The Project Gutenberg eBook of The book of the cat
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The book of the cat

Author: Frances Simpson

Release date: June 15, 2025 [eBook #76311]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Cassell and company, limited, 1903

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE CAT ***


[Illustration:

  BLACK PERSIAN.

  (_Painted specially by Madame Henriette Ronner._)
]




THE
BOOK OF THE CAT


                                    BY ...
                                    FRANCES SIMPSON

                                    _WITH 12 COLOURED PLATES, AND NEARLY
                                    350 ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT FROM
                                    PHOTOGRAPHS AND DRAWINGS_

  CASSELL AND COMPANY, LIMITED
  LONDON, PARIS, NEW YORK AND
  MELBOURNE. MCMIII

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




                               CONTENTS.


         CHAPTER                                           PAGE
             I.— CATS OF THE PAST                             1
            II.— CATS OF TO-DAY                              18
           III.— CARE AND MANAGEMENT                         37
            IV.— HOUSING OF CATS                             49
             V.— EXHIBITING                                  61
            VI.— THE POINTS OF A CAT                         96
           VII.— LONG-HAIRED OR PERSIAN CATS                 98
          VIII.— SOME NOTABLE CATTERIES                     101
            IX.— BLACK PERSIANS                             112
             X.— WHITE PERSIANS                             118
            XI.— BLUE PERSIANS                              125
           XII.— SILVER OR CHINCHILLA PERSIANS              137
          XIII.— SILVER TABBY PERSIANS                      165
           XIV.— SMOKE PERSIANS                             178
            XV.— ORANGE PERSIANS                            187
           XVI.— CREAM OR FAWN PERSIANS                     201
          XVII.— TORTOISESHELL PERSIANS                     208
         XVIII.— TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE PERSIANS           212
           XIX.— BROWN TABBY PERSIANS                       215
            XX.— “ANY OTHER COLOUR” PERSIANS                231
           XXI.— NEUTER CATS                                237
          XXII.— MANX CATS                                  244
         XXIII.— SIAMESE CATS                               254
          XXIV.— SHORT-HAIRED CATS                          274
           XXV.— SHORT-HAIRED CATS (_continued_)            282
          XXVI.— SOME FOREIGN CATS                          297
         XXVII.— CATS IN AMERICA                            303
        XXVIII.— MAINE CATS                                 325
          XXIX.— CAT PHOTOGRAPHY FOR AMATEURS               332
           XXX.— REARING OF KITTENS                         337
          XXXI.— COLOUR BREEDING                            344
         XXXII.— THE PLACE OF THE CAT IN NATURE             350
                 THE DISEASES OF CATS, AND THEIR TREATMENT  358
                 INDEX                                      377




                        LIST OF COLOURED PLATES.


 BLACK PERSIAN                                             _Frontispiece_
 BLACK-AND-WHITE PERSIAN CATS                          _To face page_ 116
 BLUE AND CREAM PERSIANS                                              126
 BROWN TABBY AND SILVER PERSIANS                                      160
 SMOKE AND ORANGE PERSIANS                                            186
 TORTOISESHELL AND TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE PERSIANS                   210
 SILVER TABBY AND ORANGE-AND-WHITE PERSIANS                           234
 BROWN TABBY AND ORANGE TABBY SHORT-HAIRED CATS                       252
 TORTOISESHELL TOM, AND SILVER TABBY SHORT-HAIRED CATS                274
 BLUE-AND-WHITE SHORT-HAIRED CATS                                     288
 MANX AND SIAMESE                                                     294
 FOREIGN CATS                                                         300




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                       PAGE
 “White to Move”                                                          1
 Mummy of a Cat                                                           1
 The God Cat                                                              2
 An Egyptian Wall-Painting: The Adoration of the Goddess Pasht            2
 The Worship of Pasht in the Temple of Bubastes                           3
 Mummified Kitten                                                         3
 A Cat God of Egypt                                                       3
 Puss as a Retriever: An Egyptian Wall-Painting                           4
 An Egyptian Toy Cat                                                      5
 A Mineral Lusus                                                          6
 Puss in Warfare                                                          7
 A Group of Cats in Pottery                                               9
 Tomb of a Cat which belonged to Madame de Lesdiguières                  10
 The Printer’s Mark of Melchior Sessa of Venice                          12
 A Cat in Heraldry                                                       12
 A Merchant’s Mark                                                       12
 Alice and the Cheshire Cat                                              13
 A Study                                                                 14
 Madame Ronner at Work                                                   15
 “Crystal,” the property of Mrs. Finnie Young                            16
 Lady Alexander’s “Brother Bump”                                         17
 Sleeping Beauties                                                       18
 Miss F. Simpson’s “Bonnie Boy”                                          18
 Kitten at Work and Play                                                 19
 Kitten belonging to Mrs. Owen                                           20
 The Antiquaries                                                         21
 “Kepwick Violet” and “Kepwick Hyacinth”                                 22
 Miss Savery’s Blue Persian Kitten                                       23
 A Pair of Short-haired Brown Tabbies                                    23
 Cat Calendar                                                            24
 Cat Calendar                                                            24
 Cat Calendar                                                            25
 Mr. Harrison Weir                                                       26
 Mr. Louis Wain                                                          27
 Lady Marcus Beresford                                                   28
 Litter of Siamese Kittens                                               29
 “Puck III.”                                                             30
 Mrs. Clinton Locke and her Siamese Kittens “Calif” and “Bangkok”        31
 The Cat’s Playground                                                    32
 Royal London Institution for Lost and Starving Cats                     33
 The Cart of the R. L. I.                                                34
 The Hon. Philip Wodehouse’s “Silver Saint”                              35
 A Bevy of Blues belonging to Miss Savery                                35
 Cats’ Tombstones at the Dogs’ Cemetery, Hyde Park                       36
 Tabbies up a Tree                                                       37
 Blue Persian belonging to Her Majesty the Queen                         37
 Three Little Maids                                                      39
 A Perilous Perch                                                        40
 Mrs. Hardy’s Neuter “Pharaoh”                                           41
 “The Raiders” Caught                                                    43
 Kittens belonging to Miss Bromley                                       45
 Neuter Pets owned by Mrs. Hastings Lees                                 46
 Carolling                                                               48
 In a Playful Sort of Way                                                49
 A Musical Party                                                         50
 The Ideal Cattery                                                       53
 A Litter Box                                                            55
 A Useful Cat House                                                      55
 A Portable Hutch                                                        56
 Lethal Chamber, R.L.I.                                                  57
 Spratt’s Travelling Basket                                              58
 A Useful Cat Basket                                                     58
 A Gang of Poachers                                                      59
 Waking Beauties                                                         61
 Richmond Cat Show: Arrangement of Tents                                 65
 Mrs. Gregory’s “Skellingthorpe Patrick”                                 67
 “Inquiry”                                                               67
 Richmond Cat Show: Judges at Work                                       69
 Type of Cage at the Richmond Cat Show                                   71
 Mr. C. A. House                                                         72
 Mr. T. B. Mason                                                         72
 The Toilet                                                              73
 Blue Persian Kittens                                                    74
 Kits with a Taste for Flowers                                           75
 Two Kittens bred by Miss Williams                                       75
 Richmond Cat Show: The Ring Class                                       77
 Minding Shop                                                            78
 Thieves                                                                 79
 Mrs. Drury’s Brown Tabby “Periwig”                                      80
 Miss Simpson’s “Cambyses”                                               80
 A Litter of Blues                                                       81
 Judging in the Ring at the Crystal Palace                               83
 Miss Kirkpatrick’s Blue Kittens                                         84
 “Rose of Persia”                                                        85
 Mischief                                                                88
 Our Play-room                                                           89
 Mr. F. W. Western                                                       91
 Officials of the N.C.C.C.                                               92
 Sandy Stealing the Milk                                                 94
 Silver Cats belonging to Mrs. Clark of Ashbrittle                       95
 The Points of a Cat                                                     96
 Tailpiece                                                               97
 Blue Persians belonging to Mrs. Wells                                   98
 “Gentian,” owned by Lady Marcus Beresford                               99
 Mrs. Herring’s “Champion Jimmy”                                        100
 The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison’s Cattery                               101
 Scenes at “Bishopsgate”                                                103
 A Sleeping Box at Lady Decies’ Cattery                                 104
 Lady Decies Visiting her Pets                                          104
 Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart’s Cattery                                       105
 The Imitation Tree, Mrs. Clarke’s Cattery                              106
 Mrs. Clarke’s Cattery                                                  107
 The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison                                         108
 Mrs. Collingwood and “James II.”                                       109
 A Morning Meal at Bossington                                           111
 Black Persian “Johnny Fawe”                                            112
 “Champion Menelik III.”                                                113
 Kitten Bred by Miss Kirkpatrick                                        115
 Mrs. Little’s Black Persian “Colleen”                                  115
 The Carol Singers                                                      116
 “Jungfrau”                                                             118
 Mrs. McLaren’s White Persian “Ladysmith”                               119
 Mrs. Pettit with her White Persians                                    121
 “Crystal”                                                              122
 “White Butterfly”                                                      123
 “Musafer”                                                              124
 “Jack” and “Jill”                                                      125
 The Artist                                                             128
 Blue Kittens bred by Miss Kirkpatrick                                  129
 Mrs. Robinson’s Blue Kittens                                           129
 Mrs. Wells’s Cattery                                                   130
 “Rokeles Kissi”                                                        131
 Scared                                                                 132
 Cast of the Cat Club Medal                                             133
 Miss G. Jay’s Cattery                                                  134
 Rev. P. L. Cosway’s “Imperial Blue”                                    135
 “_Un Saut Périlleux_”                                                  136
 “Jack Frost”                                                           137
 “Star Duvals”                                                          138
 “The Absent-Minded Beggar”                                             138
 “Omar”                                                                 139
 Three Pretty Silvers                                                   140
 “Shah of Persia”                                                       141
 “Fulmer Zaida”                                                         142
 “Troubadour”                                                           143
 A Perfect Chinchilla (two views)                                       145
 Mrs. Balding’s “Silver Lambkin”                                        146
 Mrs. Balding’s “Fluffie Tod”                                           147
 “Sea Foam”                                                             148
 Mrs. Wellbye’s “Silver Lotus”                                          149
 Mrs. Wellbye’s “Silver Dossie”                                         150
 Mrs. Wellbye’s Silver “Veronica”                                       151
 Two Views of Woodheys Cattery                                          153
 “Silver Blossom”                                                       154
 “Silver Blossom’s” Two Buds                                            155
 “Wild Tom”                                                             156
 “Fur and Feather”                                                      158
 “The Silver Lambkins”                                                  159
 “Jupiter Duvals”                                                       161
 “The Elder Miss Blossom”                                               162
 “Dolly Daydream”                                                       163
 “I want to go home!”                                                   164
 “The Marquis of Dingley”                                               165
 Miss Leake’s Summer Cattery                                            166
 Silver Tabby Kittens owned by Princess Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein  167
 “Beautiful Duchess”                                                    168
 Winter Quarters at Dingley Hill                                        169
 In the Studio                                                          171
 Miss Cope’s “Starlet”                                                  172
 A Pair of Silver Tabbies                                               173
 “Thames Valley Silver King”                                            174
 “Roiall Fluffball”                                                     177
 Mrs. Stead’s Smoke Litter by “Ranji”                                   178
 “Jo” and “Tiny”                                                        178
 Miss Bartlett’s Two Smoke Kittens                                      179
 Mrs. James’s Cat Houses at Backwell                                    181
 Mrs. Stead’s Smoke Persian “Champion Ranji”                            182
 “Champion Backwell Jogram”                                             183
 Mrs. Sinkins’ Smoke Persian “Teufel”                                   185
 “Lucy Claire”                                                          186
 Mrs. Singleton’s “Orange Girl”                                         187
 “Puck”                                                                 188
 “Swagger”                                                              188
 “Benjamin of the Durhams”                                              189
 “Torrington Sunnysides”                                                190
 “Lifeguard”                                                            191
 One of Mrs. Neate’s Outdoor Catteries at Wernham                       192
 “Curiosity”                                                            193
 Mrs. Neate’s Cat Houses (two views)                                    194
 “Musing”                                                               197
 “Out in the Cold”                                                      199
 “Higher Education”                                                     200
 Mrs. Clinton Locke’s Cream Kitten                                      201
 A Creamy Smile                                                         201
 Mrs. Norris’s Cream Kitten                                             202
 “Kew Ronald” and “Kew Laddie”                                          203
 Miss Beal and her Kittens                                              204
 Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard’s Cream Kittens                                   204
 “Miriam of the Durhams”                                                205
 “Champion Romaldkirk Admiral”                                          206
 Mrs. F. Western’s “Matthew of the Durhams”                             207
 “Topsy of Merevale”                                                    208
 Miss H. Cochran’s Tortoiseshell “Brunette”                             209
 Miss Sargent’s “Topsy”                                                 210
 Miss Kate Sangster’s “Royal Yum Yum”                                   211
 “Peggy Primrose”                                                       212
 Miss Yeoman’s “Mary II.”                                               213
 “At Home”                                                              214
 Miss Simpson’s “Persimmon”                                             215
 Miss Mellor’s “Lady Sholto”                                            216
 “Champion Crystal” (American)                                          217
 A Room in Brayfort Cattery                                             218
 Miss Whitney and her Neuter Brown Tabby                                219
 “Brayfort Princess” and “Brayfort Fina”                                220
 “Lonsdale Chrysalis” and “Lonsdale Moth”                               221
 Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard’s “Sulpherland”                                   222
 “Pioneer Bobs”                                                         223
 “Lorna Doone”                                                          225
 “Birkdale Ruffie”                                                      226
 “Birkdale Ruffie’s” Cattery                                            227
 Brown Tabby “Goozie”                                                   229
 A Trio of Tabbies                                                      230
 A Picturesque Group                                                    231
 A Grotesquely-marked Kitten                                            232
 “Lockhaven Colburn”                                                    233
 “The Conquest of the Air”                                              234
 “Grace before Meat”                                                    235
 “Marcus Superbus,” a Silver Smoke                                      235
 “Blue Robin”                                                           236
 Miss Kirkpatrick’s “Chili”                                             237
 “King Cy”                                                              237
 Miss Chamberlayne’s “Belvedere Tiger”                                  238
 “Benoni”                                                               239
 Miss Adamson’s Chinchilla Neuter                                       240
 “Nigel the Raven”                                                      241
 Madame Portier’s Neuter “Blue Boy”                                     242
 Rascals                                                                243
 Type of Manx Kitten                                                    244
 “Golfsticks”                                                           245
 Specimen of a Manx Tabby                                               246
 Orange Manx                                                            248
 Mrs. H. C. Brooke’s Manx “Katzenjammer”                                249
 “Ballochmyle Bell Spitz”                                               250
 Manx Cat                                                               251
 Mr. Ward’s Manx “Silverwing”                                           253
 A Litter by “Tachin”                                                   254
 The Garden Cattery at Bishopsgate                                      255
 Mrs. Roberts Locke, with “Calif,” “Siam,” and “Bangkok”                256
 “Si”                                                                   257
 “Tiam-o-Shian”                                                         257
 “It”                                                                   258
 Mr. Ratcliffe’s Siamese                                                259
 Lady Marcus Beresford’s “Ursula”                                       260
 Miss Armitage’s “Cora”                                                 262
 Pair of Siamese belonging to Mrs. Armitage                             263
 Mrs. Robinson’s “Ah Choo”                                              265
 “Champion Wankee”                                                      265
 “Mafeking”                                                             266
 The late “King Kesho”                                                  267
 Lady Marcus Beresford’s “Cambodia”                                     268
 Pugs Paying a Visit to the Siamese, Mrs. Hawkins’ Cattery              269
 “Romeo” and “Juliette”                                                 271
 A Cosy Corner                                                          273
 “Ashbrittle Peter”                                                     274
 “Ballochmyle Blue Queen”                                               275
 Mrs. Carew Cox’s Blue male “Bayard”                                    276
 “Sherdley Michael”                                                     277
 “Sherdley Alexis”                                                      277
 “Sherdley Sacha I.” and “II.”                                          277
 Maria                                                                  278
 Mrs. Carew Cox’s “Yula”                                                279
 Lady Alexander of Ballochmyle                                          280
 “Champion Ballochmyle Brother Bump”                                    281
 Short-haired Tabby Kittens                                             282
 Another View of Lady Decies’ Cattery                                   283
 Lady Decies’ “Champion Xenophon”                                       284
 An American Begging Cat                                                285
 “Ebony of Wigan”                                                       286
 Sleeping and Waking Tabbies                                            287
 A Black-and-White Britisher                                            288
 “Champion Ballochmyle Otter”                                           289
 “Champion Ballochmyle Perfection”                                      290
 Mrs. Barker’s “Tyneside Lily”                                          291
 Two Views of Briarlea Catteries                                        292
 A Corner of the Bossington Catteries                                   293
 Tortoiseshell Male “Samson”                                            294
 Mrs. A. M. Stead’s Brown Tabby                                         295
 Mrs. Collingwood’s “James II.”                                         295
 “Ben My Chree”                                                         296
 Burmese Cat                                                            297
 Mexican Hairless Cats                                                  299
 African Cat                                                            300
 Manx and Abyssinian                                                    301
 Geoffroy’s Wild Cat                                                    302
 “The Storm King”                                                       303
 “Rado”                                                                 303
 The Old Fort Cattery                                                   305
 Mrs. Colburn and her White Persian “Paris”                             306
 Brushwood Cattery                                                      307
 Miss Johnston’s “Persimmon Squirrel”                                   308
 A Reception Room in a Chicago Cattery                                  309
 Mrs. E. N. Barker                                                      311
 “Silver Hair” and “Tiptoe”                                             312
 Miss Ward’s “Robin”                                                    313
 Three Little Grandchildren of “Persimmon”                              314
 An American Beauty                                                     317
 “Champion Miss Detroit”                                                318
 “The Commissioner”                                                     319
 “Ajax”                                                                 321
 Orchard Ridge Cattery                                                  322
 Mrs. Charles A. White                                                  323
 “The Blessed Damozel”                                                  324
 “Tobey,” a Maine Trick Cat                                             325
 “Henessey”                                                             326
 “Blue Danube”                                                          327
 “Leo,” owned by Mrs. Martin                                            329
 “Yellow H. 14th Beauty”                                                330
 Mrs. Bagster’s “Demidoff”                                              331
 A Snapshot                                                             332
 Amateur Photographers                                                  334
 Playing at Work                                                        335
 In the Studio                                                          336
 Tabitha’s Afternoon Tea                                                337
 A Happy Mother                                                         338
 Mrs. Bonny’s “Dame Fortune”                                            339
 “Derebie”                                                              339
 A Litter of Eight belonging to Miss Savery                             341
 “Star of the Spheres” and “Son of Roy”                                 342
 The Foster-Mother                                                      343
 The Foster-Mother in Action                                            343
 “Arrived Safely”                                                       344
 “Patricia”                                                             345
 Miss Goddard’s Pair of Kittens                                         346
 “Lollypop”                                                             347
 Three Little Americans                                                 348
 “Holmlea Thistledown”                                                  349
 Brain of Cat                                                           350
 Skull of the Great Sabre-toothed Cat                                   351
 Superficial Flexor Tendons of a Cat’s Left Foot                        352
 Bones and Principal Ligaments of a Cat’s Toe                           352
 Pads of Cat’s Left Fore-foot                                           352
 Skull of a Cat                                                         353
 Skeleton of a Cat                                                      354
 Skeleton of a Cat                                                      355
 A Cat’s Eye                                                            356
 Tongue of a Cat                                                        357
 Giving Medicine                                                        358




                              INTRODUCTION


Fanciers have long felt the want of a work dealing in a popular manner
with cats, and it was therefore with great pleasure that I undertook to
write THE BOOK OF THE CAT, and to give the results of a long experience
in as simple and interesting a form as possible, so that the book might
be instructive to cat fanciers, and also readable to that portion of the
community which loves cats for themselves and not only for their prizes
and pedigrees. It is possible that the beautiful reproductions in this
work may result in the conversion of some cat haters, who, seeing the
error of their ways, may give poor puss a corner in their hearts. Dogs
are more essentially the friends of men, and cats may be considered as
the chosen allies of womankind.

In the past, as I have endeavoured to show, many noted celebrities of
the sterner sex have shown a sympathetic feeling for the feline race. At
the present time the number of men fanciers on our cat club lists and
exhibitors at our shows tends to prove that the cat is gradually
creeping into the affections of mankind, even in this busy work-a-day
world. I have given a full description of the various breeds, and have
suggested advice as to the feeding, housing, and general treatment of
cats. The chapters on the management of shows, containing also simple
rules for the guidance of exhibitors, will, I trust, prove useful and
instructive.

In my work I have received most valuable assistance, for which I am
deeply grateful, from Mr. H. Gray, the well-known veterinary surgeon,
whose chapter on the diseases of cats will, I am sure, be very
interesting to breeders and fanciers. To Mr. H. C. Brooke I must tender
my sincere thanks for his chapter on foreign cats, and to Mr. E. N.
Barker for his excellent survey of the American cat fancy, and to Mrs.
Pierce for her notes on Maine cats. Mr. Robert Holding’s chapter on the
anatomy of the cat, with its excellent diagrams, forms a valuable
addition to the work. To Mrs. S. F. Clarke I am greatly indebted for the
number of clever photographs with which she has so kindly supplied me.

To many of my “catty” friends I offer grateful thanks for interesting
items, paragraphs, and pretty photographs; and last, but not least, I
have to thank that veteran, Harrison Weir, for his kindly encouragement,
and I feel I cannot do better than quote from his letter, received on
the completion of my work—enclosing a few remarks for my preface:—

“Miss Frances Simpson has kindly dedicated her labour of love, the
fascinating BOOK OF THE CAT, to me, and truly the honour is great. Words
cannot convey my feelings, but out of its fulness the heart
speaketh—Thanks! I carry my mind back to the long, long ago, when the
cat was a god or ideal, and worshipped. Then later, ‘our gentle Will’
called it ‘the harmless, necessary cat,’ and that it has ever been, and
more than that to many. It is a lonely home without a cat; and for
awhile—and I hope for long—cats are the fashion. Thirty years ago it was
apparent to me that cats were not valued at their true worth, and then I
suggested a show of cats! Let anyone try to start anything new, though
novelty is said to charm! Many were the gibes, jokes, and jeers that
were thrown at me then. But nothing succeeds like success. Now, if I may
without offence say a few words as to present-day shows, it is that they
have not answered my expectations. Why? Because particular breeds are
catered for and run after. Why such breathless talk all about
long-haired cats, be they blues or silvers? This is not cat breeding. I
want, I wish, and, if I live, I hope to see far more of the ‘harmless,
necessary cat’ at our shows; for a high-class short-haired cat is one of
the most perfect animals ever created.

“Far more I might, and perhaps am expected to add; but my life’s work is
well-nigh done. He who fights honourably the good fight sinks at last.
Miss Frances Simpson has rendered me her debtor; and others, beside
myself, will tender her grateful thanks for her work in the cause of the
cat and for the welfare of the fancy. Adieu!”

Mr. Harrison Weir’s words are precious to me, and now that my “labour of
love” is ended I can only re-echo his wish and express a hope that the
many pages I have devoted to the “harmless, necessary cat,” whose
fireside friendship I have enjoyed all the years of my life, may awaken
and arouse a greater interest in and admiration for these gentle,
complex creatures, who in return for a little understanding will give a
great deal of love.

                                                        FRANCES SIMPSON.

  KENSINGTON,
      _August, 1903_.




[Illustration:

  “WHITE TO MOVE.”

  _Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke_
]




                          THE BOOK OF THE CAT.




                               CHAPTER I.
                           CATS OF THE PAST.


[Illustration:

  MUMMY OF A CAT.

  (_At the British Museum._)
]

The origin of the cat has puzzled the learned, and the stock from whence
it sprang is still, in the opinion of some, a mystery for the zoologist
to solve.

Historians tell us that the feline race came into existence about the
same time as the horse. Reference is made to the cat in Sanskrit
writings over 2,000 years old, and still earlier records are found in
the monumental figures, inscriptions, and cat mummies of ancient Egypt.
These carefully-preserved relics of the past assist us in answering the
question as to how this least tameable of animals became domesticated.

There are many legends concerning Puss and the manner in which she first
sprang into existence. A surprising account of the cat’s creation is
found in the works of an Arabian naturalist. It is as follows: “When
Noah made a couple of each kind of animal enter the Ark, his companions,
as well as the members of his family, said to him, ‘What security can
there be for us and for the animals so long as the lion shall dwell with
us in the same vessel?’ The patriarch betook himself to prayer and
entreated the Lord God. Immediately fever came down from Heaven and
seized upon the king of beasts, so that tranquility of mind was restored
to the inhabitants of the Ark. But there was in the vessel an enemy no
less harmful—this was the mouse. The companions of Noah called his
attention to the fact that it would be impossible for them to preserve
their provisions and their clothes intact. After the patriarch had
addressed renewed supplications to the Most High, the lion sneezed, and
a cat ran out of his nostrils. From that time forth the mouse became so
timid that it contracted the habit of hiding itself in holes.”

[Illustration:

  THE GOD CAT.

  (_From an old Wood-cut._)
]

So runs the legend, and in an old Italian picture representing the
departure from the Ark we may observe a big brindled cat leading the
procession of animals with an air of dignity and self-satisfaction.
According to the Arabic scholar Damirei, there was no cat in the Garden
of Eden. It is a singular fact that nowhere in the canonical books of
the Old Testament nor in the New Testament is the cat mentioned, and if
we take into consideration the number of books connected with the life,
manners, customs, and religions of the Egyptians, this omission is the
more striking. The only Biblical reference to cats occurs in the Book of
Baruch, chap, vi., v. 22. This is a letter by Jeremy to the Children of
Israel, who were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar to Babylon. Some Hebrew
scholars have asserted that the animals that prowled and cried among the
ruins of Babylon were jackals, and not cats.

But however much the origin of the feline tribe is wrapped in mystery,
we are certain that more than 3,000 years ago the cat lived and was
loved along the banks of the Nile. The ancient city of the Pharaohs paid
her homage; she was admitted into the ranks of sacred animals, she was
worshipped in the temples. Jewels were placed in her ears and necklaces
about her neck. Figures of cats were kept in the home and buried in the
tomb. Trinkets representing both the goddess and the cat were worn upon
the person, to indicate special devotion on the part of the wearer.

There seems but little doubt that the ancient and well-beloved cat of
the Egyptians was a barred or marked animal, answering to some extent to
our homely tabby. Paintings and statuettes of this type frequently
occur, and therefore we may it take for granted that the Egyptians, who
were so realistic and true to Nature when dealing with the animal world,
would have presented cats of other species had they existed.

According to the historian, animal worship was first introduced into
Egypt by Chores, the second king of the Second Dynasty.

[Illustration:

  AN EGYPTIAN WALL-PAINTING: THE ADORATION OF THE GODDESS PASHT.

  (_British Museum._)
]

The Egyptians made gods of many living creatures of all kinds, amongst
others the bull, the crocodile, the ibis, the hawk, the beetle, and the
asp; but the cat appears to have held the highest place in their hearts.
Not only was it preserved from injury, beloved and venerated during
life, but at its death it was buried with all respect, and everyone
mourned for it with outward and visible signs of grief, even to the
extent of shaving off their eyebrows. The Egyptian’s idea of a correct
burial involved mummification, so that all the parts might be preserved
and thus kept from annihilation against the day of resurrection. A rich
man’s cat was very elaborately mummified. Different-coloured stuffs were
twisted round and round the body, forming curious patterns in two
colours. The head would be carefully encased and sometimes gilded; the
ears were always standing upright. These curious mummies look something
like bottles of rare wine done up in plaited straw. Sometimes the mummy
would be enclosed in a bronze box with a statue of a cat seated on the
top. Mummies of cats with painted faces have been found in wooden
coffins at Bubastes, Speos, Artemidos, Thebes, and elsewhere. Here is an
illustration of a kitten brought to me from the Boulak Museum. The
picture gives but little idea of the care and neatness which must have
been employed in wrapping up the dear little dead bodies. The linen used
is of the finest. The ears of the tiny kitten are each separate and
distinct, and the muzzle of the creature shows distinctly through the
delicate wrappings. Scarcely a good museum in the country now that has
not some specimens of cat mummies. In some of these we notice that eyes
have been added after the mummy has been encased and the embalmment
completed. Most of the cats that died in the far-away time were thus
embalmed and sent for burial to the holy city of Bubastes, near Thebes,
on the banks of the Nile.

[Illustration:

  MUMMIFIED KITTEN.

  (_In the possession of Miss Simpson._)
]

The Temple of Bubastes, according to Herodotus, was the fairest in all
Egypt, and here special reverence was paid the cat. The local goddess of
this city was Pasht, who was represented as a woman with a cat’s head.
Cats were kept in the temples sacred to them, and doubtless the head cat
of the Pasht’s temple was a very splendid specimen, who, living the life
of great luxury, would be buried with the pomp and magnificence of a
royal personage.

[Illustration:

  THE WORSHIP OF PASHT IN THE TEMPLE OF BUBASTES.

  (_British Museum._)
]

[Illustration:

  A CAT GOD OF EGYPT.

  (_From the British Museum._)
]

It was at Bubastes, on the banks of the Nile, that an annual festival in
honour of the goddess Pasht was held. We are not told whether the cats
took any part in the proceedings. From the towns and villages within
hail, pleasure parties were sent in boats up and down the river to the
city, and on their passage the men and women who crowded these boats
made merry all the long summer day. The women clashed their cymbals and
danced, and the men played on their flutes. Seventy thousand people, it
is said, assembled at this feast, and they sacrificed victims and drank
a good deal of wine. Perhaps the cats were treated to an extra dish of
some dainty to mark this red-letter day in the annals of their patroness
and goddess.

A curious custom, which probably had its origin in these pilgrimages to
the sacred shrine, had until recent years survived amongst the Egyptian
Moslems, who when they were starting on their way to Mecca always set
apart one camel for the conveyance of several cats, and some ancient
dame was told off to take charge of the precious animals. She was
honoured with the title of “Mother of Cats.” Her office was not an
enviable one, and probably it was found that a woman was unable to
wrestle satisfactorily with the refractory travellers, for at a later
date a man was substituted to carry the pussies to the Holy City.

[Illustration:

  PUSS AS A RETRIEVER: AN EGYPTIAN WALL-PAINTING.

  (_At the British Museum._)
]

Thebes appears to have been a favourite burying-place for cats, and also
a place called Beni Hasan, one hundred miles from Cairo. A few years ago
some excavations were made near this town, and thousands of little
mummied bodies were found that had rested peacefully for centuries.
Their graves were desecrated, their burying ground plundered, and tons
and tons of mummied forms were carted away to the neighbouring fields to
serve the useful, if not romantic, purpose of manure! According to
Horopollo, the cat was worshipped in the temple of Heliopolis, because
the size of the pupil of the animal’s eye is regulated by the rising and
waning of the sun. Plutarch, however, states in his treatise on “Isis
and Osiris” that the image of a female cat was placed at the top of the
sistrum as an emblem of the moon. “This,” says the historian, “was on
account of the variety of her fur, and because she is astir at night;
and furthermore, because she bears firstly one kitten at a birth, and at
the second two, at the third three, and then four, and then five, until
the seventh time, so that she bears in all twenty-eight, as many as the
moon has days. Now this, perchance, is fabulous, but ’tis most true that
her eyes do enlarge and grow full at the full moon, and that on the
contrary they contract and diminish at the decline of the same.”

Among other fables of classic naturalists and historians may be
mentioned the following by Herodotus: “If a fire occurs, cats are
subject to supernatural impulses; and while the Egyptians ranged in
lines with gaps between them, are much more solicitous to save their
cats than to extinguish the fire, these animals slip through the empty
spaces, spring over the men’s shoulders, and fling themselves into the
flames. When such accidents happen, profound grief falls upon the
Egyptians.”

Whether these frenzied cats did or did not commit suicide is open to
doubt, but that they would plunge fearlessly into water is an
acknowledged fact. This is attested by paintings representing sporting
scenes in the valley of the Nile. Men and women used to go out on
fowling excursions in a boat to the jungles and thickets of the marsh
land, or to lakes in their own grounds, which abounded with wild fowl,
and there among the tall reeds knock down the bird with a stick. Into
these happy hunting grounds they took a cat who would jump into the
water and retrieve the game as it fell. There is a painting taken and
brought from a tomb in Thebes, which is now in the British Museum, and
Wilkinson, in his “Manners and Customs of Ancient Egyptians,” writes as
follows: “A favourite cat sometimes accompanied the Egyptian sportsmen
on these occasions, and the artist intends to show us, by the exactness
with which he represents the animal seizing the game, that cats were
trained to hunt and carry the water-fowl.”

[Illustration:

  AN EGYPTIAN TOY CAT.

  (_At the British Museum._)
]

One of the earliest representations of the cat is to be found in the
Necropolis of Thebes, which contains the tomb of Hana, who probably
belonged to the Eleventh Dynasty. There is a statue of the king standing
erect, with his cat Bouhaki between his feet. The large basalt statues,
of which there are so many in the British Museum, both seated and
standing, are examples of great interest. They have mostly the disc of
lunar divinity above their heads and the royal asp above the forehead.

M. Champfleury, in his delightful book, “Les Chats,” gives a good deal
of information regarding the cats of ancient Egypt, and mentions the
existence of funerary statues of women which bear the inscription
Techau, the cat, in token of the patronage of the goddess Bast.
Frenchmen occasionally call their wives _ma chatte_ without attaching
any hieratic association to that term of endearment.

According to ancient documents in the Louvre, we are enabled to surmise
the name by which the cat was known in Egypt. It was Mau-Maï, Maau, or
Maon. A tablet in the Berlin Museum, bearing the representation of a
cat, dates from 1600 B.C., and another, two hundred years older, has an
inscription in which the word “Mau” appears.

Amongst old Egyptian images in bronze and earthenware, we may often find
the cat crouching with the symbolic eye, emblem of the sun, engraved
upon its collar. In the British Museum there is a curious example of a
toy in the shape of a wooden cat with inlaid glass eyes and a movable
lower jaw well lined with teeth.

There is a tradition that Cambyses devised a scheme for the capture of
the town of Peluse, which, if true, is one example among many of the
devotion of the Egyptians to cats. It was in the fourteenth year of his
reign that this king of Persia tried to effect an entry into Egypt, and
he is said to have hit upon a clever strategy. Knowing that the garrison
of the town was entirely comprised of Egyptians, he put at the head of
his army soldiers each carrying in their arms a cat. The Egyptians,
alarmed lest they might injure the sacred animals when destroying their
enemies, consented rather to be vanquished. But for their scruples they
might perhaps have repulsed the invaders, for the Persian soldiers could
not well have done their share of the fighting while clasping in their
arms restless and terrified cats!

It is strange that the cat was almost neglected by the Greeks and
Romans. It is true that Grecian art working on such grand sweeping lines
might fail to follow the insignificant yet graceful curves of the cat.
Therefore no Greek monument is adorned with a figure of the idol of
Egypt, and Homer never gives a passing mention of the cat. Among the
Greeks the cat was sacred to the goddess Diana. Mythologists pretend
that Diana created the cat in order to throw ridicule upon the lion, an
animal supposed to have been called into existence by Apollo with the
intention of frightening his sister. This he followed up by producing a
mouse, which Hecate’s cat immediately ate up. A cat was often emblazoned
on the shields and flags of Roman soldiers. That the cat was known at an
early period in Italy we have proof in the curious mosaic in the Museum
at Naples, which depicts one pouncing upon a bird. The date of this has
been fixed at about one hundred years prior to the Christian era. In the
Bordeaux Museum there is a tomb of the Gallo-Roman period with a
representation of a girl holding a cat in her arms and with a cock at
her feet. In those days the playthings and domestic animals belonging to
children were buried with them.

From some of the oldest Indian fables we learn that the cat was
domesticated in that country at a very early period. Her first
appearance into China would seem to have been about 400 A.D. There is a
curious ancient Chinese saying to the effect that “A lame cat is better
than a swift horse when rats infest a palace.”

Amongst the curious freaks in the natural world are mineral _lusus_.
These are stones, agates, or marbles, which, by the action of the soil,
air, or water during thousands of years, have assumed various forms,
which we may interpret to represent human heads, trees, animals, and so
forth. This illustration of a mineral _lusus_ is taken on a reduced
scale from a book by Aldrovandus, an Italian naturalist of the
seventeenth century. The figure of the cat occurs, he says, in a slab of
marble. It was also reproduced by Athanasius Kircher, the Jesuit, who
copied many of Aldrovandus’s engravings.

[Illustration:

  A MINERAL LUSUS.

  (_From an old Engraving._)
]

I think the most casual observer would pronounce this illustration to be
the representation of a cat; and if, as we are led to believe, this and
other figures are really the result of natural causes, we can only
marvel at the wonderful correctness of outline and form in which through
countless ages the substances comprising the specimen have arranged
themselves.

We have no record that the cat became domesticated in Great Britain and
France before the ninth century, when it would seem that she was by no
means common, and considered of great value; for in the time of one of
the old Princes of Wales, who died in 948, the price of a kitten before
it could see was fixed at a penny, after it had captured a mouse,
twopence; and if it gave further proofs of its usefulness it was rated
at fourpence. This same prince, Howel the Good, issued an order that
anyone who stole or killed a cat that guarded the prince’s granary was
to forfeit a milch ewe, its fleece, and lamb, or as much wheat as when
poured on the cat suspended by its tail (the head touching the floor)
would form a heap high enough to cover the top of the tail.

This is not only curious, as being an evidence of the simplicity of
ancient customs, but it goes far to prove that cats were not aborigines
of these islands. The large price set on them—if we consider the high
value of specie at that time—and the great care taken of the improvement
and breed of an animal that multiplies so quickly, are almost certain
proofs of their being little known at that period. No doubt wild cats
abounded in our islands, and this creature is described by Pennant as
being three or four times as large as the house cat. The teeth and claws
are, to use his expression, “tremendous,” and the animal is altogether
more robust. The tail of the wild cat is thick and as large at the
extremity as it is in the centre and at the base; that of the house cat
tapers to the tip. This ferocious creature, well named the British
tiger, was formerly common enough in the wooded and mountainous
districts of England, Scotland, and Wales, but owing to the attention
paid to the preservation of game it has gradually become almost if not
entirely exterminated. In olden times, when wild cats were hunted and
captured, the principal use they were put to was to trim with their fur
the garments of the ladies in the various nunneries scattered over the
land. A writer of the Middle Ages says: “The peasants wore cat skins,
badger skins, &c.” It would appear that lambs’ and cats’ skins were of
equal value at that period.

Harrison Weir, in his work on cats, tells us that in 1871 and 1872 a
wild cat was exhibited at the Crystal Palace by the Earl of Hopetoun; he
also mentions that as late as 1889 Mr. Edward Hamilton, M.D., writing to
the _Field_, gives information of a wild cat being shot at
Inverness-shire. He states: “A fine specimen of a wild cat was sent to
me on May 3rd, trapped on the Ben Nevis range. Its dimensions were: from
nose to base of tail, 1 foot; height at shoulders, 1 foot 2 inches.” In
July, 1900, a paragraph to the following effect appeared in the
_Stock-Keeper_:—


  “The Zoological Society have just acquired a litter of wild cats. This
  is the only instance where a whole litter has been sent to the
  Gardens. It was taken not far from Spean Bridge, Inverness-shire.”


[Illustration:

  PUSS IN WARFARE (_vide p. 8_).

  (_From a 16th Century MS._)
]

The late Professor Rolleston, in an article on the “Domestic Cats of
Ancient and Modern Times” (_Journal of Anatomy and Physiology_), has
well explained much of the confusion about cats in former writers and
their so-called interpreters. He shows how loosely now, as long ago, the
word “cat” and its classic equivalents may be employed. Just as we still
speak of civet cats and martens. Up to the beginning of this century the
wild cat was wrongly thought to be the original of the tame species. Yet
apart from more exact evidence this is shown to be an error if we note
the value set upon domestic cats in former centuries. The Rev. Dr.
Fleming, in his “History of British Animals” (1828), points out some of
the distinctions between the two species. He also alludes to the spotted
variety, termed the Cypress Cat, as noticed by Menet, who wrote the
earliest book on British Natural History in 1667.

“It is a curious fact,” says Mr. J. E. Herting, an eminent naturalist,
“that in Ireland, notwithstanding reports to the contrary, all
endeavours to find a genuine wild cat have failed, the so-called ‘wild
cat’ of the natives proving to be the ‘marten cat,’ a very different
animal.”

In the early Middle Ages, according to tradition, cats were utilised in
a strange manner. The illustration on p. 7 depicts a German fortress
which it was desired by the enemy to set on fire. Not being able, one
may suppose, to effect this by treachery, the foes pressed into their
service both biped and quadruped. On the back of the pigeon and cat
alike, a flask of inflammable matter is attached, and furnished with a
time fuse to ignite at the proper moment. There is a broad road for the
cat to travel, and we must presume that the gate of the fortress was
left open for her entrance. The pigeon would be supposed to cut the cord
of the flask with her beak when just over the magazine and let it drop
at an auspicious moment. This cut is reduced from a coloured drawing in
an unpublished manuscript volume dated 1575, in which is a great variety
of illustrations of fireworks for war and recreation.

It is strange that the cat, which was an object of worship and adoration
to the Egyptians, should, during the long, dark years of mediæval
history, be looked upon as a diabolical creature. The only pleasant
legend handed down to us from the Middle Ages is that of “Dick
Whittington and his Cat.” There are records to show that this worthy
citizen was thrice Lord Mayor of London, and we have always been led to
believe that it was to his cat he owed his wealth and prosperity. At all
events, so long as London is London, Whittington will ever be associated
with his cat.

Innumerable are the legends that gather round the cat during the Middle
Ages. It was believed that the devil borrowed the coat of a black cat
when he wished to torment his victims. Sorcerers pretended to cure
epilepsy by the help of three drops of blood taken from the vein under a
cat’s tail. At numerous trials for witchcraft, puss figured as the
wicked associate of the accused. Cats were offered by sorcerers as
oblations to Satan, and they were flung into the fire at the Festival of
St. John. All praise to Louis XIII., who as the Dauphin interceded for
the lives of these poor pussies thus annually sacrificed. It was thought
to bring good luck to a house if a cat were cooked alive in a brick
oven, and in Scotland she was roasted before a slow fire as a means of
divining the future.

The mania of witchcraft had pervaded all ranks, even the holy
profession, whose duty it should be to preach peace and goodwill.
Hundreds of wretched old women were sent out of life “in a red gown”
(the slang of that day for being burnt “quick” or alive), after
undergoing the most excruciating tortures to make them confess the
impossibilities for which they suffered.

In 1591, when King James of Scotland was crossing from Denmark, a great
tempest arose at sea. This was supposed to have been caused by a
“christened cat” being placed in the vessel by witches. The following is
an extract from an old pamphlet: “Againe it is confessed that the said
christened cat was the cause that the Kings Majestie’s shippe had a
contrarie wind to the rest of the shippes in his companie, for when the
rest of the shippes had a fair and good winde, then was the winde
contrarie and altogether against his Majestie.” Thus, in the past as in
the present day, blame was laid upon the poor harmless puss, where no
blame was due.

In an old book called “Twenty Lookes over all the Roundheads of the
World,” published in 1643, we read:—

[Illustration:

  A GROUP OF CATS IN POTTERY.

  (_From Figures in Cases at the British Museum._)
]


  “In the Reigne of Queene Mary (at which time Popery was much exalted)
  then were the Roundheads (namely, the monks and friars) so odious to
  the people, that in derision of them a cat was taken on a Sabbath day,
  with her head shorne as a Fryer’s and the likeness of a vestment cast
  over her, with her feet tied together, and a round piece of paper like
  a singing Celse between them; and thus was she hanged in a gallows in
  Cheapside, neere to the Crosse, in the Parish of St. Matthew. Which
  cat, being taken down, was sent to Doctor Pendleton (who was then
  preaching at St. Paul’s Cross), commanding it to be shown to the
  congregation. The Round-head Fryers cannot abide to heare of this
  cat.”


At the coronation of Elizabeth there is an account given, in the Hatton
correspondence, of an effigy of the Pope being carried through the
streets and afterwards burnt with several live cats, which, we are told,
“squalled in a most hideous manner” as soon as they felt the fire.

After a famous French trial in the seventeenth century, a woman
condemned as a murderess was hung in an iron cage over a slow fire, and
fourteen poor unoffending cats were made to share the same fate. It is
difficult to conceive by what train of thought civilised beings could
arrive at such a pitch of wicked and horrible cruelty. Why should a
gentle, shrinking, graceful little creature be thus made the savage
sport of devils in human form?

There seems, however, to have been one haven of rest for poor persecuted
pussy during the Middle Ages, and that was in the nunneries. Here, at
least, she would be kindly treated, let us hope. It is said that this
fact has something to do with the cat’s traditional association with old
maids.

And now let us quit this dark page of history, where the shameful
treatment of an innocent race makes the lover of the poor pussies
sorrowful and indignant. It was in France that, after the period when
the cat was given over to the ways of the witch and the sorcerer, we
find her yet again taking her proper place in the home and the heart of
the highest in the land. Writers of natural history and others
frequently denounce the cat as an animal incapable of personal
attachment, yet puss has wooed and won the friendship and affection of
many notable men.

Cats, the most politic, the most polite, and in proportion to their size
the most powerful of beasts—realising almost literally Napoleon’s
favourite maxim, “Iron hand in velvet glove”—have the permanent fame of
being loved by that most eminent of Frenchmen, Cardinal Richelieu, who
delighted to watch the frolics of a number of kittens by which he was
generally surrounded in his leisure hours. In this _tendresse_ he
resembled a still more famous Churchman! A cat went to sleep once, we
are told, on the sleeve of Mahomet’s robe. The hour of prayer arrived,
and he chose rather to cut away his sleeve than to disturb the slumbers
of his beloved Muezza.

[Illustration:

  TOMB OF A CAT WHICH BELONGED TO MADAME DE LESDIGUIÈRES.
]

Chateaubriand makes frequent mention of the cat in his “Memoires.” He
received a present of a cat from the Pope. Moncrieff wrote a series of
quaintly worded letters on cats, and the book has some curious
illustrations. In this we read of the pussies of many grand dames of the
French Court of that day. We give an illustration taken from this book,
which represents the tomb of a cat which belonged to Madame
Lesdiguières, and bears this inscription:—

                   UNE CHATTE JOLIE.
                   Sa maitresse qui n’aima rien
                     L’aima jusques à la folie.
                   Pourquoi le dire? On le voit bien.

Moncrieff had to suffer an immense amount of ridicule on account of his
charming “Lettres sur les Chats,” which the author himself calls “a
gravely frivolous book.” Victor Hugo had a favourite cat he called
“Chanoine,” and Gautier’s cat slept in his bed, and always kept him
company at meals. Petrarch loved his cat as he loved his Laura. Dr.
Johnson used to indulge his cat Hodge with oysters, which he would go
out himself to purchase. Chesterfield provided for his cat in his will.
Sir Walter Scott’s love of dogs did not prevent him delighting in the
company of a “conversable cat,” and Hunse, of Hunsefield, seems to have
possessed a large share of the great man’s affection, and when he died
his master wrote thus to Richardson: “Alack-a-day! my poor cat, Hime, my
acquaintance, and in some sort my friend of fifteen years, was snapped
at even by that paynim, Nimrod. What could I say to him, but what
Brantôme said to some _ferrailleur_ who had been too successful in a
duel: ‘Ah, mon grand ami, vous avez tué mon autre grand ami.’” Amongst
famous French novelists several have been cat lovers, especially Dumas,
who in his “Mémoires” makes notable mention of “Le Docteur.” Cowper,
Shelley, Wordsworth, Swinburne, and Matthew Arnold all wrote lovingly of
cats. But Shakespeare, although he makes forty-four distinct mentions of
cats, never has a good word for poor pussy. In “All’s Well that Ends
Well” he gives vent to his dislike. Bertram rages forth:—


  “I could endure anything before me but a cat, and now he’s cat to me.”


In “Cymbeline” occurs this passage:—“In killing creatures vile as cats
and dogs”; and in “Midsummer Night’s Dream” Lysander is made to
exclaim:—“Hang off, thou cat, thou burr, thou vile thing.”

Romeo cries out:—

                    “Every cat and dog
                And little mouse, every unworthy thing.”

From these quotations alone we may infer that, at any rate, dogs and
cats were not favourites with the great bard. There is only one mention
of cats in Dante. He compares to cats the demons who, with their hooks,
claw the “barterers” (_i.e._ abusers of their office as magistrates),
when these sinners try to emerge from the hot pitch wherein they are
punished. He says of one of these wretches:—“Tra male gatte era venuto
il sorco.” (_Inf. XXII._, 58.) Translation:—“Among wicked cats the mouse
came.”

In the “Westlosthcher Divan” of Goethe, written in his old age, but full
of youthful spirit and of the freshest allusions to Eastern things, the
cat is called one of the four “favoured beasts,” _i.e._ animals in a
state of grace, admitted into Paradise, in a verse very near the end of
the poem, which being literally translated, reads thus:—

“This cat of Abuherriras” (a friend of the prophet Mahomet) “purrs about
the Lord, and coaxes. Since he is ever a holy beast whom the Prophet
stroked.”

Robert Liston, who, as everyone knows, was the leading London surgeon in
the middle of the nineteenth century, was passionately attached to his
cat, and used to introduce it to his guests at the dinner parties which,
according to the custom of a past generation, he gave his medical
friends. On these occasions the cat would gravely walk round the dinner
table during dessert to be admired by the guests in succession, and it
once happened that the top of its tail got into the wineglass of Dr.
Anthony Todd Thoruson, Liston’s famous colleague at University College
Hospital. This man promptly struck the animal. Liston was so enraged
that he started from his seat and denounced his guest in language more
forcible than elegant.

Jeremy Bentham, who introduced by their names to Lord Brougham the cats
seated on chairs round his table, deserves honour, not only as the
foremost of modern jurists but also because, in his “Principles of
Morals and Legislation,” he had expressed better than others the claims
of brutes to kind treatment.

The great scholar and eminent writer, St. George Mivart, has given the
world a wonderfully comprehensive work on the Cat, and has used the
maligned feline as his type for an introduction to the study of
back-boned animals. It is he who remarks:—“We cannot, without becoming
cats, perfectly understand the cat mind.”

[Illustration:

  THE CAT IN HERALDRY.

  (_From Frank’s Collection of Book Plates._)
]

Perhaps the unkindest picture given to us of a cat is from the pen of
the naturalist Buffon. “The cat” (says this unsympathetic student) “is
an unfaithful animal, kept only from necessity in order to suppress a
less domestic and more unpleasant one, and although these animals are
pretty creatures, especially when they are young, they have a
treacherous and perverse disposition, which increases with age, and is
only disguised by training. They are inveterate thieves; only when they
are well brought up they become as cunning and flattering as human
rascals.”

[Illustration:

  THE PRINTER’S MARK OF MELCHIOR SESSA, OF VENICE.

  (_From a Print at the British Museum._)
]

Chateaubriand, referring to these scathing remarks, says:—“Buffon has
belied this animal. I am labouring at her rehabilitation, and hope to
make her appear a tolerably good sort of beast.”

[Illustration:

  A MERCHANT’S MARK.

  (_From a Print at the British Museum._)
]

A charming reference to the ways of cats occurs in a curious and
interesting book by a once famous Jesuit, Father Bougeant, who lived in
the first half of the eighteenth century. There is an English
translation of this work, which has passed also into other languages and
several editions. This is the passage translated:—


  “Such is one of those big-whiskered and well-furred tom cats, that you
  see quiet in a corner, digesting at his leisure, sleeping if it seems
  good to him, sometimes giving himself the pleasure of hunting, for the
  rest enjoying life peaceably, without being troubled by the events
  which agitate us, without tiring his mind by a thousand useless
  reflections, and little caring to communicate his thoughts to others.
  Truly it needs only that a female cat (_une chatte_) come on the scene
  to derange all his philosophy; but are our philosophers wiser on such
  occasions?”


The cat, as the emblem of independence and liberty, has been used in
heraldry, statuary, and signboards. In the sixteenth century a
well-known firm of printers named Sessa, at Venice, adopted the device
of a cat surrounded by curious ornamentation, and Dibdin in one of his
works tells us that whenever you see Sessa’s cat you may be sure the
book is a good one and worth reading. Ever since the days when the
Romans carried on their banners the design of a cat, this combative and
courageous animal has been a favourite symbol of warriors and nobles.
The wife of King Clovis, Clotilde, had a cat sable upon her armorial
bearings, springing at a rat, and on the famous Katzen family’s shield
was a cat holding a mouse in its mouth. In Scotland the Clan Chattan was
known by the emblem of a wild cat with the significant motto, “Touch not
the cat, but” (meaning without) “the glove.” Their chief was called Mohr
au chat, or the great wild cat.

M. Champfleury, dealing with cats in heraldry, tells us that the French
Republic resumed heraldic possession of the cat and added it to its
glorious shield of arms; and an illustration is given in his book of the
republican painter’s figure of Liberty holding a pike surmounted with a
Phrygian cap, and at her feet is seated a cat.

In past, rather than in present, days the cat was used on signboards,
especially in France. We read of “La Maison du chat pelote” (_i.e._
which rolls itself up), and “La Maison du chat qui pêche.” In the
Lombards’ quarter of Paris, “Le Chat Noir” was formerly a familiar
figure above restaurants and confectioners. In England we often come
across “The Cat and the Fiddle” as a signboard to old country village
inns, and in Cassell’s “Old and New London” a writer says:—“Piccadilly
was the place in which ‘The Cat and Fiddle’ first appeared as a
publichouse sign. The story is that a Frenchwoman, a small shopkeeper,
had a very faithful and favourite cat, and that in lack of any other
sign, she put over her door the words: ‘Voici un chat fidèle.’ From some
cause or other, the ‘Chat Fidèle’ soon became a popular sign in France,
and was speedily Anglicised into ‘The Cat and Fiddle,’ because the words
form part of one of our most popular nursery rhymes.”

[Illustration:

  ALICE AND THE CHESHIRE CAT.

  From “Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland,” by Lewis Carroll.

  (_By permission of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Limited._)
]

Many are the popular traditions, maxims, proverbs, and superstitions
connected with the cat. In olden days her every movement was looked upon
as a sign of ill-omen or of good luck. Old nurses would drive a cat out
of the bedroom with much significance of manner, that it might not “suck
the child’s breath.” There is a superstition that a cat will not remain
in a house with an unburied corpse.

M. Presse d’Aveunes gives an account of a curious cat superstition.
“When a woman gives birth to twins, boys or girls, the last born of the
two, whom they call ‘barecy’ (sometimes both), has at times, and it may
be all its life long, an irresistible craving for particular eatables;
and in order to satisfy more easily its gluttonous desires, it assumes
the shape of different animals, and especially that of the cat. During
the transmigration of the spirit into another shell, the human body is
as a corpse, but when the spirit has satisfied its desires it retakes
its proper form.”

He continues: “Having one day killed a cat which had made inroads upon
my larder, a druggist of the neighbourhood came to me in a great fright
and entreated me to spare all animals, for he said he had a daughter who
had the misfortune to be a ‘barecy,’ and that she was often in the habit
of assuming the shape of a cat in order to eat the sweetmeats served at
my table.”

[Illustration:

  A STUDY.

  (_From the painting by Madame Ronner._)
]

Milton tells us “that when the cat washes her face over her eares, we
shall have a great store of raine.” A cat sneezing is supposed to bring
luck to a bride on her wedding day. Sailors have in all times been prone
to superstition as regards cats. A black cat’s appearance on the ship
foretells disaster, but if a cat should disappear overboard the greatest
consternation is caused amongst the crew.

Very plentiful are the nursery rhymes, fairy tales, and stories
concerning cats—a good-sized book would not contain them. “The cat,”
says M. Champfleury, “is the nurse’s favourite and the baby’s earliest
friend. It plays its part in little rhythmical dramas, cunningly
presented to the drowsy child, who falls asleep with a familiar image
parading fantastically through his brain.” French nursery rhymes are
much prettier than English. For instance, this bald and commonplace
statement is not calculated to catch the attention of the juvenile
mind:—

               “Great A, little A, bouncing B,
               Cat’s in the cupboard, and can’t see me.”

How much softer and daintier are the following lines:—

                   “A, B, C,
                   Le chat est allé
                 Dans la neige; en retournant
                   Il avait les souliers tout blancs.”

In passing, I should say it is strange that to the French a cat is
always masculine, and to the English feminine.

In the days of good Queen Anne the story of pussy’s venturesome journey
to London was put into verse, and what child has not listened eagerly to
these lines from that time down to our present day?

                      “‘Pussy-cat, Pussy-cat,
                          Where have you been?’
                      ‘I’ve been to London
                          To see the Queen.’

                      “‘Pussy-cat, Pussy-cat,
                          What did you do there?’
                      ‘I frightened a little mouse
                          Under her chair.’”

In “Alice in Wonderland” Lewis Carroll has given the world “a childish
story” which will never cease to delight both young and old. In this we
read of the “Cheshire Cat” which grinned down upon the guests assembled
at the royal croquet party, and having incurred the anger of the Queen,
was in danger of having its head cut off by order of the infuriated
monarch. The other volume by the same author—“Alice Through the
Looking-Glass”—opens with a description of the way in which Dinah the
cat washed her children’s faces:—“First she held the poor thing down by
its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw she rubbed its face
all over the wrong way, beginning at the nose.” Then follows an animated
conversation between Alice and the kitten. All the world knows of the
love Lewis Carroll had for children, and I can assert he had an
affection also for cats, for when a child he spoilt and petted me and my
kitten. I only wish I could remember the deliciously impossible stories
he was wont to tell me of fairies, goblins, and pussy-cats.

Harrison Weir, in his book on cats, has gathered together a number of
curious cat proverbs. Some are very familiar, such as: “A cat may look
at a king”; “Care will kill the cat”; “When the cat is away the mice
will play,” and a very significant one is: “When the maid leaves the
door open the cat’s in fault.” The quaint saying, “When candles are out
all cats are gray” is a very expressive one.

When we consider the cat in art, it is among Eastern painters we find
the most delicate and skilful studies. Next to the Egyptians, the
Chinese and Japanese have excelled in the artistic treatment of animals.
In many of the Dutch interiors given to us by Flemish artists, the
domestic cat may be seen curled up on the hearth, or sitting erect,
bearing somewhat the appearance of being stuffed with bran.

[Illustration:

  MADAME RONNER AT WORK.

  (_Photo: Alexandre, Brussels_)
]

In many of the early Italian sacred pictures we find the cat depicted,
but great painters, like Titian, Velasquez, and Murillo, seem to have
preferred the dog as an adjunct to their portraits. Raphael and Salvator
both considered puss a worthy subject for their brush. In M.
Champfleury’s interesting book on cats he gives a facsimile from the
powerful pencil of Mind, whom Madame Lebrun has termed “the Raphael of
Cats.” The attitudes are so true to nature that the cat seems alive.
Mind was a native of Berne, and in 1809, on account of a scare of
madness amongst cats, eight hundred were put to death. This was a
heartbreak to the cat-loving painter, who, however, managed to save his
favourite pet Minette from the wholesale massacre.

Very quaint reproductions of cats have been made in the following wares:
Whieldon, Salt Glaze, Agate, and Staffordshire. With Chinese and
Japanese cat figures we are all familiar; they are grotesque rather than
beautiful.

Coming down to the cat artists of the present day, we would mention
Madame Henriette Ronner, who has justly deserved the great reputation
that she has acquired in her own country as well as ours. It is in
depicting kittens in their ever-varying moods that Madame Ronner most
excels. Whether playing havoc with antique lace, as in “Un Bout de
Toilette,” scattering an artist’s materials, as in “Mischief,” or
dragging jewels from a casket, her kittens are instinct with vitality,
and are portrayed in a manner implying knowledge of their anatomical
structure, as well as in a most appreciative perception of their youth
and beauty. Most lovers of cats are acquainted with Madame Ronner’s
artistic volume containing so many faithful and lovely reproductions of
several of her best pictures, and an interesting account of her life and
work written by Mr. M. H. Spielmann.

Another famous painter of cats is M. Eugène Lambert, who may be said to
divide the honours with Madame Ronner in portraying with fidelity and
artistic taste the feline race. Among English animal painters we have
none who can come anywhere near to these two celebrated French artists
in their marvellous delicacy of touch and subtle skill in depicting cat
and kittens.

In these latter days who is there amongst us, young and old, who has not
enjoyed a hearty laugh over the comical cats of Louis Wain? In his
particular line, he is unique, for no one has ever portrayed cats in
such various attitudes and with such deliciously expressive
countenances. The adjectives and adverbs of the Cataract of Lodore would
not suffice to describe the varied emotions of these funny felines. A
Christmas without one of Louis Wain’s clever catty pictures would be
like a Christmas pudding without the currants!

[Illustration:

  “CRYSTAL,”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. FINNIE YOUNG. (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

To Harrison Weir cats and cat lovers owe a debt of gratitude. He has
done much to raise the standard of the feline race, and in his excellent
book called “Our Cats,” he thus writes in his preface:—


  “Long ages of neglect, ill treatment, and absolute cruelty, with
  little or no gentleness, kindness, or training, have made the cat
  self-reliant; and from this emanates the marvellous powers of
  observation, the concentration of which has produced a style analogous
  to reasoning, not unmixed with timidity, caution, wildness, and a
  retaliative nature. But should a new order of things arise, and it is
  nurtured, petted, cosseted, talked to, noticed, and tamed with
  mellowed firmness and tender gentleness, then in but a few generations
  much evil that bygone cruelty has stamped into its wretched existence
  will disappear, and it will be more than ever, not only a useful,
  serviceable helpmate, but an object of unceasing interest, admiration,
  and cultured beauty, and thus being of value, it will be profitable.”


It was Harrison Weir who instituted and carried out the first Cat Show
held at the Crystal Palace in 1871, and since then he has taken an
active part in the cat world. Of late years, however, he has been
failing in health, and it was suggested that some testimonial should be
offered to him in his declining years by his many admirers and
cat-loving friends.

_Our Cats_, that popular weekly publication, opened a list in their
columns, the result being a handsome piece of plate, which the veteran
F.R.H.S. was asked to accept. In his reply acknowledging the gift, he
writes:—“Kindest and best wishes to those warm-hearted and truly
unforgetful friends who have contributed towards the very handsome
testimonial.” Then he goes on to allude to the first cat show and to his
prophecy regarding the growing popularity of the cat family:—“Did I
expect the outcome to be what it is? Yes, and no. I fully expected large
shows and more of them, and a ‘Cat Press,’ and in the papers cat columns
for the universal and worthy favourite cat. But in another way I am
disappointed, and that is for the neglect of the short-haired English
cat by the ascendancy of the foreign long-hair. Both are truly
beautiful, but the first in intelligence, in my opinion, is far in
advance of the latter.” Therefore, with a hope that Harrison Weir may
yet live to see the English short-haired cats still more widely loved
and appreciated, and given better classification at our shows, I will
pass on to my chapter on present-day cats and cat clubs, and the many
other institutions and societies which are the outcome of the rapid
strides that have been made in the cat fancy since the day when Harrison
Weir was laughed at by his incredulous and astonished railway companion
as they travelled together to the first Cat Show held at the Crystal
Palace in 1871.

[Illustration:

  LADY ALEXANDER’S “BROTHER BUMP.”

  CHAMPION SHORT-HAIRED BLUE.
]




[Illustration:

  SLEEPING BEAUTIES.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. Francis Clarke._)
]




                              CHAPTER II.
                            CATS OF TO-DAY.


The term “Cat” is applied in its widest sense to all feline animals. The
following are the various names by which the cat is known in different
countries, and it is curious to note that, with two exceptions, they all
begin with a “C” or a “K” and differ very little in pronunciation: Irish
and Scotch, _Cat_; French, _Chat_; Dutch, _Kat_; Danish, _Kat_; Swedish,
_Katt_; German, _Katti_ or _Katze_; Italian, _Gatto_; Portuguese and
Spanish, _Gato_; Polish, _Kot_; Russian, _Kots_; Turkish, _Keti_; Welsh,
_Cetti_; Cornish, _Katt_; American, _Katz_.

[Illustration:

  MISS F. SIMPSON’S “BONNIE BOY.”

  (_Photo: Gunn & Stuart, Richmond._)
]

In the English house and home we call her “puss,” and it is the name
which appeals most to our hearts. No woman likes to be called a “cat,”
but to be likened to a puss or pussy is suggestive of something or
someone soft and pretty, with gentle, winning ways. Archbishop Whately
has said that only one English noun had a true vocative case,
“Nominative, cat; vocative, puss.” I do not think that in any other
country there is a pet name for the cat, just as there is no word in any
foreign language that breathes the same tender truth to the hearts as
“home.” Puss and home! The terms seem so closely connected with each
other, and suggest peaceful happiness and restful repose.

Truly, the history of the cat has been a strangely chequered one.
Perhaps, because she is such a secret, complex, and independent creature
she has remained somewhat of a puzzle to humankind, and is therefore to
a great extent misunderstood; but those who will take the trouble to
consider the cat and try to understand her, will find that puss is none
of those things she has been accused of being. It is only those who are
in constant contact with cats who understand how intelligent they really
are; although their intelligence is quite in a different mould from that
of the dog. I may mention that the household cat outnumbers, it is said,
the household dog in London by the proportion of four to one. This fact
may be accounted for by the non-taxation of cats. The question of the
taxation of cats has very often been raised, and I do not think that
anyone who really values his cat would object to pay a yearly tax; but
the proposal is as unpractical as it is ridiculous, and it is certain
that taxation would not help in exterminating the poor, disreputable,
half-starved members of the feline tribe, who have no fixed abode and
whose only means of existence is by plunder.

The figure and number nine seems to be an important one in connection
with cats. There is a popular saying that a cat has nine lives. The
expostulating tabby in Gay’s Fables says to the old beldame:—

               “’Tis infamy to serve a hag,
               Cats are thought imps, her broom a nag;
               And boys against our lives combine,
               Because, ’tis said, your cats have nine.”

Cats probably owe this reputation to their extraordinary powers of
endurance, and certain it is that they have a greater tenacity to life
than any other animal. At the Battersea Home a dog and a cat have been
placed in the lethal chamber, and it was observed that the dog died in
five minutes, whereas the cat breathed for forty minutes longer. A short
time ago I received the following letter from a cat fancier:—


  “At 11 p.m. two kittens, a few hours old, were placed in a pail of
  water, and left there for rather over ten minutes. Seeing them at the
  bottom with their mouths open, it was taken for granted they were
  dead; the bodies were then transferred to the ashpit, and early next
  morning they were discovered to be alive and quite chirpy. Restoring
  them to the mother, they have grown nice, strong, healthy little kits,
  and have just left for comfortable homes.”


In Thistleton Dyer’s interesting book on “English Folk-lore,” reference
is made to this subject. “Cats,” he says, “from their great suppleness
and aptitude to fall on their feet, are commonly said to have nine
lives; hence Ben Johnson, in ‘Every Man in his Humour,’ says, ‘’Tis a
pity you had not ten lives—a cat’s and your own.’”

“In the Middle Ages a witch was empowered to take cat’s body _nine_
times,” so writes an eminent old zoologist.

[Illustration:

  KITTEN AT WORK AND PLAY.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

The “cat-o’-_nine_-tails” is a dreaded object to some light-fingered and
heavy-handed miscreants. I have heard a magistrate remark that he
considers this form of punishment the best way in which to give hints to
the wicked. Garrotting was virtually stamped out by its use.
Wife-beating would be less common if the brute-husband were treated to a
taste of the cat-o’-nine-tails. This implement of torture consists of
nine pieces of cord put together, and in each cord are nine knots.
Consequently every stroke inflicts a large number of long and severe
marks not unlike the clawing and scratching of a savage cat, producing
crossing and re-crossing wounds.

[Illustration:

  KITTEN BELONGING TO MRS. E. S. OWEN, DETROIT, MICHIGAN.

  BY “KING OF THE SILVERS”—“BLESSED DAMOZEL.”
  (_Photo: Albany Art Union, New York._)
]

In my long and varied experience of cats, I have noticed that more of
these creatures succumb to the common enemy at about _nine_ years of age
than at any other period. We have heard of cats attaining the age of
twenty years, but the following account surpasses all previous records
of longevity in the feline world:—


  TO THE EDITOR OF THE _Stock-Keeper_,

  Sir,—Seeing you have a column in your paper devoted to cats, I thought
  it might interest your readers to hear that in our village there is a
  cat thirty-one years old. She is quite lively, and looks like living a
  few more years. It belongs to a poor widow, who told me she had it as
  a kitten when she married. (Her husband lived twenty-seven years, and
  has been dead four.)

                   _Newbury, Bucks._      W. B. HERMAN.


It is strange that the poor dead bodies of cats have often been used as
objects of foolish and vulgar so-called sport. Dead cats and rotten eggs
were, and are sometimes still, considered legitimate missiles to make
use of at borough and county elections.

All sorts of stories are related of pussy’s superhuman intelligence, but
the most uncanny one of very recent date I will refer to here. It may be
remembered that in the winter of 1901 a vessel named the _Salmon_ was
wrecked. On the morning of the accident, this vessel was lying alongside
the _Sturgeon_, and her two cats, who had all their lives shown the most
perfect contentment with their home and surroundings, made desperate
efforts to get on board the _Sturgeon_. The crew drove them off again
and again, and the ship’s dog attacked them, but they would not be
deterred, and when the _Salmon_ at last cast off, the two cats landed
with one frantic and final spring on to the _Sturgeon’s_ deck. It seems
absurd to argue that those cats knew of the coming disaster, yet why
should they take such a sudden and utterly unreasonable aversion to the
ship which had always been their home? And why should they insist on
making their way to another vessel from which they had been so
inhospitably repulsed?

We have many proofs of the extraordinary extent to which a cat’s sense
of hearing and smell are developed. On my voyage out to Australia flying
fish would sometimes fall on to the deck. The cats that are always
somewhere about the ship might be comfortably curled up asleep below,
but the peculiar sound would fetch them up in a great hurry, and they
would rush to secure the prize. The crew used to amuse themselves
sometimes by trying to imitate the noise in various ways to deceive
them; but the cats were not to be “had”—they could distinguish the
peculiar thud of the flying fish from all other sounds.

[Illustration:

  THE ANTIQUARIES.

  (_From the painting by Madame Ronner._)
]

Various theories have been put forward to account for the marvellous
instinct which a cat possesses, enabling her to find her way home
although miles and miles of untraversed country lay between her and the
place from which she has been taken. It is contended that a cat which is
conveyed in a bag or blindfolded will have its sense of smell in full
exercise, and will, by this means take note of the successive odours
encountered on the way, and that these will leave in its mind sufficient
information of the route so as to make it an easy matter for the animal
to find its way back again. Be this as it may, many of us can state
facts which are even stranger than fiction of mysterious reappearances
of cats who, with a homing instinct as true as any carrier-pigeon,
return to the haven where they would be.

[Illustration:

  “KEPWICK VIOLET” and “KEPWICK HYACINTH.”

  BLUES BELONGING TO THE HON. MRS. MCLAREN MORRISON.
  (_Photo: J. R. Clarke, Thirsk._)
]

The instinct of maternity is, perhaps, more largely developed in the cat
than in any other animal. No creature shows such anxiety for the safety
and welfare of her offspring as she does, and often her natural
timidness will give place to bold and fearless courage when her little
ones have been in any difficulty or danger. Mivart tells us of a cat
that plunged into a swiftly running stream and rescued her three
drowning kittens, bringing them one by one in safety to the shore.
During a fire in a London theatre, which took place a few years ago, a
poor cat with her family was left forgotten at the back of the stage.
Three times the faithful mother rushed into the flaming building and
reappeared each time with a kitten in her mouth. But alas! with fatal
persistence the devoted creature returned to rescue the remaining one,
and that she reached the spot was proved, for after the fire was
extinguished, the charred bodies of mother and child were found lying
side by side.

A clever writer has stated that “the human race may be divided into
people who love cats and people who hate them; the neutrals being few in
numbers.” This is very true. There are also differences of opinion as to
whether cats are desirable inmates of a household or not, but there can
be no question as to the great utility of these animals, and it is only
natural to suppose that they were created for the purpose of suppressing
rats and mice and other vermin. There is a popular notion that if a cat
is petted and well fed she will become less useful as a mouser. This is
a fallacy, for the cat’s inclination is to hunt the mouse or rat, not
for food, but for sport, and an animal that is enfeebled by neglect and
starvation is not in the best condition to successfully catch its prey.
This love of sport is not, however, inherent in all cats, but is
hereditary in the feline tribe as it is in the human race.

It may not be generally known that the Government pays annual sums for
the purpose of providing, keeping, and feeding numerous “harmless,
necessary cats” in their public offices, dockyards, and stores, thereby
attesting to the worth and capability of pussy’s services.

In the National Printing Office in France a considerable number of cats
are employed in keeping the premises clear of rats and mice which would
otherwise work havoc amongst the stock of paper always stored in large
quantities. In Vienna, cats are placed on active service in the
municipal buildings. At many of our great railway stations there is a
feline staff engaged in the various warehouses and offices. The farmer
will readily admit the usefulness of puss in his barns, stables,
outhouses and fields. Farmers are notorious grumblers, but they would
have greater cause for discontent and disappointment if rats and mice
were allowed to live and thrive, and breed and multiply on their
premises. The newly sown peas and corn stacks would suffer to a terrible
extent, and the broods of ducklings and chickens would speedily vanish
if puss did not keep a vigilant eye and silently but surely fulfil the
duties of her calling.

[Illustration:

  MISS SAVERY’S BLUE PERSIAN KITTEN.

  (_Photo: H. Warschawski, St Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

In the live stock department of the Army and Navy Stores in London, an
orange Persian cat may be seen strolling about amongst the cages of
birds of every sort. The attendant informed me she had been on the
premises three or four years, and had saved the company a “tidy sum.”
Previous to obtaining her services the packets of bird-seed disappeared
like magic, for they were demolished wholesale by the swarms of mice.
Now rarely one is nibbled, and every morning dozens of lifeless bodies
are cleared away. Curiously enough these dead mice have their tails
eaten off, for apparently this cat has a weakness for the appendage,
whereas, usually the head is considered the delicate morsel amongst the
feline race. It seems that although the cat is left alone with all the
fluttering birds at night, she never has attempted to molest them in any
way.

[Illustration:

  A PAIR OF SHORT-HAIRED BROWN TABBIES.

  (_Photo: T. Fall, Baker St., W._)
]

I lately had occasion to visit one of our London theatres during the
daytime, when it was empty; and observing a big brown cat walking about
amongst the stalls, I made some remark about him to the official who
accompanied me. He said they found it quite impossible to get along
without a cat; they had tried, but the place became overrun with mice.
During pussy’s occupation of the empty playhouse plenty of bodies were
discovered, but never a live mouse had been seen disporting itself.

The cats in Government service in America are very numerous. The army
has a regular corps of them kept at the commissary depôts of the great
cities. It is customary for the officer in charge of each depôt to
submit to the War Department a request for an allowance for the cats of
meat and milk. More than three hundred cats are in the employ of the
Post Office Department, distributed among about fifty of the largest
offices. The New York City office expends sixty dollars annually in
cats’-meat. At Pittsburg, there is a “cold storage” breed of cats, which
has special qualifications for enduring extreme cold. These cats are
short tailed, with long and heavy fur, and their eyebrows and whiskers
are extraordinarily long and strong. It is said they do not thrive when
transferred to an ordinary atmosphere.

[Illustration:

  CAT CALENDAR.

  (_By kind permission of Raphael Tuck & Co._)
]

The following extract from the _Daily Mail_ of February 1st, 1902, gives
us an account of a most exemplary, well trained, and up-to-date cat, and
opens up a fresh field for the utility and agility of our domestic
pets—not an absolutely fresh field indeed, if one recalls the fact that
Puss was already a “retriever” in ancient Egypt.


                             A PING-PONG CAT.

  Hunting for balls is undoubtedly the one great drawback to ping-pong.
  Might I suggest a novel and easy method of accomplishing this
  difficult and unpleasant task?

  My cat is now an expert in the art of finding ping-pong balls.
  Immediately the ball touches the floor the cat is after it, and brings
  it from its hiding-place to the side of the table at which I am
  playing, thus saving me from unnecessary exertion.

                                                                F. S. W.


The thought suggests itself that pussy’s teeth and claws might work
serious havoc amongst the ping-pong balls, and that some of these would
be produced in a mutilated condition.

Of all animals the cat appears most to resent being taught or trained to
do tricks. Puss has a natural antipathy to be forced to do anything, or
remain anywhere against her will. Hence the few exhibitions of really
clever performing cats in comparison with the marvellous feats achieved
by dogs. It has been stated that the cat is the hardest animal to teach;
it takes years to train a cat to perform some simple trick which a dog
would learn in as many weeks. Once a cat is trained, it becomes a very
valuable possession. We have all seen the Happy Family, consisting of
monkeys, guinea-pigs, canaries, pigeons, and mice, whilst a cat is
seated demurely in the midst of this incongruous assembly. No doubt some
training was required to cause puss to disregard the natural instincts
of her race.

The cat is a most cleanly creature, and perhaps more particular about
her appearance than any other animal. As Miss Agnes Repplier, in her
delightful book, “The Fireside Sphinx,” says: “Pussy’s adroitness is
equalled only by her delicacy and tact. Her cleanliness and her careful
attention to her toilet show respect for herself and for us.”

[Illustration:

  CAT CALENDAR.

  (_By kind permission of Raphael Tuck & Co._)
]

One of the strangest and most profitable trades in London is the
wholesale and retail business of horsemeat for cats. In barrows and
carts the hawkers of this horse-flesh cry their wares throughout the
city and suburbs, and find a ready sale for them. It is stated that
26,000 horses, maimed, or past work, are slaughtered and cut up every
year to feed our household pets. Each horse means on an average 275
pounds of meat, and this is sold by pussy’s butcher in half pennyworths
skewered on bits of wood. The magnitude of this trade can be estimated
by the fact that it keeps constantly employed thirty wholesale salesmen.
I may here mention that a cats’-meat men’s supper was organised last
year in London by the editor of _Our Cats_, assisted by Mr. Louis Wain
and others; and a most successful entertainment was given at the City of
New York Restaurant. The applications for tickets were so numerous that
400 men had to be refused; and when the 250 guests were seated, it was
clearly proved that every available inch of accommodation had been
utilised. Having been present, I can testify to the excellent supper and
entertainment provided for the cats’-meat men of London.

[Illustration:

  CAT CALENDAR.

  (_By kind permission of Raphael Tuck & Co._)
]

The most casual observer cannot have failed to remark the wonderful
development of late years in “Catty” Christmas souvenirs, thus giving
proof of the growth of love and admiration for pussy. We have cat
almanacks, cat calendars, and cat annuals, and I can testify to the
innumerable Christmas cards with designs of cats of all sorts and
conditions which have found their way into my hands expressive of good
wishes at the festive season.

The official mind would probably frown at the suggestion that the census
returns should be enlivened with incidental humour. However, after the
last census, the following statement appeared in the press:—


  “An enumerator in going over a return paper found that the household
  cat had been included as a member of the family. It was described as
  ‘Jim,’ the relationship to the head of the family being ‘lodger.’ The
  entry then stated that he was of the male sex, single, aged one last
  birthday. His occupation was also given—‘mouse-catcher, worker on his
  own account.’”


A description of the ordinary domestic cat is hardly necessary, but
before I pass on to mention matters of general interest concerning cats
of to-day, I will give a quotation from a Board School boy’s essay,
which speaks for itself:—


  “The house cat is a four-legged quadruped, the legs as usual being at
  the corners. It is what is sometimes called a tame animal, though it
  feeds on mice and birds of prey. Its colours are striped, it does not
  bark, but breathes through its nose instead of its mouth. Cats also
  mow, which you have all heard. Cats have nine lives, but which is
  seldom wanted in this country, coz’ of Christianity. Cats eat meat and
  most anythink speshuelly where you can’t afford. This is all about
  cats.”


Perhaps my readers may think that after such a lucid description of the
subject in hand, further comments are unnecessary!

I will proceed, however, to give a glance round at the Cat Fancy in
general before mentioning particulars of Clubs and Cats of the present
day. The question has often been asked whether the Cat Fancy will ever
become as popular and fashionable as the breeding of dogs, poultry, and
birds? I think this question may be answered in the affirmative, when we
consider that during last year a dozen and more large cat shows have
been held in different parts of England and Scotland, to say nothing of
numerous mixed shows where a section for cats was provided. Every year
the number of fanciers increases, and although this particular hobby is
almost entirely confined to the gentler sex, yet it is really surprising
to find how many more men are beginning to take an interest in the
pussies, and are keenly excited in the winnings of the household pet or
the king of the cattery. As a friend once said to me, “You know what men
are; if only the cats win prizes, my husband does not mind, but it is a
different matter if I return from a show with no award; then he declares
we must get rid of all the cats!” I am afraid that cat fanciers must be
looked upon as a rather quarrelsome set, and there is no doubt that
petty jealousies and spiteful gossip retard in many ways the development
and improvement of the fancy.

Another question that is often asked is whether cats can be made to
pay—or, in other words, whether cat breeding is a profitable
undertaking. From my own experience, which has extended over a number of
years, I can unhesitatingly say I have derived not only much pleasure
but a good deal of profit from keeping cats, and also I have started
many friends in the fancy who have gone on and prospered. The dangers
that beset beginners are many, and the chief difficulty is to know how
to limit the number of our pussies and so avoid overcrowding, or
retaining poor stock which will not prove creditable or profitable. Cat
keeping on an extensive scale means a large outlay, followed by constant
and untiring attention. I do not intend, however, in this chapter to
enter into any details as to the care and management of cats, for this
and other subjects connected with their interests will be fully dealt
with later on.

[Illustration:

  MR. HARRISON WEIR.

  (_Photo: C. E. Corke, Sevenoaks._)
]

In my preceding chapter I alluded to the first Cat Show held at the
Crystal Palace in 1871. This exhibition of cats has become an annual
fixture, and year by year greater interest has been manifested, better
classification given, and a larger number of cats exhibited. It was,
therefore, considered advisable to have some definite organisation, and
the National Cat Club was instituted in 1887, with Mr. Harrison Weir as
president. I will now proceed to give a list, which I believe to be
complete and correct, of the various other clubs and societies in
England and America which have been organised and which are all at this
present time in thoroughly good working order.


                    LIST OF CAT CLUBS AND SOCIETIES.


  The National Cat Club, founded 1887. Hon. sec., Mrs. A. Stennard
  Robinson, 5, Great James Street, Bedford Row, London, W.C. Annual
  subscription, 1 guinea.

  The Cat Club, founded 1898. Hon. sec., Mrs. Bagster, 15A, Paternoster
  Row, London, E.C. Annual subscription, 1 guinea.

  The Northern Counties’ Cat Club, founded 1900. Hon. sec., Mrs. Herbert
  Ransome, Altrincham. Annual subscription, 10s.

  The Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society, founded 1900. Hon. sec.,
  Mrs. H. V. James, Backwell, near Bristol. Annual subscription, 5s.

  Black-and-White Club. Hon. secs., Miss Kerswill and Miss White Atkins.
  Entrance fee, 1s.; annual subscription, 4s.

  The Blue Persian Cat Society, founded 1901. Hon. sec., Miss Frances
  Simpson, Durdans House, St. Margaret’s-on-Thames. Annual subscription,
  5s.

  The Siamese Club, founded 1900. Hon. sec., Mrs. Baker, 13, Wyndham
  Place, Bryanston Square, W. Annual subscription, 4s.; to working
  classes, 2s. 6d.

  The Orange, Cream, Fawn and Tortoisshell Society, founded 1900. Hon.
  sec., Miss Mildred Beal, Ronaldkirk Rectory, Darlington. Annual
  subscription, 10s.

  The Chinchilla Cat Club, founded May, 1901. Hon. sec., Mrs. Balding,
  92, Goldsmith Avenue, Acton. Annual subscription, 5s.

  The Short-haired Cat Club, founded 1901. Hon. sec., Mrs. Middleton,
  67, Cheyne Court, Chelsea.

  The Scottish Cat Club, founded 1894. Hon. sec., J. F. Dewar, 2, St.
  Patrick Square, Edinburgh. Annual subscription, 5s.

  The Midland Counties Cat Club, founded at Wolverhampton, 1901. Hon
  sec., Miss Cope, 136, Bristol Road, Birmingham. Annual subscription,
  5s.

  The British Cat Club, founded 1901: Hon. sec., Sir Claude Alexander,
  Faygate Wood, Sussex. Subscription, 5s.

  The Manx Cat Club, founded 1901. Miss Hester Cochran, Witchampton,
  Wimborne. Subscription, 5s.

  The Beresford Cat Club (Chicago), founded 1899. President, Mrs.
  Clinton Locke; corresponding secretary, Mrs. A. Michelson, 220, East
  Sixtieth Street, Chicago. Annual subscription, resident members, 2
  dollars; non-resident, 1 dollar.

  The Chicago Cat Club, founded 1899. President, Mrs. Leland Norton,
  Drexel Kennels, Drexel Boulevarde, Chicago.

  The Louisville Cat Club, founded 1900. Corresponding secretary, Miss
  E. Converse. Annual subscription, 50 cents.

  The Pacific Cat Club, founded 1900. Corresponding secretary, Mrs. A.
  H. Brod, 114, Broderick Street, San Francisco. Annual subscription, 1
  dollar.

  The Atlantic Club, founded in New York, 1902. Corresponding secretary,
  Dr. Ottolengui, 80, West Fortieth Street, New York.


[Illustration:

  MR. LOUIS WAIN.

  (_Photo: Lascelles & Co._)
]

Since the formation of the National Cat Club, many changes in its
constitution have taken place. On the retirement of Mr. Harrison Weir
from the presidency, Mr. Louis Wain was appointed, and still holds the
office. The N.C.C. is fortunate in having so energetic a hon. sec. and
treasurer as Mrs. Stennard Robinson, whose name is so well known in the
“doggy” world. The following is a list of officers of the National Cat
Club at the time of writing, and a summary of the objects for which the
Club was organised:—


                         THE NATIONAL CAT CLUB.


  _Patron._—H.H. Princess Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein.

  _President._—Her Grace the Duchess of Bedford.

  _Vice-Presidents._—The Right Hon. the Countess of Warwick, The
  Viscountess Maitland, The Marchioness of Dufferin and Ava, The
  Countess of Aberdeen, The Lady Hothfield, Lady Willoughby, Lady Reid,
  The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, The Lady Granville Gordon, Lady
  Decies, The Hon. Mrs. Baillie, Madame Ronner, Mr. Isaac Woodiwiss, Mr.
  Sam Woodiwiss.

  _Committee._—Louis Wain (President), Lady Decies, Lady Alexander, The
  Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, Mrs. Vallance, Mrs. Balding, Miss
  Hamilton, Dr. Roper, Mrs. Herring, Mrs. Ransome, Mrs. G. H. Walker.

  _Hon. Sec. and Treasurer._—Mrs. A. Stennard Robinson, 13, Wyndham
  Place, Bryanstone Square, W. (Telegraphic address—“Bow-wow, London.”)

  The National Cat Club was organised (1) to promote honesty in the
  breeding of Cats, so as to ensure purity in each distinct breed or
  variety; (2) to determine the classification required, and to
  encourage the adoption of such classification by breeders, exhibitors,
  judges, and the committees of all Cat Shows; (3) to maintain and keep
  the National Register of Cats; (4) to assist the Showing and Breeding
  of Cats, by holding Cat Shows under the best sanitary conditions,
  giving Championship and other prizes, and otherwise doing all in its
  power to protect and advance the interests of Cats and their owners.

  The National Cat Club is also a Court of Inquiry and Appeal in all
  matters relating to Cats, or affecting the ownership of Cats, and so
  saves the expense to its Members of litigation.

  The National Cat Club founded its Stud Book some twelve years ago, and
  it is the only reliable source of information concerning the pedigree
  of Cats. The Registration Fee is 1s. for the Register of Names, but
  for the Stud Book the fee is 5s. for _Approved_ Cats exhibited under
  N.C.C. Rules.


The two principal shows of the National Cat Club are held annually at
the Botanical Gardens in connection with the Ladies’ Kennel Association
in June, and at the Crystal Palace in October. In 1901 the total number
of cats shown at the Palace was 601, and the entries numbered 1,021.
There were 106 classes provided for long- and short-haired cats. The
following is the definition of the classes:—


                         DEFINITION OF CLASSES.


  _Open Classes._—Open to all Cats, Prize-winners or Novices.

  _Limit Classes._—For Cats of any age that have not won Three First
  Prizes.

  _Novice Classes._—For Cats of any age that have never won a First
  Prize at any Show.

  _Special Novice Cats._—For Cats or Kittens over 6 months that have
  never won a Prize of any sort at a Crystal Palace Show.

  _Neuter Classes._—For Gelded Cats.

  _Stud Classes._—For Male Cats that have sired Kittens which are
  entered and on exhibition in this Show.

  _Brood Queen Class._—For Queen Cats whose Kittens are entered in this
  Show.

  _Selling Class._—For Cats of any colour or Sex to be sold at a price
  not exceeding 3 guineas in Long-haired or 2 guineas in Short-haired
  and Foreign.

  _Ring Class._—For Cats shown in collar, and lead.

  _Kitten Classes._—Single entries to be over 3 months and under 8
  months, unless otherwise stated.

  _Brace._—For 2 Cats, age over 6 months.

  _Team._—For three or more Cats, age over 6 months.

  No Cats can be entered in brace or teams unless also entered in one
  other class.


The money prizes in each class are First, £1; Second, 10s.; Third, 5s.
The list of special prizes, including Challenge Trophies and medals,
numbered 262 at the last Crystal Palace Show in 1901.

In addition to the two regular fixtures of the N.C.C., other cat shows
are held in different places in connection with the Club and under its
rules.

[Illustration:

  LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.

  (_From a painting by Edward Hughes._)
]

The National Cat Club reigned alone until 1898, when Lady Marcus
Beresford started and founded the Cat Club. This ardent cat lover has
done more for pussy than anyone in the fancy. She is most lavish in her
generosity and unwearying in her efforts to promote the welfare of the
Club. It was Lady Marcus who first started the idea of holding cat shows
in aid of charity. The Cat Club’s first show, held at St. Stephen’s
Hall, Westminster, in 1899, was in aid of the Children’s Guild of the
Deptford Fund.

In 1900 the families of the soldiers and sailors who had fallen in the
Transvaal were benefited to a large extent by the proceeds of the show.
In 1901 the Children’s Hospital, Great Ormond Street, was the charity
selected to receive a handsome donation of £100. The Westminster shows
have always been splendidly managed, a noticeable feature being the
wonderful array of beautiful special prizes offered for competition. The
following is the list of officials connected with the Cat Club:—


                             THE CAT CLUB.

                 (_Founded by Lady Marcus Beresford._)


  The objects of the Club are the general good of the Cat, the promoting
  of true breeding of Cats, the holding of a Winter Show, so that Cats
  may be exhibited at their best, and taking other steps that shall be
  for the welfare of the Cat.

  The annual Subscription is £1 1s., payable on election, and on the 1st
  of January in each succeeding year.

  A Stud Book and a Register of Cats are kept by the Club.

  _Presidents._—Lily, Duchess of Marlborough; Edith, Duchess of
  Wellington; Lord Marcus Beresford.

  _Vice-Presidents._—Isabella, Countess Howe; Viscountess Maitland,
  Viscountess Esher, Lady Ridley, Lady de Trafford, The Hon. Mrs.
  Bampfylde, Lady Lister, Lady Gooch, Mrs. Barnet, Mrs. Alfred Bles,
  Mrs. Walter Campbell, Mrs. Chaine, Mrs. George Dawkins, Mrs. Cary
  Elwes, Mrs. C. Hill, Mrs. King, Mrs. Nicholay, Mrs. Tottie, Mrs.
  Peston Whyte, Lord Walter Gordon Lennox, A. E. Bateman, Esq., Colonel
  Chaine, Henry King, Esq.

  _Committee._—Lady Marcus Beresford, Mrs. Vary Campbell, Mrs. Dean,
  Mrs. Paul Hardy, Mrs. C. Hill, Miss Anderson Leake, Mrs. R. Blair
  Maconochie, Mrs. Neild, Mrs. Simon, Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart, Mr. L. P.
  C. Astley, Mr. Gambier Bolton, Rev. P. L. Cosway, Mr. W. R. Hawkins,
  Mr. E. W. Witt.

  _Hon. Treasurer._—Lord Marcus Beresford.

  _Hon. Secretary._—Mrs. C. J. Bagster, 15A, Paternoster Row, London,
  E.C.


[Illustration:

  LITTER OF SIAMESE KITTENS.

  BELONGING TO LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.

  (_Photo: T. Fall, Baker St., W._)
]

There is really ample room for two parent clubs, as the Fancy is making
such rapid strides, and, no doubt, well-appointed shows with good
classification do a great deal to benefit breeders and assist fanciers.
Between the National Cat Club and the Cat Club there is one point of
serious disagreement, namely, as regards registration. At present
members are expected and required to register their cats in each club if
they exhibit at the respective shows. It would be a great benefit to the
cat world in general and to the exhibitor in particular if some
arrangement could be made whereby one independent register should be
kept, and that both clubs might work together and assist each other in
endeavouring to scrutinise and verify all entries made in the joint
register, so that inaccuracies should be detected and fraud prevented.

The Northern Counties Cat Club is affiliated with the N.C.C., and has
quite a large number of members. This enterprising club holds two shows
in Manchester every year, which hitherto have been capitally managed by
the energetic hon. sec. As a natural sequence a Midland Counties Club
has lately been started, having its working centre at Birmingham. No
doubt arrangements will be made for holding a cat show in this or some
other equally central Midland town.

The Scottish Cat Club is in a flourishing condition, and has been
steadily working up members since 1894. A show is annually held in
Edinburgh, and fanciers over the border are taking a much keener
interest in cats.

In America the fancy has gone ahead in a wonderful way. It was in 1895
that the first cat show of general interest was held at Madison Square
Gardens, New York. There had previously been some private attempts to
have exhibitions of cats in connection with poultry and pigeon shows. In
1896 an American Cat Club was organised, which did some good work. Then
Chicago started a Cat Club in January, 1899, and this was followed by a
most successful enterprise on the part of Mrs. Clinton Locke, who
founded the Beresford Cat Club, called after Lady Marcus Beresford, and
now numbering about 200 members. In January, 1900, the club held its
first big show. The classification was of a most comprehensive nature,
and the list of special prizes a very liberal one. This show is now an
annual fixture, and the Cat Club of England sends medals and prizes to
be competed for. Many of the best cats exhibited at these shows have
been exported from England, and Americans are very keen in trying to
procure the very best possible stock—high prices in many cases being
offered to induce English fanciers to part with prize-winning specimens.

The following is a list of officials of the


                      BERESFORD CAT CLUB OF AMERICA.

                               _Officers._

  Mrs. Clinton Locke, 2825 Indiana Ave., (_President_); Mrs. Charles H.
  Lane, 5323 Madison Ave., (_First Vice-President_); Mrs. F. A. Howe,
  3941 Grand Boulevard (_Second Vice-President_); Mrs. A. A. Michelson,
  220 E. 60th Street (_Corresponding Secretary_); Miss L. C. Johnstone,
  5323 Madison Ave. (_Recording Secretary_); Mrs. Elwood H. Tolman, 5403
  Madison Ave. (_Treasurer_).

                               _Directors._

  Mrs. J. H. Pratt, 5816 Rosalie Court; Mrs. Lincoln Nicholson, Lee
  Centre, Illinois; Miss Louise Fergus, 3229 Sheridan Road; Mrs. Blanch
  P. Robinson, 6, Langley Place; Mrs. Vincent E. Gregg, 736 North Park
  Avenue.


[Illustration:

  “PUCK III.”

  THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCESS VICTORIA OF SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN.
]

At the Cat Show held in January, 1902, as many as 75 classes were
provided, and it is plain to see from these that Americans have not the
same antipathy for broken colours—that is, cats with white markings—as
we have in England, as there are classes specially for orange-and-white,
and black-and-white cats. In another part of this work I shall refer to
varieties and breeds of cats existing in America which differ from those
in England. The Beresford Cat Club have an extremely well-arranged stud
book and register, which is published annually. I am sure that the Cat
Fancy in America has a great future before it, and we cannot help being
greatly struck with the earnestness, thoroughness, and enthusiasm with
which Americans have taken up this hobby. When we consider the great
distances in the States and the paucity of good stud cats, and the few
opportunities of exhibiting at well organised shows, we cannot fail to
admire the energy and enterprise displayed by our American fellow
fanciers.

Specialist Clubs for Cats are of very recent growth. The first was
started by an ardent breeder of silver Persians in 1900. It was then
called the Silver Society, and it included smokes and silver tabbies.
The title of this society has since been changed to the Silver and Smoke
Persian Cat Society. In the following year Blue Persian Breeders
bestirred themselves and formed a society for this most popular breed.
In the same year the Orange, Cream, and Tortoiseshell Society, the
Siamese Club, and the Chinchilla Club were inaugurated, also a Manx Club
came into existence, and two clubs for short-haired cats were started.
Particulars concerning these specialist societies and their objects will
be found in future chapters on the various breeds of cats. It will be
noticed by the list of clubs given that for brown tabby and
black-and-white Persians no societies have as yet been formed, but
doubtless ere long these varieties will be gathered into the fold of
specialist clubs.

A good deal of discussion has taken place in catty circles as to the
desirability of having specialist societies, but I am sure a vast and
marked improvement has taken place in the different breeds since their
formation, and the fact of publishing a standard of points has certainly
assisted breeders in coming to a more correct idea of what constitutes a
good cat of a particular breed. The number of challenge prizes, medals
and specials offered by these societies at various shows act as an
incentive to exhibitors, and thus entries increase and competition
becomes keener. Specialist clubs are not altogether popular with the
parent clubs, who regard them with rather a suspicious and jealous eye.
They think that exhibitors may join these less expensive societies and
yet continue to show and win prizes without subscribing to the club that
holds the show. No doubt there is something in this, and specialist
clubs should be ready and willing not only to offer prizes for which
their members only can compete, but they ought also to guarantee
classes, and perhaps give a donation towards the expenses of the show.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CLINTON LOCKE AND HER SIAMESE KITTENS “CALIF” AND “BANGKOK.”
]

There have been quite a number of catty cases in our courts of late
years, and these generally seem to cause considerable amusement to the
legal as well as to the public mind. At a recent trial, where a lady was
wrongfully accused of starving a Persian cat, the magistrate, wishing
for information, inquired of the witness (who was a veterinary surgeon)
how long a cat could live without food. The reply was, “I am sure I
could not say, sir, for cats are the funniest animals we have to deal
with.” And it is very true that these creatures, being so complex,
require to be specially studied, and our principal veterinaries, who
lead busy lives, are just a little superior to the many ailments and
infirmities of these too often despised animals. It is therefore a
subject of satisfaction for cat fanciers that two clever and kind animal
loving men have taken up the doctoring of cats, and by personal
experience are learning “pretty pussy’s ways” in sickness and in health.
Mr. Ward, of Manchester, and “Salvo,” of Hertford Heath, are now two
household names in the cat fancier’s vocabulary. To the many excellent
remedies prepared by these clever specialists I shall refer later on in
my work. Suffice it here to say that when in doubt or difficulty about
your pussy’s state of health I would recommend you to write to either of
these common-sense practitioners.

The cat literature of the present day has been steadily on the increase.
The first paper to supply special cat columns was _Fur and Feather_,
which, as its title infers, treats besides of birds, rabbits, poultry,
cavies, mice. This weekly paper has a large circulation amongst the
various fanciers. In 1899 _Our Cats_ was started, and is widely read by
the ever-growing circle of cat lovers, and claims the unique distinction
of being “The only newspaper in the world solely devoted to cats.” In
both these papers there are stud advertisements of cats and a register
of visits of queens and births of kittens.

In America the chief organs in the cat world are _The Cat Journal_, _The
Pet Stock News_, and _Field and Fancy_.

And now a few words on those most excellent institutions which should
appeal to the hearts of the animal loving public—I mean the homes for
poor stray and starving cats. It is a mercy that there are now several
of these refuges in our great metropolis. I have personally visited
Gordon Cottage at Argyle Road, Hammersmith, and the London Institution
in Camden Town. The objects of both these institutions are practically
the same, namely:—

(1) To receive and collect homeless and diseased cats and painlessly
destroy them.

(2) To provide a temporary home for lost cats.

(3) To board cats at a moderate weekly charge.

[Illustration:

  THE CATS’ PLAYGROUND: ROYAL LONDON INSTITUTION FOR STARVING CATS AT
    CAMDEN TOWN.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

The Camden Town Institution to which Her Majesty the Queen has
graciously given Her Patronage, was founded by Mrs. Morgan in 1896, and
up to the end of 1901 has received the enormous number of 47,212 lost
and starving cats. The average received weekly is 300, and in one day as
many as 91 cats have been taken in. Not a day passes without several
wretched cats having to be destroyed at once on admission, and 80 per
cent. are destroyed within twenty-four hours of admittance. No charge is
made to the poor, and only 1s. 6d. for a painless death in the lethal
chamber is asked from those who can afford this most merciful mode of
destroying life. The dead cats are cremated at the Battersea Dogs’ Home
at a charge of 3d. each body. A motorcar is employed to go round and
collect stray cats, and will call at any house if due notice has been
given to the hon. manageress. It is estimated that the number of cats in
London is close upon three quarters of a million, of which from 80,000
to 100,000 are homeless. It is during the summer months, when
householders leave town for their holidays, that poor pussy is forsaken
and forgotten, and no provision being made for her, she is forced to
take to the streets, where she seeks in vain to stalk the wily London
sparrow or pick up any scraps from the gutter. The humbler folk very
frequently manifest vastly greater solicitude for the Tom or the Tabby
of their hearths than do their social superiors. All lovers of cats owe
a debt of gratitude to those truly noble ladies who have begun and carry
on such a merciful work in our midst. To attempt to alleviate suffering
must appeal to all; and even those who have an instinctive dislike to
harmless cats cannot fail to see the immense benefit to be derived by
the public at large from the noble endeavour to clear our London
streets, squares, parks, and empty houses of these poor forlorn and
friendless creatures.

[Illustration:

  ROYAL LONDON INSTITUTION FOR LOST AND STARVING CATS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

At the Battersea Home for Lost Dogs there are also splendid arrangements
for stray cats, and at a very small charge per week cats can be taken in
to board. The catteries are capitally arranged, and the feeding is
excellent.

In our sister isle there is a Cats’ Home, established sixteen years ago
by Miss Swifte in Dublin, and she has most gallantly carried out the
beneficent objects with which she started her humane work. No doubt she
and other founders of similar institutions have had to suffer a
considerable amount of ridicule, for with many human beings the cat is
regarded as little deserving of commiseration or kindness. It is,
however, a sign of increased justice and benevolence that these homes
for cats do exist and obtain public support, although the funds received
are, according to all accounts, very inadequate to meet all the
expenses. This must surely be partly because these splendid institutions
are so little known to the general public.

Our American cousins are not behindhand in their laudable endeavours to
cope with the question of lost and starving cats, and an institution
similar to our Battersea Home was started in the early ‘eighties in the
district of Boston, and is called the “Ellen M. Gifford Sheltering Home
for Animals.” The lady giving her name to this humane institution left a
large sum of money to endow the home, and over the office is a tablet
bearing the following extract from one of Miss Gifford’s letters about
the time the home was opened:—


  “If only the waifs, the strays, the sick, the abused would be sure to
  get entrance to the home, and anybody could feel at liberty to bring
  in a starved or ill-treated animal and have it cared for without pay,
  my object would be attained. March 27, 1884.”


According to Miss Helen Winslow, the authoress of “Concerning Cats,”
there is another institution in Philadelphia which does not limit its
good work to tending cats and dogs, but cares for all living and
suffering animals, bringing relief to the unfortunate creatures by means
of a painless death.

It was as early as 1874 that this institution was founded, and in 1889
it was reorganised and incorporated as the “Morris Refuge for Homeless
and Suffering Animals,” having for its motto “The Lord is good to all,
and His tender mercies are over all His works.”

[Illustration:

  THE CART OF THE ROYAL LONDON INSTITUTION FOR LOST AND STARVING CATS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

The efforts of the charitable ladies who so ably assisted in the
establishment of these institutions have been followed by others, and a
proposal to found a home for animals in Montreal has, I believe, proved
successful. Miss Winslow tells us that there are several cat asylums and
refuges in the Far West, and a Sheltering Home at Brighton, Mass. In
1901 a Cat Refuge was started in Chicago by a well-known cat lover, Mrs.
Leland Norton, and probably, as time goes on, some further organised
attempt will be made to deal with the question of lost and starving cats
in American towns.

The love of the cat still lingers in Egypt, and I have been told that
free rations to starving cats are dealt out every day at the Palace of
the Cadi and the Bazàr of Khan Kheleel; also that a cats’ home has been
founded in Cairo for the lodging and feeding of homeless cats.

[Illustration:

  THE HON. PHILIP WODEHOUSE’S “SILVER SAINT.”

  (_Photo: Clarke & Co., Norwich._)
]

There was a report that in order to cope with the innumerable lost and
starving cats the American Legislature had decided to enforce a bill for
licensing cats, but if such a law came into existence in any country the
result would surely be that thousands of cats with good homes would be
thrust out into the streets, and that rats and mice would multiply to an
alarming extent. It is estimated that in New York city alone 60,000 cats
depend for their daily food on garbage and the mice and rats that they
capture. Therefore, if each cat catches three mice or rats a week, the
sum total amounts to over 9,000,000 a year!

I have often wondered why some of our numerous “distressed ladies” do
not set up private homes for the care of cats. A really comfortable
country home for cats is an enterprise in which many a woman, who is
hopelessly at sea for some means of earning an honest livelihood in this
overcrowded work-a-day world, might thus combine pleasure with profit.
Many fanciers feel the difficulty and well-nigh impossibility of leaving
their catteries for any length of time, and few have a permanent and
responsible caretaker on the premises. An opening, therefore, presents
itself not only for boarding homes for cats, but for temporary helps who
could be engaged by the week or month to take charge of the cattery
during the absence of the owner. Of course, such a person should have
had experience with cats and kittens, and above all should be an animal
lover. To dwellers in any of our large cities the sojourn in some
country place would come as a boon and a blessing, and if the owner of
the cattery is fully assured of the capabilities of the caretaker, then
all anxiety of mind as to the welfare of the pets would be allayed.

There is a secluded corner in Hyde Park known as the Dog’s Cemetery, and
amongst the many headstones I noticed two or three erected in memory of
lost pussies who have been privileged to rest in this quiet burying
ground.

[Illustration:

  A BEVY OF BLUES BELONGING TO MISS SAVERY.

  (_Photo: Waschenki, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

When we see poor pussies packed into dirty cages in the shops of dealers
of beasts and birds in our great metropolis, and when we are made sad by
the sight of the wretched starving cats of our streets, we can breathe
no better wish for them than a speedy deliverance from their life of
misery, even if it be to embark with the grim ferryman in their free
transportation to the Feline Elysium.

            “There shall the worthies of the whiskered race,
            Elysian mice o’er floors of sapphire chace,
            ’Midst beds of aromatic marum stray,
            Or raptur’d rove beside the milky way.”

A French writer of the early part of the eighteenth century, a famous
Jesuit Father, suggests a very strange theory on the old idea as to the
nature of the soul of animals. I am sure that the question of a future
existence for those pets who during so short a time in this world have
been our faithful and loving companions must have often entered into the
hearts and minds of true animal lovers.

A wise and good man—a writer of some of our most beautiful hymns, and
who passed to his rest within the last year—wrote and gave me these
lines when he lost his faithful dog:—


                          SANCHO: AN OLD FRIEND.

      A large brown Irish retriever: buried in the Vicarage Garden
      of St. Paul’s, Haggerston: a stone to his memory is on the
      school wall, with this inscription:—

          “In the centre of this lawn lies

                                 SANCHO,

          a gentleman in all but humanity; thoroughbred, single
          in mind, true of heart; for seventeen years the
          faithful and affectionate friend of his master, who
          loved him, and now for him ‘faintly trusts the larger
          Hope’ contained, it may be, in Romans viii. 19–21.

                        _He died April 26, 1883._”


          NOT sparse of friends the world has been to me
            By grace of GOD; sweetness and light to life
            Their love has given; many a stormy strife,
          Many a pulseless torpor, on my sea,
          Through them—their presence or their memory—
          Have been or stilled or quickened; and to thee,
            My Dog, the tribute, as the term, is due,
            My _Friend_! not least of all dear, near, and true
          These seventeen years—and through the years to be
          Sure in my heart of immortality.
          Must this be all? I’ the great Day of the LORD,
            Shall aught that is of good and beauty now
          Be missing? Shall not each gift be restored?
            Paul says “the whole creation”—why not thou?


[Illustration:

  CATS’ TOMBSTONES IN THE DOGS’ CEMETERY, HYDE PARK.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Co., Ltd._)
]




[Illustration:

  TABBIES UP A TREE.

  _Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._
]




                              CHAPTER III.
                          CARE AND MANAGEMENT.


In the care, management, and feeding of cats no hard-and-fast rule
can be laid down, for the dispositions and constitutions of these
animals differ just as much as do those of human beings. Fanciers
must therefore learn to treat their cats individually and not
collectively; they must study their character and make allowances
for the fads and fancies of the feline race. I am convinced that a
varied diet is the best for cats, and fanciers should bear in mind
the importance of regularity in the hours of feeding, whether two or
three or four times a day. Fresh water should always be supplied,
and unfinished food should not be left standing about. For one or
two pet cats the scraps from the table given with judgment will
probably suffice; but in the case of a large cattery with several
inmates, some sort of system in feeding is necessary. I would
suggest that the chief meal for two days a week should be fish,
mixed perhaps with rice or Freeman’s Scientific Food, raw meat twice
or three times a week cut up into fairly small pieces, horse-flesh
(if obtained from a reliable source) twice a week. Lights, liver, or
sardines may be given occasionally. Sloppy food in any large
quantity should be avoided; but oatmeal well boiled, cornflour,
arrowroot, and several of the well-known foods, such as Neave’s or
Mellin’s, make a nice change. Spratt’s biscuits of various kinds,
soaked and mixed with stock, are relished by some cats. Vegetables
should be given frequently, and grass supplied, as green food
purifies the blood and keeps the bowels in good condition. Persian
cats require special attention as regards their coats, and should be
combed and brushed regularly, and, if the fur becomes matted, the
knots should be cut away. Avoid washing your cats; there are other
means of cleansing their coats, particulars of which will be given
in the chapter on exhibiting.

[Illustration:

  BLUE PERSIAN.

  PRESENTED BY MISS PATTERSON TO HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN.
]


                        FEMALE CATS AND KITTENS.

As regards the management of female cats, it is necessary to start
from the time when they first arrive at maturity, viz. when they are
first capable of becoming mothers. This usually takes place—or they
“come in season,” as it is called—after they are seven or eight
months old; and though cases have been known when this has happened
before six months, it is very unusual. It may therefore be laid down
as a rule that if a kitten exhibits extraordinary high spirits,
racing and tearing about, it should be carefully watched, and not
allowed its freedom without supervision, either out of doors or in
the house.

Queens may be known to be in season by several symptoms, such as
rolling on the ground, rubbing up against furniture, increased
affection for their owners, and often by the curious cries they
utter, at times by a soft note of invitation, at other times by
shouts of impatience or distress which resound through the house.
Cats should not be mated until they are nine or ten months old at
least; twelve months is a better age, though if they are insistent
it will not do to put them off more than three times, as there are
records of cats who, having been kept back on account of extreme
youth, have been seriously ill or have never had families at all.

On the other hand, it is possible these cats may have had the
reproductive instinct abnormally strong, though for some cause or
another they would always have been unfertile. Powders are sold to
quiet cats who are considered too young to become mothers, and two
or three small doses of bromide have a decidedly calming effect.
This drug should, however, be given with caution, as it is a
dangerous one in unskilled hands. Cats come in season about every
three weeks during the spring and summer; but in the autumn and
early winter months nature seems to intend that they should rest;
therefore, as soon as the year has turned, and in very mild winters
even before Christmas, no time should be lost in selecting the best
sires for the various breeding queens, and arrangements made with
their respective owners, so that as soon as ever a queen is ready
she may be mated without delay, as some cats go off in two or three
days, while others are not safe for a fortnight. If possible, it is
well to select a stud cat near at hand, especially if your queen is
timid and frightened, as a long railway journey may upset her.

It is most essential that female cats should be freed from worms
before being allowed to mate or breed, otherwise the kittens will
probably fall victims to these pests by sucking in the disease with
the mother’s milk. Most cat fanciers know the symptoms which are
suggestive of worms; and whenever there is a reasonable suspicion of
their presence, then it is best at once to resort to some of the
many remedies to be obtained from veterinaries and cat specialists.

A cat’s period of gestation is nine weeks, but this is often
extended to a day or two longer, so that it is best to expect a
litter about nine weeks from the date of the queen’s return from
visiting the stud cat. An experienced breeder will most likely see
symptoms of a cat coming in season, and will then do well to give a
worm powder. Salvo’s No. 3 powder may be given one morning, and the
cat sent off the next day quite safely. Visiting queens should be
despatched as early in the morning as possible and insured, to save
delay on the road, with the owner’s name and address inside package,
also the name of the cat, as poor pussie will be far happier if on
her arrival she hears herself called by her pet name. Full
instructions should be sent as to the return journey; also it should
be stated if the cat is kept out of doors or indoors, and what food
she is accustomed to have, number of meals per diem, etc. If going a
very long journey the queen should not be nailed into a box, or
padlocked, as occasional delays occur, and the railway authorities
will feed and look after an insured cat if packed in a hamper or box
where they can get at the occupant. Boxes or hampers with skeleton
lids are by far the best on this account. If the weather is very
cold and a basket is used, it should be lined, and round the sides
brown paper is an additional safeguard against draughts, for which
all stations are proverbial. A very delicate cat or young kitten
finds great comfort in winter from a hot-water bottle placed inside
the hamper for it to rest against. Queens should have a good meal an
hour or two before starting, as they often arrive upset with the
journey, and in their strange new home will not at first touch any
food. Do not put any food in the travelling basket. It is not well
for a queen to mate just after a heavy meal.

Fish and warm milk, if these agree with the queen, or a small meat
meal, may be offered after a long, cold journey, and, if eaten, the
queen should be allowed to rest an hour or two before introducing
her to the stud cat.

[Illustration:

  THREE LITTLE MAIDS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

After mating, a queen should be kept quiet for a few days on her
return home, as much apart from other cats as possible; but no
uneasiness need be felt if the visit does not seem to have quieted
the queen, as she will settle down in a few days and cease to think
about her mate. With regard to treatment of cats in kitten, some
queens are gentle and quiet, and very careful of themselves, others
are exceedingly bad-tempered, fighting and quarrelling, while some
amuse themselves by climbing up high places and jumping down,
behaving in such a wild and excitable fashion that they not only
endanger their own lives, but run the risk of bringing maimed and
deformed offspring into the world. Cats such as these should be kept
isolated, if possible, or at most with only one other quiet queen,
and all high shelves or tall articles of furniture should be
removed. It is always well to be very careful in handling cats in
kitten. They must never be lifted up by their fore legs, but when
absolutely necessary to move or carry them, both hands should be
used to do so, one being placed under the body by the shoulders to
carry the weight, while the other hand gently supports the hind
quarters; but the less a cat is lifted about the better. All
medicines should be given quietly and quickly, so that there may be
no struggling. The cat’s head should be grasped firmly with the left
hand, the fingers and thumb on each side of the corners of the
mouth, and forced back on the shoulders with a firm pressure; this
will cause her to open her mouth, when medicine can be popped
quickly down the throat from a spoon held in the right hand. In the
case of a very restless cat, it is advisable to have an assistant in
administering medicine. Amateurs would do well to practise giving
water in a spoon to queens who are in health, so that they may
become used to this simple method of administering medicine. Cats in
kit require three or four meals daily of nourishing food—raw meat
from four to six ounces night and morning, and fish and scraps and
vegetables or biscuit, etc., for the midday meal. Half a teaspoonful
of cod-liver oil on their food two or three times a week is very
good for the queens in cold weather; but if sickness ensues, of
course the oil must be discontinued. _Never suffer diarrhœa to go on
unchecked._ This applies to all cats and kittens of whatever age,
sex, or condition, but is especially dangerous when a cat is in kit
or nursing her young. Mr. Ward and Salvo prepare powders which will
stop the diarrhœa, and if persevered with will restore the bowels to
their normal condition. Change of diet is also very helpful. If the
diarrhœa is very violent or persistent, or if no medicine can be
procured, a small quantity of powdered chalk, as much as will lie on
a sixpence, may be given every hour or two, three or four times; but
the primary cause, of which diarrhœa is only a symptom, should be
sought out, and if not discoverable, the advice of a cat doctor
should be obtained.

[Illustration:

  A PERILOUS PERCH.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

Persistent diarrhœa (if not the accompaniment of diseases, such as
inflammation of the bowels, etc.), is usually caused by indigestion
or worms, and sometimes by a stoppage of fur or food imperfectly
digested, which nature in this way tries to get rid of; and if this
is the case, or there is even reason to suspect it may be, a dose or
two of warm salad oil, a teaspoonful every two hours, will often
bring away the obstruction. Cats in kitten frequently suffer from
constipation, for which also warm salad oil is far better than
castor-oil, as the latter is irritative to the bowels, and though
acting as an aperient, the after effects are increased costiveness.
Warm salad oil, given a few hours before the birth of kittens, is
helpful to the mother. For at least a week before the kittens are
expected, a nice cosy bed should be prepared in some retired spot;
and, to a novice, the caution would not be amiss—do not let a cat in
kitten sleep on your bed, or she will either have her kittens there,
or will drag the poor little things into the bed the first chance
she gets. If a box is to be made ready for the cat, it should be of
a fair size (about twenty-six inches by eighteen inches), and should
be placed on its side, and a bit of wood about three inches deep
nailed on to the bottom of the side, standing up to keep the bedding
in its place and the kittens from rolling out. This box may be
placed on a table or two chairs, so arranged that the cat can step
in and out from another chair.

The floor of the box should be covered with several thicknesses of
flannel or blanket in the winter and paper in the summer. Avoid
coloured materials, as the dye will come out if they get wet. A
bolster may be placed at one side of the box stuffed with straw, or
hay or paper torn up very small, to support the cat’s back; but
should the weather be very cold and the mother delicate, a hot-water
bottle covered with flannel may be used instead, and is a great
comfort. A covering should be thrown over the box, which may be
pulled down to hide the interior, as cats love to be screened from
observation; and also it is very essential that the tiny babies
should be kept almost in the dark for the first fortnight, after
which time, when their eyes are open, the covering can be raised in
the day and lowered at night in cold weather. This box must be
placed on the ground as soon as the kittens can walk about, but
retaining the ledge already referred to, which will keep them from
ground draughts to a great extent. A nice little box with run
attached is the best house for a cat and kittens; but as these cost
about 25s. each, a number of them become costly and beyond the means
of some breeders. The bed described is the next best thing, far
better for shy queens than a box or basket used in the ordinary way.
An empty drawer makes a good place, but the kittens should be moved
out of it as soon as they can see, as it is rather too dark and
close after the blind period is past.

[Illustration:

  MRS. HARDY’S NEUTER “PHARAOH.”

  (_Photo: Schutk’s Photographic Galleries._)
]

A cat should sleep in whatever bed is arranged for her for at least
a week before the kittens are expected, and when that day arrives
the queen should be carefully watched, as some cats will have their
kittens anywhere if not looked after. For the sake of those new to
the fancy, it may be as well to remark that cats become very
restless, walking about sometimes purring loudly, and looking in
cupboards and dark corners, while occasionally the first noticeable
indication that the event is about to come off is that the fur
behind is wet, and if this should be the case no time should be lost
in carrying the cat most carefully to her bed, as the kittens may
then be expected any moment. Some animals like to be left entirely
alone while giving birth to their young; others, especially pets,
prefer to have their owners near to them; but if there is any
uncertainty it is better to leave her to herself.

Experienced breeders will know that should the labour be dry or very
prolonged it is a great help to a cat to pass the hand firmly and
slowly down the side during an expulsive pain, as the pressure will
help the mother and hasten the birth of the kittens.

After the first is born, the rest come comparatively easily. Very
occasionally there is a cross presentation; but as only those really
competent should attempt to do anything in this case, no time should
be lost in sending for the nearest cat doctor or veterinary. After
the first kitten has arrived—the birth of which is usually heralded
by a loud cry of pain from the mother—some milk should be made hot,
and as soon as the new baby has been cleaned the mother will gladly
drink this; but on no account should cold or even lukewarm milk be
given the same day, or, indeed, for two or three days. Novices are
sometimes startled at seeing the cat eating a lump of something
which they fear may be a kitten; but there is no occasion for alarm,
as it is merely the afterbirth, the consumption of which is probably
Nature’s provision for affording sustenance to the mother, as an
animal in a wild state could get no food for at least several hours
after the birth of its offspring. If a cat is wild or shy, it is
better to leave her alone (with the exception of offering hot milk
from time to time) until all the kittens are born, and they should
not be examined or handled for some days.

With a gentle queen the first kitten may be taken away when the
second is born, well wrapped up in warm flannel and put by the fire,
and so on, always leaving one kitten until the last is warm and dry,
when the others should be returned to the mother. This plan is most
necessary in cold weather (especially if the kittens are born out of
doors), for if the labour is easy and quick it is quite impossible
for the queen to dry one kitten before the advent of the next, and
by the time they are all born they are frequently stone cold, and so
wet that the mother gives up the attempt to dry them in despair; and
many kittens, thought to be stillborn, have died in the night in
this way. Kittens quite cold and nearly dead have been restored (and
have lived to a good old age) by being taken at once to the fire and
warmed and dried, and though at first life may appear extinct, time
and patience will work wonders. If the kittens are taken away from
the mother at birth as described above, it is a good opportunity for
destroying any that are not wanted, because of sex or colour. When
the litter is given to the mother she should be offered milk again,
and should after that be left alone several hours; but she will most
likely welcome a few kind words and loving pats as a reward for all
she has gone through, and will then cuddle down contentedly with her
little ones.

In giving milk do not take the mother out, or even make her get up
to drink it, on the day of her confinement; if she cannot reach it
comfortably, raise her head and shoulders with one hand, until she
can reach the saucer held in the other conveniently, and do not be
in a hurry, as she knows well the temperature the milk ought to be,
and will not take it if too hot or too cold. Milk should be given
night and morning, and offered during the day, for some days after
the kittens are born. Cats that never like it at other times are
thankful for it when nursing; but, on the other hand, cats that have
been fond of milk will turn away from it at these times. Queens
usually come out every few hours for food, and their meat or
ordinary meal should be ready for them, as they will want to eat it
quickly and return to their little ones. After the second or third
day a warm, clean blanket should be substituted for the one on which
the kittens were born, and it is well to do this when the mother is
present, as some cats resent interference during their absence.

As soon as the kittens are about a week old, a finger should be
passed over their eyes, and if there is a little ridge on the lids,
the eye should be moistened with eye-lotion twice daily with a
camel-hair brush. If, after ten days, they do not open as is usual,
the eyes should be sponged with warm water, as in this case they
must have become glued together with mucus, which should be cleared
away, and the eye moistened with eye-lotion, taking care a little
goes well into the eye. The lid should then be smeared with olive
oil to prevent adhesion. It is this adhesion of the lids which
causes inflammation, and the eyes must be frequently attended to, so
that they may be kept open, avoiding any very strong light.

If the kittens are born indoors in the summer, windows should be
kept open during the day, and when the little creatures are about a
fortnight old put them out in the sunshine for an hour or so daily.
The mother must be as well fed as she was before the kittens were
born, but carefully notice if she suffers from diarrhœa, for if this
is the case, and change of diet does not cure it, you may be certain
that she is nursing too many kittens, and if some of them are not
speedily removed you will lose them all.

If a foster mother can be procured, by all means have one,
accompanied by one of her own kittens if possible. Make a cosy bed
for her, warming the blanket, and leave her in it till night, when,
if she seems settled down, give her two or more kittens as the case
may be, removing her own the following night. Do not attempt to
interfere with the kittens while the mother is away, and act very
gently, talking to, and stroking her so that she may not resent your
interference. If no foster-mother can be procured, Mr. Ward, of
Manchester, has a clever little appliance which he claims can be
used instead of a foster-mother.

[Illustration:

  “THE RAIDERS” CAUGHT!

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

Some fanciers may take upon themselves the task of bringing up the
kittens by hand, and in that case wrap them up in warm flannel,
keeping them by the fire by day, and giving them a hot bottle at
night, feeding with weak milk and water about every two hours (this
should be about half and half), with a teaspoonful of lime-water to
each cup of milk and water. It should be given warm, not hot, and
the milk scalded, not boiled. In London or large towns unsweetened
condensed milk is better than cow’s milk, as the colouring or
preservative acids used by dairymen in the latter is very injurious
to kittens. This condensed milk should be much diluted, and
flavoured with small quantities of salt and sugar. If too strong or
too sweet, the food will cause diarrhœa. Kittens will soon learn to
suck out of an eggspoon; but do not give too much at once, or force
the food down their little throats when they object to take any
more.

At about five weeks old the kittens will begin to lap and possibly
to eat. Many fanciers are delighted if they will eat and drink
before a month old, and some make the serious mistake of trying to
coax the little ones to eat solid food at this tender age. Such
persons do not stop to think how weak are all the digestive organs
of these tiny creatures. The milk of the mother supplies all that is
needful for their growth and well-being until such time as Nature
makes itself heard in her demands for further nourishment, and if
substantial food is given to them too soon, or too strong, it merely
goes through the stomach, passing out into the bowels undigested,
decomposes, and forms slimy mucus which is the hotbed for worms,
even if it does not set up inflammation of the bowels. More kittens
die from worms and consumption of the bowels than from any other
complaint, and much of this loss of life is directly traceable to
strong food at too tender an age.

Lung disease, gastric catarrh, gastro-enteritis, are all directly or
indirectly set up by the non-assimilation of food; hence the supreme
importance of giving nourishment which can be digested easily. After
six weeks scraped raw beef may be given (if the kittens want to eat)
three times daily in very small quantities, about half a teaspoonful
to start with, and they may have warm milk and water with lime in
it. This should be followed by Mellin’s, or Benger’s Frame Food, as
directed for infants. It is advisable not to allow kittens to
overload their stomachs, but to feed them about four times daily. If
healthy they will eat eagerly, but not ravenously; a kitten who is
greedy and precipitates itself into the saucer in its anxiety to get
its dinner may be suspected of worms, and when about eight weeks old
a course of Salvo’s No. 1 powders may be given with safety.

As soon as the kittens are about a month old, a shallow tin of dry
earth or ashes (I do not recommend sawdust) should be provided for
them, and it will well repay their owners to spend some portion of
the day with the little ones and lift them into the earth pan when
necessary. If this is done two or three times, the lesson is
probably learnt for life. Kittens are naturally clean, and will get
out of their beds, and run about crying loudly for some
accommodation for their wants; and if this is neglected the seeds of
dirty habits are sown, and the poor untaught little ones reap a sad
harvest of cuffs and sometimes kicks from servants, who naturally
dislike the trouble caused by dirty house pets. Even in catteries
cleanly habits in cats are much to be desired. If a cat or kitten
gets into dirty ways, it should never be beaten and put into the
tin, but should be gently stroked and coaxed into good habits. Those
who only keep one or two queens will find that if they spend a few
minutes playing with the kittens before their meals, they will be
well rewarded by the quicker growth and better digestion of the
little ones; but, of course, this is out of the question in a large
cattery.

In summer, kittens should be combed daily with a small tooth tomb,
as the insects which inhabit their coats not only worry them and
cause them to scratch out their fur, but they convey disease from
one to another, to say nothing of sucking out so much blood that the
poor little creatures become absolutely anæmic, and in this state
they fall an easy prey to the first disease that attacks them. Fleas
were formerly treated as irritating but otherwise harmless insects;
but we are assured on the best authority that they are a dangerous
medium of disease, and that tapeworms are generated in dogs and cats
by their means. The poor animals, wildly resenting the annoyance of
these pests, hunt for them with teeth and tongue, and, swallowing
their enemy, may also swallow a number of undeveloped tapeworms,
which in their larval or grub state are secreted in the abdomen of
the flea. Tapeworms are said to undergo certain metamorphoses or
transformations, and require to pass through the body of some other
creature than the one they exist in in their mature state of being.

[Illustration:

  KITTENS BELONGING TO MISS BROMLEY.
]

It is a great mistake to keep kittens in heated rooms, and worse
still to allow them to be close to a fire by day and then to let the
room get cold at night. An even temperature, cold and dry, is better
than sudden changes; cats and kittens love warmth and comfort, but,
at the same time, all extremes of heat and cold are bad. Never
neglect the first symptoms of illness; note the signs, and if you
are not able to dose the invalid yourself send off a wire to some
competent cat doctor describing the form the indisposition has
taken, and while waiting for medicine no harm can be done by giving
as much carbonate of soda as will lie on a threepenny-bit in a
little water two or three times daily. Salvo has lately advertised a
medicine which is said to be very valuable for giving on the first
signs of a cat or kitten being out of sorts, and which, he says,
will take down fever, stop colds, and modify attacks of bronchitis,
pneumonia, etc.; and for such fragile little beings as kittens
fanciers would do well to keep this medicine by them. People often
say that their cats and kittens seem ill or out of sorts, and allow
this sort of thing to go on quite calmly for a week or so, when one
day they wake up to the fact that the poor creature is very
seriously ill, and they then send off in a hurry for medicine which
frequently arrives too late; and the sufferer may be beyond all
human aid.

Double pneumonia, which is perhaps the quickest and most fatal of
all diseases, is not so sudden but that it is ushered in by various
symptoms, beginning often a week before the attack becomes acute. An
animal will seem cold, will creep near the fire, or sit in the
fender, mope about, refusing to play, sit in a hunch with its back
up, or is very sleepy and stupid; the fur is rough; there may be
sickness, and the evacuations are of a bright yellow colour; perhaps
it has not quite finished its meals for a few days; and the nose is
hot and dry, and, if taken up, the cat feels hot and dry all over.
When there are several of these symptoms, no time should be lost in
administering the remedies named above every hour or two until
suitable remedies can be obtained; but do not rely upon them alone,
or think if you give them persistently they will pull the animal
through the illness, for they will not, special remedies being
needed for special symptoms and for various stages of disease. No
two animals are exactly alike, and the experienced cat doctor will
prescribe carefully for each individual cat in the same way as a
physician will give different prescriptions to suit the needs of
different patients.

One thing should _never_ be neglected, and this is keeping up the
strength from the first with beef-tea, eggs and milk, Brand’s
Essence, or animal Kreochyle— a teaspoonful every hour. As soon as
an animal has refused two meals, begin feeding with spoon, as it
will have so much more strength with which to battle against disease
if fed up well from the first.

People who desire to sell kittens for profit will do well to part
with them at about two months old, before they start teething, for
at this period of their little lives fresh troubles begin.
Occasionally they suffer from fits, but though these are sometimes
caused by cutting their teeth, they are oftener due to the presence
of worms. If the gums are swollen and inflamed, a quarter of one of
Steedman’s teething powders will soothe them, or a few doses of
bromide, as prescribed before for kittens desiring to mate too
early, may be given, and excitable kittens should be kept quiet. If
kittens are troubled with diarrhœa, all starchy food should be
avoided, as it is never easily digested by animals. The reason of
this is not far to seek, when we know that the saliva partly digests
starch, while the juices of the stomach act directly on meat.

[Illustration:

  NEUTER PETS OWNED BY MRS. HASTINGS LEES.

  (_Photo: The Royal Central Photo Co., Bournemouth._)
]

Animals, instead of masticating their food, by which means the
saliva acts upon it, often bolt it, and it goes into the stomach and
is passed out into the large bowel practically undigested, where it
decomposes, working off in noxious gases which escape through the
skin, causing eczema, or in many cases producing inflammation of the
bowels or enteritis. Nothing needs more careful attention than the
diet of kittens, and nothing is so little studied. It would be no
exaggeration to say that all disease, apart from outside or
accidental causes, such as draughts, cold winds, contagion, etc., is
in the first place set up by undigested food, and even what may be
called external causes would often not be harmful to an animal if
the digestive organs were in proper working order. Remember, it is
not the quantity of food a kitten takes that benefits it. The secret
of its health and well-being is in the quantity it digests. A kitten
should only digest certain things in certain proportions, and
whatever remains undigested produces irritation, and in this case
the kitten cannot possibly develop, and is generally weakly and
fretful.

Those who have never cared much for cats will be interested and
amused if they bring up a family of kittens, and the love and trust
of the little creatures will well repay them for all their care.


                               STUD CATS.

A male cat should not be allowed to mate under a year old, and if
you wish to keep your stud in good condition do not allow more than
two, or at most three, lady visitors a week. There is no doubt that
a really reliable stud cat is a very profitable possession. The most
essential recommendations are a sound constitution and absolute
health, combined with a good pedigree and a list of prize-winning
progeny. It is necessary to exhibit your stud cat at the best cat
shows from time to time, and thus to keep him before the public. It
is also advisable to advertise him in the cat papers, and it is
often useful to have a photograph to forward to fanciers who may be
unable otherwise to obtain any idea of your cat. Needless to say
that for stud purposes a cat should possess the highest possible
qualifications of the breed to which he belongs, and a massive frame
and broad head are most desirable in all stud cats. It is a good
plan to allow the visiting queen to be within sight of the male for
a short time before she is put in the stud cat’s house, and for this
purpose it is convenient to have a small movable pen or hutch to
place where the two pussies can hold catty conversation.

A stud cat cannot, for many and obvious reasons, be allowed his full
freedom; but it is essential that his dwelling place should have as
long and roomy an exercise ground as possible. It is also possible
with some male cats to tether them out of doors for a short period
during the day, in which case great care should be taken to have the
lead only as long as will permit of exercise within a safe distance
of dangerous pitfalls or spreading trees and shrubs. The best time
for mating is about one hour after feeding.

It is most important that stud cats should be in good coat at the
time of mating, and that they should be free from worms.

The usual fee for a visit to a stud cat is £1 1s., and this should
be sent at the same time as the request for permission to send a
queen. A second visit is generally considered allowable if the first
one has proved unsuccessful. An additional amount of food may be
given to a cat whilst he is being used at stud, and always remember
to provide grass in some form or other in your stud cat’s house.

There is no universal remedy for all cats, neither can there be any
rule for feeding them. Different cats need different treatment, and
those which are kept in a captive state, as are stud cats, should
not be fed on the same lines as those that are allowed full liberty.


                              NEUTER CATS.

Opinions differ as to the best period for a cat to be made neuter,
but it is generally considered advisable to have the operation
performed between the ages of five and eight months. A male cat can
be kept as a household pet till he is about nine or ten months old
without any unpleasantness, but after that period he must be
relegated to an outside cattery or stud house. It is cruel to put
off gelding a cat till he shows signs of wishing to mate. A duly
qualified veterinary ought to be employed, and an anæsthetic used.
The cat should be kept on a low diet for a day or two before and
after the operation. It is very seldom that any evil effects ensue,
and after a few days the puss is quite himself again. Neuter cats
grow to an immense size, and the Persian varieties develop great
length of fur, which is generally not shed so frequently or to such
an extent as in the males and females. Neuter cats are very docile,
and generally rather lazy and listless; for this reason they are not
accounted such good mousers.

Female cats can also be rendered sexless, but in their case the
operation is more likely to be attended with dangerous results. I
have heard it stated that a female cat ought to be allowed one
litter of kittens before being operated upon. There are not many
very fine neuters on exhibition at our shows, and this fact may
perhaps be accounted for by reason of fanciers picking out weedy and
altogether below the mark specimens of their litters to be gelded
because they do not consider them worth keeping to breed from. In
this way several poor specimens of neuters are to be seen with
indifferent markings, white spots, incorrect coloured eyes, and long
noses. For a home pet there is, of course, nothing to come up to a
fine neuter cat who will not roam, who does not attract amorous
females, and who is content to lie for hours stretched out on the
drawing-room rug or the kitchen hearth, the admired of all admirers.
From the lips of many noted breeders of Persian cats who have been
troubled by wandering males and prolific females, I have heard the
exclamation, “I shall end by keeping only neuters!”

Cat owners in general, and lovers of neuters in particular, might do
worse than agitate for more consideration to be extended to these
grand pets at our leading shows, and I cannot help thinking that a
neuter club or society might be formed to assist in this and other
objects connected with the general improvement of our neuter cats.

[Illustration:

  CAROLLING.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]




[Illustration:

  “IN A PLAYFUL SORT OF WAY.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




                              CHAPTER IV.
                            HOUSING OF CATS.


The proper housing of valuable stock is the first essential subject
to be studied by the beginner in the cat fancy, and one requiring
both careful thought and attention. For I do not hesitate to say
that, of all the domestic animals, the cat is the most difficult to
keep healthy and happy in the unnatural condition of total or
partial confinement. Belonging to the feræ, its original and savage
nature still shows glimpses, not wholly tamed, in its independence
of character and its roving habits; while yet its civilised side
shows the keenest appreciation of the comforts to be found in the
home life. A house cat that enjoys its freedom to go out as it
pleases, to climb the garden walls, and anon to lie in purring
contentment before the kitchen hearth, is a creature ailing little.
It is the pedigreed pets, in their luxurious prisons, that too often
fall a prey to disease. To establish a cattery, therefore, that
shall be a pleasure and a pride to the owner, and not a source of
worry and grief over perpetual illness amongst the inmates, it is
necessary in the very first inception to study the chief needs of
cat nature.

Let us consider these in order. How our typical healthy cattery may
be best arranged. It must be dry—was ever a cat yet seen of choice
sitting in the wet? It must have ample space, both of houses and
runs, and inducements for exercise—a well-branched dead tree sunk in
the gravelled run is good, besides divers posts, shelves, and
benches. Let the aspect be bright, with lots of sunshine. A cat is a
devotee of the sun—it is the life of young growing things, and the
greatest destroyer of disease germs; and it is very easy by
coverings or the growth of climbing plants to provide temporary
shade during the height of summer. For this last, nothing is better
than that most useful and least fastidious king of climbers, the
Virginian creeper, as it bestows its leafy shade just when required,
and harbours no damp, as the growth of thick, tall trees is apt to
do.

[Illustration:

  A MUSICAL PARTY.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

Lastly, let the outlook of the cattery be cheerful. Do not select a
spot so far from the house life that the attendant who feeds and
cleans is practically the only person the cats see in the
twenty-four hours. A cat loves to observe, preferably from some
secure high perch, whence it may see all that passes—to exchange
greetings with the dogs, the gardener, the maids, the tradesmen
coming to the door, and thus fill its imprisoned hours with
interest. If you disregard this, and put your cats out of sight in
some back yard, they will mope badly, and also grow very stupid.

These principal requirements being borne in mind, individual fancy
of building and arrangement may follow. Every breeder of experience
has his own ideas of best design, according to means and
circumstance. If a cat fancier is fortunate enough to be able to
disregard expense, he can indulge in brick houses with every
appliance for comfort and elegance of construction. For others, who
can supply a working plan, an intelligent local carpenter (when
found) can do much. Occasionally, also, it is possible to convert a
portion of existing stabling to very efficient uses. But I must
advise the beginner, as regards this last suggestion, to be careful.
If the stabling is modern, and possesses the main requisites I have
already spoken about (of dryness, and space, and cheerful light),
then all is, and will be, well. But if, as is often the case, the
stable of temptation is old, perhaps unused for some years, is dark,
with more than a suspicion of damp, and a very certain habitat of
rats, then our fancier is emphatically warned against making any
trial of it, short of pulling down and rebuilding. Let him rest
assured, it would in the end mean the loss of money, time, care,
and, most likely, breeding stock too, and certain ill-health among
the poor inmates. I know a case in point where a cat fancier thus
utilised a stable. A converted portion of old stabling that looked
most desirable, and kept scrupulously clean, was used for a number
of young kittens. Very soon a peculiar and most violent form of skin
disease appeared amongst them, at first as mere scurfy patches, but
swiftly assuming the form of contagious fever, which spread with
frightful rapidity, infecting every cat with whom they came in
contact. Not until after many deaths, and the most cruel sufferings
of those who struggled through the disease, was it at last
discovered to be acute blood poisoning, produced by the exhalation
of sewer gas from an old sewer running underneath the floors. Rats
were probably responsible, either by gnawing through the pipes, or
coming up into the cattery, themselves stricken with the foul
disease.

The site of the cattery selected, the preparation of the ground may
be advisable, certainly on all clay soils. To ensure perfect
dryness, the top soil should be removed a foot or so and filled in
with brick rubble or builders’ rubbish. On this foundation, cement
concrete or asphalt may be laid down. Personally, for runs and
floors, I prefer the cement; it is easier to keep clean—a bucket of
water can swill it from end to end, while it dries much faster than
the asphalt. Asphalt in outside runs is apt to soften in the summer
sun, and depress into holes, and within the houses the smell of the
tar remains strong for some months. The cost of the two is much
about the same, but in very damp situations the asphalt is
preferable, as it prevents all ground-damp rising through.

Now to plan out a medium-size cattery that shall be simple in
construction and not ruinous to the modest beginner, let us suppose
we have at our disposal a fair length of brick wall—say 60 to 70
feet in length—facing south, on slightly sloping ground. Our first
proceeding will be to level and render damp-proof by a foot of
rubble, as heretofore suggested, a strip 11 feet wide and about 45
feet along the wall, and to surface this strip with cement or
asphalt. Upon this, and against the wall, we will erect our houses,
a long wooden shed with lean-to roof, divided into three main
divisions by matchboarding partitions, and with a smaller house at
either end, as shown in plan.

A, the sleeping-room; B, a playroom for queens and kittens; and C,
the third apartment for kittening, or cats it is desirable to
isolate awhile. The smaller houses at the outside ends reserved for
stud cats. D, doors from one apartment to another of wood. The
outside woodwork is of 1-inch feather-edged matchboarding,
well-seasoned deal, a roof of wood, felted and tarred, being
preferable to the use of corrugated iron, which is very hot in
summer and very cold in winter; an annual dressing of sand and tar
keeps the felt watertight for many years. Allow good wide eaves, and
have gutter pipes all round. Inside, line the walls with wall felt,
and limewash; or an inner lining of 1-inch matchboarding, allowing a
two-inch space to be packed with sawdust, keeps the house very warm
and dry.

For the brick back wall, ¼-inch matchboarding should be sufficient
as lining. The dimensions of the sleeping-room, A, are 12 feet long
by 11 feet wide, and a wire frame partition with door subdivides
this again into two equal parts. Against the back wall, at a height
of about 20 inches from the floor, runs a broad shelf 4 feet wide,
having inch mesh wire netting frontage, half to open on hinges, and
movable wooden partitions sliding in a slot; these for the
sleeping-pens, each 4 feet deep by 3 feet wide, two on either side
the wire frame partition, or convertible into one 4 feet by 6 by
removal of sliding wooden division. It will be warmer for the
occupants if these pens are roofed in at a height of 3 feet. Cover
the bench with oilcloth before putting up the divisions. This can be
washed over daily if necessary, and will dry in a few moments, thus
avoiding the dangers of scrubbing wood in damp weather. As nothing
offensive can soak in, a pure atmosphere is preserved, and risk of
infection is greatly minimised.

A comfortable sleeping box or basket should be provided for each
pen, filled in winter with plenty of sweet hay, and in summer with
sheets of newspaper or brown paper. A cat loves to repose on paper,
and it has the advantage of being cheaply renewable and easily burnt
after a day or two’s use. Never use old packing straw for bedding.
It is frequently full of infectious germs, and many skin complaints
have been traced to its use. Neither are cushions, blankets, old
bits of carpet, matting, etc., to be recommended. They are apt to
become damp in prolonged wet weather, and retain both dirt and
odour. A sanitary tin to hold dry earth or sawdust should be placed
in each cat house, emptied and washed out every morning by the
attendant, when the floors are also swept out or washed over.

A fair-sized window, to open, must be in the front, and a door, the
upper half of which might also be of glass, to open out into a
gravel run. Outside wooden shutters for cold nights are a great help
in keeping the house warm, and should be provided.

Having arranged our first room, the playing room, B, next must come
under consideration. This being the central division, the felt
lining could here be dispensed with, and instead the boards can
either be plainly stained and varnished—which is also easy to keep
perfectly clean—or Willesden damp-proof paper might be nailed over
the walls. This paper, made at the Willesden Company’s works,
Willesden Junction, N.W., is made in several good colours for
interior lining, and a house so hung looks very comfortable, and
shows to advantage such mural decorations as show prize cards,
photos of winners, etc. The frontage of this room is to be entirely
glazed, in small panes set in a wooden framework, with a 6-inch high
weather board at floor to protect from draughts, the glass protected
on the inside by wire netting fastened over it. A window here to
open outwards with a bolt, and fairly high up, to ensure fresh air
in rainy weather without the wet and damp driving in on a level with
the cats; a half-glass door also to run, but no outside shutters
will be here needed, the cats not occupying this room at night.
Cover the asphalt floor with linoleum or oilcloth, and put up some
shelves 15 inches wide, fairly high up, but within leaping distance,
against the walls; a movable bench too, to place the cats upon for
brushing and attending to them. Old chairs that can be spared from
the house might end their service here; or if the luxury of a plain
wicker chair could be permitted, and furnished with one or two
cushions in washable slip covers, it would be as pleasant for the
owner when making her visits as for the pussies themselves. A ball
for the kittens, a reel hanging from a string, will stimulate
healthy romps, even amongst the staid grown-up cats, when weary of
indoor dozing.

Room C. C is primarily intended for the interesting occasions when
new little prize-winners are expected. This is subdivided by wire as
in sleeping-room, but the partition three feet from back wall should
be of wood, to ensure privacy to the anxious mother, and to temper
the light; oilcloth on floor.

For the littering nests themselves I describe, and advise my friends
to make trial of, the following plan. Have a sort of shallow wooden
box, or tray with sides, made about 4 feet 6 inches long by 24
inches high and 4 inch sides. This is stained, varnished, and
mounted on wooden feet at the four corners about two inches high; a
good bed of hay is put in it, the box is put in a quiet corner away
from the light, and a truss of new straw placed upright at one end
of the box, leaning against the angle of the wall. A little of the
straw at the bottom may be pulled out to suggest the idea of a hole
to the cat; but as a rule she takes to the notion brilliantly, and
will set to work to dig out a nest for herself with the greatest
zest. In this the kittens are born, safe in a cosy nest at the end
of a tunnel of straw. There is ample ventilation; they are protected
from all draughts, so that doors may be left open to the fresh air
with impunity; and they are in the dark, as kittens naturally should
be till they walk out into the daylight of their own desire to
explore the world. Then the rest of the tray forms a glorious
playground for the first week or two, when one adventurous mite
finds out he can climb up the shallow sides, and tumble out on a
large strange world of floor and trot after mamma. A well-known
fancier tells me she has not had one litter with weak or bad eyes
since she adopted the straw truss plan.

[Illustration:

  THE IDEAL CATTERY.
]

One of these trays might be placed each side of the wooden
partition, and if necessary to shut a nervous or surly cat up with
her family, one might be enclosed in a wire frontage with door, as
the sleeping-pens were arranged. Let there be a good large window in
this room, as the kittens, when running about, will want all the
sunshine and air possible. This run should be of asphalt, for
dryness and warmth, with plenty of play places arranged in it. An
old barrel with the bottom knocked out affords great games, also the
tree I have before spoken of; a tree-stump or two, or a heap of dry
brushwood stacked in a corner, will supply those climbing and hiding
holes kittens so greatly enjoy, and afford protection from winds.

A grass run and a gravelled one are designed in the plan, each
having access to the other, and will allow the cats ample exercising
ground according to weather. An oval flower-bed in the centre of the
grass plot, planted with some evergreen bushes, is a good idea. It
affords shelter, and the cats can dig in the dry earth. For the
benches in the gravel run, an old outhouse door, painted and mounted
on stout legs, makes a very good one, which the cats love to sit
upon.

The stud houses are simple: a wired-in space of 12 feet by 11 feet
contains a house with lean-to roof 4 feet by 8 feet long, fitted
with sleeping bench and box, wired windows, door for attendant, and
small trapdoor for cat. _En passant_, all doors should be fitted
with good locks, and locked up after feeding at night is done. The
stud run is gravelled, but a border of grass might be left on two
sides—grass is such a necessity for cats in confinement, and they
prefer to select it growing for themselves. The design here
suggested is capable of either modification or extension. The plan
can be enlarged to any extent. For instance, if desired, an
attendant’s cottage could be built at one end instead of the stud
house, and comprise a special kitchen, and also an upper room,
fitted with convenient pens for a hospital for the sick members—a
very necessary adjunct to the cattery, as a sick cat should be at
once removed from its healthy companions and kept in a place quite
apart. More stud houses could be arranged at an angle on one side of
the chief runs, or, if only a very few cats are intended to be kept,
one of the divisions could be dispensed with, perhaps, and the
dimensions of the other two made smaller. But whatever your
ambitions may be, great or small, when you are about it have the
work well done.

The heating of catteries is a rather vexed question, many famous
breeders affirming that stock raised without it are healthier and
harder; others maintaining that a certain amount of heat is a
necessity for producing a good coat. A very experienced breeder once
told me the heaviest-coated kittens she ever bred were reared over
some hot-water pipes, in a temperature of 70°! With adult cats
having partial freedom and allowed to come into the house in severe
weather, and with stud cats, I consider the no-heat plan decidedly
the best; but I do not think it possible to rear young stock during
the colder part of the year in an outdoor cattery without artificial
heat. It is the damp of the English winter which proves so fatal,
and damp cannot be kept out of the very best constructed houses
except by the admission of dry heat.

Kittens that are cold will not play, and if you see them huddled
together on a cold day looking listless and uneasy, instead of
romping, be sure it is fire heat they need.

A thermometer should hang in each house, and the heat be carefully
regulated by that, a minimum of 48° and a maximum of 55° being
suggested. In houses where a flue is practicable, a stove of the
Tortoise pattern is to be recommended, but it needs a high guard
around it. For a long range of brick-built houses, an outside flue
and boiler, with hot-water pipes running the length of the cattery,
would be found of most service, as it maintains an even and medium
warmth throughout, keeps the building perfectly dry, and can be
stoked with less trouble. In small wooden houses, very excellent
results are given by the use of an oil stove with hot-water
apparatus, such as are supplied for small greenhouses. The lamp will
usually burn twenty-four hours without attention, is un-get-at-able
by the cats, who can neither singe their tails nor knock it over
during the wildest gambols, and if kept clean and looked to with
care will not cause the slightest odour. A quart of paraffin in one
of these oil stoves will burn twenty-four hours, and heat a building
12 feet by 10 feet to 50°. Now, in concluding this little discourse
upon catteries, the final word of advice is always to remember the
importance of _absolute cleanliness_. There should never be the
least offensive smell in the cattery, and if such be noticed on
entering the houses in the morning, discover the cause and remedy it
at once. And do not rely solely upon disinfectants to do this. Too
frequently this is but overcoming a bad smell by a stronger, the
evil remaining. A good and non-injurious disinfectant should always
be used in the water for the daily cleansing of pans and floors,
etc. Camphaleyne or Salubrene are both safe and effective, but
disinfectants that contain creosote in any quantity, or carbolic, I
do not approve of, except in cases of illness of an infectious type,
when stronger measures are obligatory.

No dirty food dishes, no unchanged water, no soil of any kind,
should ever be left about on flooring or bedding. Let your cattery
be kept as scrupulously clean and sweet as a hospital, then will
your cats thrive and kittens be healthy and sturdy.

[Illustration:

  A LITTER BOX.
]

Do not elect to start a cattery unless you yourself intend to bestow
both time and trouble upon it. In this, as in every other occupation
or hobby, the one golden rule is, “Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do, do it with all thy might.”


                              APPLIANCES.

In the preceding section on the cattery proper, I have not spoken of
the very useful variety of portable houses which are now made a
speciality of many firms, considering them more or less as
accessories to the well-appointed cattery. But in small town
gardens, where space is valuable and it is not convenient to build a
large permanent structure, it is quite possible to succeed extremely
well when two or three cats only are kept by using these portable
houses. They also have the advantage of being removable and a
“tenant’s fixture” in the event of leaving one’s house.

[Illustration:

  A USEFUL CAT HOUSE.
]

A very good house is one built by Messrs. Boulton and Paul, of
Norwich (_see_ illustration). It is a very pretty and well designed
structure, and would be exceedingly ornamental in a sheltered corner
of the garden. In putting up, however, it should be stood upon brick
piers to raise it at least four inches from the ground, or the
wooden flooring would soon show damp. Cats kept in these small
houses, it must be understood, should have their liberty at least a
portion of every fine and dry day, the runs being wholly inadequate
for a cat to be shut in continuously without further scope for
exercise.

Another illustration is a handy portable hutch, intended to be used
chiefly in a house or room, although it is also convenient for
penning young kittens out of doors on a sunny day, the wire run
preventing their straying away. It consists of a sleeping box and
small wire run hooked on, and can be made at the cost of a few
shillings.

[Illustration:

  A PORTABLE HUTCH.
]

The sleeping box is 24 inches long by 17 inches wide and 22 inches
high, is raised three inches from floor by a false bottom, and has a
large door at back opening with a brass catch. In front, two
side-pieces reduce the entry to 12 inches. A handle screwed on the
top of the box is convenient for carrying. The run is 3 feet 6
inches by 24 inches, made in four sections, two sides, top and end
piece, all fitted and hooked together with 1-inch mesh wire netting
that it may be easily taken apart for carrying or storing away. It
makes a useful sleeping-pen, too, for young toms that are inclined
to quarrel together, and so have to be shut up separately at night.
All the woodwork is stained and varnished, and a square of oilcloth
laid on the floor of the sleeping box.

The next appliance to be considered is a somewhat gruesome adjunct
to the cattery, and belongs to the darker side of our hobby. In
spite of every care, illness and death must enter now and again,
when we are fain to retire worsted from the conflict with disease,
and the wisest and kindest thing to do is to put our pet to sleep.
The illustration given on the opposite page depicts a lethal box, as
used at the Royal London Institution for Lost and Starving Cats at
Camden Town, and is capable of holding twelve animals at a time.

Mr. Ward, the well-known feline specialist of Manchester, has
patented a lethal box of more moderate dimensions. Mr. Ward, not
yet having an illustration of it, kindly writes me the description
as follows:—“The box inside is 15 inches by 12 inches by 12
inches. A sheet of glass is inserted in the lid, so that the
operator may watch the process. The vapour—coal gas passed through
chloroform—enters through a tube at end. Two minutes is sufficient
time.”

Fanciers, I think, will agree that this simple peace-giving box is
not among the least of Mr. Ward’s kindly ministrations to the cats
he loves so well. Few amongst us can bear to see unmoved the
terrible last pains of a pet who in its days of health delighted us
with its beauty.

Feeding utensils we turn to next. For them nothing is more
satisfactory than the unbreakable enamelled ware in white or
blue—except, perhaps, for the water pans, for which it is scarcely
weighty enough, and it not infrequently happens that a gay and
frolicsome company of kittens will knock against them, sending them
spinning, and the water is spilt upon the floor.

The circular, heavy glazed earthenware dishes, spittoon-shaped, and
generally inscribed “Pussy,” are excellent, and cannot be
overturned.

Besides the plates and saucers for feeding, let the cats have also a
saucepan of their own, a deep stewpan-shaped one of blue enamel,
large enough to cook a sheep’s head with biscuits. Cook will be far
less prone to grumble at the necessary cooking for the cats—I speak
here of a small cattery, when no attendant is kept—if her saucepans
are not pressed into the service.

But see that all are kept scrupulously clean, nothing “left over” in
the saucepan to become sour or tainted in hot weather; and after
each meal is cooked, the saucepan should be boiled out with soda and
scoured clean.

_Earth tins._ A great mistake made in these necessary items is
having them too deep. I have seen an old zinc footbath supplied to
two months old kittens with quite six inches of sawdust in it, and
the owner wondered why she could not teach her kittens to be cleanly
in their habits!

A 4 inch deep tray is quite deep enough, and this should not be
filled more than two thirds full, or the cat rakes so much earth out
on the floor. Neither do they require to be very large, as their
weight when filled with soil makes them very cumbersome to move, and
they get the more quickly knocked out of shape. The best size is
about 17 inches by 14 inches and 4 inches deep, made in stout
galvanised iron, with a rim round the edge, and these might be
painted some light colour with Aspinall’s enamel paint. (I advocate
“light paint” as any dirt stains are seen at once.) They will then
last free from rust, and can be washed out every morning. Two or
three tins of smaller size—say, 12 inches by 8 inches by 21
inches—are suggested for kittens, or for placing in small pens in an
emergency. Baking tins answer this purpose.

After washing, it is well to stand these trays in the air to
sweeten, as if they smell disagreeable the cats will not use them.

[Illustration:

  LETHAL CHAMBER, ROYAL LONDON INSTITUTION AND HOME FOR LOST AND
    STARVING CATS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

Messrs. Whiteley supply these zinc tins, or they can be made by any
local ironmonger to dimensions given.

_Hot-water appliances._ These are very necessary in the cattery, and
should by no means be forgotten.

Many a sick cat’s life has been saved, and the critical corner in an
illness turned, by the timely comfort and strength bestowed by the
hot-water bottle or bag, or even a brick made hot in the oven and
wrapped up. In the event of winter litters, too, a hot-water bag
should be always in readiness, in case it is advisable to remove the
first-born kittens from the mother for a few hours. Heat will
restore a seemingly dead kitten, as I have said before. The outside
dwellers also, how they appreciate on a bitter winter’s night the
hot bottle or wrapped up hot brick to keep them cosy!

I know a luxurious stud cat who has a hot-water tin made to fit his
sleeping box, which is filled by the maid every cold night and slid
beneath his hay bed. Assuredly, there is no greater safeguard
against winter’s chills and changes of temperature than to provide
for your pets sleeping warmly and comfortably at night. The
hot-bottle plan has many advantages over the heating of the sleeping
houses by stove or lamp during the night. It is better for the
animals themselves, as the air is not exhausted, and they are not so
prone to take a chill going from heated air to the outside rawness
of a winter’s morning. It is much safer, and it is also much more
economical.

[Illustration:

  SPRATT’S TRAVELLING BASKET.
]

Personally I prefer the indiarubber bag to the old-fashioned stone
bottle, and in the smaller sizes (which are quite large enough) are
not much more expensive than the latter. If not filled too full, and
wrapped in a washable cover—flannelette is very good—it can be laid
flat under the hay, and the cat will remain upon it all night. In
the case of a sick cat the cover should always be of flannel, to
avoid any chill as the bag grows colder.

Then, in our list of appliances, proper travelling baskets must come
under consideration. I say “proper” advisedly, for how heterogeneous
is the collection of hampers, boxes, baskets—I had almost added
bundles—one sees brought in by the officials during the receiving
hours before a big show! Every variety of package, very many of
which are exactly what they ought not to be. Some unnecessarily
elaborate, polished wooden cases with brass fittings—handsome and
durable no doubt, but far too cumbersome, and by their very weight
inflicting much jar on the occupant when moved about; while others
are a disgrace to anyone pretending to care about a cat or even to
know what a cat is, many deserving to be straightway brought under
the notice of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

I have seen big heavy cats jammed into margarine hampers, a thin
wicker receptacle whose sides slope inwards like a flower-pot, where
the animal must have suffered agonies of cramp in a veritable
chamber of “little ease.” Others are sent weary distances in
shallow, rough grocery boxes with a few holes bored for ventilation,
subject to be thrown about in transit, first on one side then on the
other, the lid perchance nailed on, giving thereby much extra
trouble to the penning officials. Little wonder if the cat arrives
bruised, shaken, frightened nearly to death, and very probably wild
and savage.

Now, as evil is wrought by want of thought (and common sense) as
well as want of heart, I have thought it well to comment on these
very wrong and stupid ways of sending our cats on their journeys
before advising better arrangements.

Here are two illustrations of excellent travelling baskets, which
fulfil pretty nearly all requirements for cats travelling singly.

The first is made by Messrs. Spratt, and has an inner skeleton lid,
which is much to be recommended when sending a vicious or very timid
cat that is likely to make a bolt on the basket being opened.

The second, beehive shaped, is designed by Mrs. Paul Hardy, of
Chobham. It is of strong white wicker, the lid fastening with a rim
of about two inches deep over the body of the basket, apertures in
the rim allowing the wicker loops of the fastenings to project; when
the cane stick is thrust through these the basket is absolutely
secure—not a paw can get out.

[Illustration:

  A USEFUL CAT BASKET.
]

[Illustration:

  “A GANG OF POACHERS”—KITTENS BELONGING TO MISS ALICE DELL.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

This beehive shape has several advantages. The cat can stand up and
stretch itself at ease, when tired of lying down. The handle being
at the apex, it is carried—even by porters—without the cat being
tilted off its legs; whilst the dome top prevents any other package
being piled upon it—a disadvantage the flat-typed hamper always has.
I line my baskets outside with brown paper or oil baize up to the
rim, and inside with curtain serge, leaving the lid free for
ventilation. Then, with plenty of hay at the bottom of the basket,
the cat will travel from one end of England to the other in comfort
and safety, with no danger of taking cold even if left about
draughty platforms or in parcel offices. This basket is made by
Messrs. Bull, of Guildford, at a very moderate cost, and lasts for
years.

These baskets are, of course, intended for one cat only, or a pair
of kittens. A really safe and capable travelling arrangement for a
litter with the mother has yet, I think, to be devised. I have seen
none I think good. The double compartment hamper I much dislike. The
handles are perforce at each end, necessitating two carriers—who
never do it—so the hamper is dragged by the porter or official with
one end tilted (the other cat being nearly upside down), is leant up
against other luggage, or dropped flat with a bang. With young
kittens inside this leads to fatalities.

A label for the travelling basket seems an insignificant item to
mention, but an efficient one is as important as that proverbial
nail for whose absence the horse and the kingdom were lost.

I have just made the acquaintance of a first-rate label, devised and
sent out by a Mr. Foalstone, at sixpence per dozen, from the
Aerefair Engineering Works, near Ruabon. It is a stout linen label,
printed “Valuable Live Cat” in big block letters; below is “Urgent”
in red—a good idea, red being more likely to attract the casual eye
of the railway official. Spaces are left below for line of travel,
_viâ_, etc., and date and time of despatch. It is reversible, so the
sender can fill up with the return address if necessary. I always
prefer to fasten the label down at both ends, flat to the basket: it
is less likely to be torn away than when left hanging loose from one
eyelet.

It is by due attention to the details that cat fanciers can to some
extent mitigate the dangers and risks that must necessarily attend
the transit of live stock by rail.

[Illustration:

  WAKING BEAUTIES.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]




                               CHAPTER V.
                              EXHIBITING.


Amongst cat fanciers there is a laudable ambition not only to breed
good stock but to exhibit it. Certainly there is vastly more
gratification and satisfaction in obtaining high honours for cats
and kittens that we have bred ourselves, rather than for those
specimens which money has purchased.

If we consider that our cats have sufficiently good points to merit
their being entered for a show, we must bear in mind that all the
beauty and form and feature will be thrown away unless our pussies
are in good show condition. For exhibition purposes condition means
everything, and this is more especially the case with the
long-haired breeds. A first-class specimen whose coat is ragged and
matted cannot fail to suffer in the judges’ estimation when compared
with another cat, of inferior quality perhaps as regards points, but
yet in the pink of condition, with its coat well groomed, its eye
bright, its fur soft and silky. In the present day many of the
specimens penned are so close together in point of breed merit that
a very little turns the scale one way or the other. I have often
said to myself, when judging a class of cats, “This exhibit would be
a winner but for its condition,” and I have had to put it down in
the list. There is no doubt that with long-haired cats a fine full
coat will cover a multitude of sins, but it cannot alter a long nose
or poor shape and bad-coloured eye; and in urging the importance of
condition, I at the same time deprecate the awarding of prizes to
cats that have nothing to recommend them but their pelage. Seeing,
therefore, that a handsome specimen may go to the wall for the lack
of attention on the part of the owner, it behoves all cat fanciers
and would-be exhibitors to do everything in their power to make
their cats look their very best, so that their pets may be things of
beauty in the show pen. In the dog, rabbit, and pigeon fancy a great
deal more attention is given to condition than amongst cat fanciers,
who need waking up to the fact that nothing goes so far to
propitiate a judge as superb show form and general good appearance.
There may be standards of points for the guidance of the awards, but
assuredly a common-sense judge will look with disfavour on a
specimen with excellence of breed and correct colour of eye if his
coat is draggled and matted, his tail dirty, and his fur soiled. We
have only to run our minds back to the various exhibits of
well-known fanciers at our large shows, and we shall find that the
most persistently successful exhibitors have been those who have
sent their cats to the shows in the best condition. Some fanciers,
wishing to help on entries at a show, will exhibit their Persian
cats when quite out of coat. This is a mistake; send your entry
money if you like to the secretary, but keep your coatless cats at
home. As regards the short-haired breeds, these cats should have
coats with a gloss and brilliancy like that of a well-groomed horse,
shining like satin; a spiky appearance in the fur denotes poor
condition in both long and short breeds.

In getting cats ready for exhibition owners should look to their
comforts in every way. Their houses and beds should be kept clean,
their coats combed and brushed daily. Attention should be paid to
their ears, for if these are neglected a cat will continually
scratch them, and thus injure its appearance by tearing out its fur.
Some fanciers are in favour of washing their cats, but when we take
into consideration the usually delicate constitutions of Persian
cats, and the restless, impatient nature of these animals, it
behoves us to try to find some other effectual means of cleansing
their coats, which in the case of white and silver cats are
naturally easily soiled. Experience has taught me that very good
results can be obtained by damping the coats with a soft cloth
dipped in a weak solution of ammonia and water. Follow this up by
rubbing some white powder into the fur and well fingering the parts
that are at all greasy. Pears’ white precipitated fuller’s earth is
the best preparation, and is perfectly harmless. To clean away the
powder use a fairly soft brush, and after this process has been gone
through several times your cat will be fit for show. Another method
of cleaning long-haired cats is to heat a quantity of bran in the
oven. Put it into a large bowl or footbath, and stand the puss in
it. Rub the hot bran well amongst the fur for some minutes, and
afterwards carefully brush it out. This treatment will give a soft
and silky appearance to the coat, but for light-coloured cats the
powder is more cleansing.

Cats require to be educated to the show pen, and it is very
necessary in some cases to give a course of training. For this
purpose it is well to obtain a similar pen to those used at shows,
and to place your puss in this for an hour or two daily. In time he
will learn to come and sit and look out of his temporary prison, and
when he makes his _début_ he will not spoil his chances by crouching
at the back of the show pen, or vex his would-be admirers, who may
have recourse to the use of an umbrella or stick to make the exhibit
move into a more convenient and conspicuous position.

Taking it for granted you have decided to send your cat to a show,
the first step is to register it in the club under whose rules the
show is to be held. At present the National Cat Club and the Cat
Club both require separate registration, the charge being one
shilling. It is, however, to be hoped that the earnest wish of all
cat fanciers and exhibitors will ere long be fulfilled, and that one
register will be kept by an independent person, so that pedigrees
can be verified and mistakes rectified, and the confusion caused by
a double registration will cease to worry and perplex the cat-loving
community. Registration forms are supplied by the secretaries of the
respective clubs, and you must fill in the particulars of your cats
as set forth on the forms, a sample of which is here given, together
with the registration rules of the National Cat Club:—


  REGISTRATION.

  The registration rules of the National Cat Club are as follow:—

  1. Every Cat exhibited at a show under National Cat Club Rules
  must (except such as are exhibited exclusively in Local Classes,
  or exhibited in Classes exclusively for litters of kittens),
  previous to the time of entry for such show, have been entered in
  a registry kept by the National Cat Club at their offices. A
  charge of 1s. each shall be made for registration. In such
  registry shall be inserted the name and breed of the cat, and its
  breeder’s name, the date of birth, names of sire and dam, and of
  grand-sires and grand-dams, and if the dam was served by two or
  more cats their several names must be stated. If the age,
  pedigree, or breeder’s name be not known the cat must be
  registered as breeder, age or pedigree “_unknown_,” any or all, as
  the case may be. If the name of a cat be changed, or an old name
  re-assumed, such cat must be again registered and identified
  before exhibition in its altered name.

  2. A name which has been duly registered in accordance with Rule 1
  cannot be again accepted for registration of a cat of the same
  breed, without the addition of a distinguishing number, prefix, or
  affix, for a period of five years, calculated from the first day
  of the year next after the one in which the name was last
  registered; but the name of a cat after publication in _“Our Cats”
  and the Stud Book_, or which has become eligible for free entry
  therein, cannot again be assumed.

  N.B.—The name of a cat that has become eligible for free entry in
  the _Stud Book_ in any year shall not be changed after the 31st of
  December of that year.

  Cats do not receive a number on registration. Numbers are only
  assigned to Prize Winners or cats entered in the Stud Book on its
  publication, on payment of a fee of Five Shillings, in addition to
  One Shilling for registration.

  The application for registration must be made on a form as
  follows:—

    NUMBER OF BREED AS PER LIST IN MARGIN____COLOUR____

    I wish to register the following __ (_Sex_) by the name of____

    Previously registered by the name of_______________________

    _Signature of Owner___________________________________________
    (Mr., Mrs. or Miss)

    _Address_______________________________________________

    LATE OWNER (if any)_________________________

    SIRE____________ } G. SIRE_______
                              }
    OWNER OF SIRE___ } G. DAM_______

    DAM_____________ } G. SIRE_______
                              }
    OWNER OF DAM____ } G. DAM______

    DATE OF BIRTH_______________________

    NAME & ADDRESS OF BREEDER___________________

    ________________________

  NOTE.—If this name cannot be registered, I select one of the
  following, and name them in the order named: (1) _______________
  (2) ______________ (3) _______________

  Only one cat must be entered on one form, which must be forwarded
  with a remittance of one shilling to Mrs. A. Stennard Robinson,
  Hon. Sec., at 5, Great James Street, Bedford Row, London, W.C.

  The various varieties as recognised by the Club are as follow:—

       SHORT-HAIRED CATS.

    1. SIAMESE.

    2. BLUE.

    3. MANX.

    4. FOREIGN.

    5. TABBY.

    6. SPOTTED.

    7. BICOLOUR.

    8. TRICOLOUR.

    9. TORTOISESHELL.

   10. BLACK.

   11. WHITE.

   12. SABLE.

   13. TICKS.

   14. ABYSSINIAN.

       LONG-HAIRED CATS.

   15. BLACK.

   16. WHITE.

   17. BLUE.

   18. ORANGE.

   19. CREAM.

   20. SABLE.

   21. SMOKE.

   22. TABBY.

   23. SPOTTED.

   24. CHINCHILLA.

   25. TORTOISESHELL.

   26. BICOLOUR.

   27. TRICOLOUR.


It will be seen that you are requested to give more than one name,
and it is very desirable in the first instance to select an uncommon
one, which may be considered your cat’s exhibition title, but you
will doubtless have some short pet name for home use. A prefix,
probably the name of the town or village in which you live, can be
used to specially identify your cat. For this an extra charge is
made. It is well to fill in the pedigree as far as possible, and
every exhibitor should strive to obtain correct particulars of date
of birth and name of breeder of the cat to be exhibited. It is a
pity to label your cat “unknown,” if with a small amount of trouble
exact details can be obtained. At any rate, it is important to state
the names of the two parents. The age of kittens should be counted
by months—that is, say, from the 20th to the 20th. Having registered
your cat, you receive a notification of such registration, and
whether you are intending to exhibit or not it is very necessary and
advisable that your cat should be duly registered in at least one of
the parent clubs.

A separate fee is charged for each cat or kitten in each class, and
the amount must be forwarded at the same time as the entry is made.
The following is a copy of the entry form used at the Cat Club’s
Show at Brighton in 1901, and I may mention that the fee for
registration has since been raised from 6d. to 1s.:—

 +----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
 | _ENTRIES CLOSE MONDAY, NOVEMBER 4TH, 1901._              |  Class as per Schedule. |
 |                                                          |                         |
 |       BRIGHTON CHAMPIONSHIP SHOW OF THE CAT CLUB,        | No.                     |
 |                    TO BE HELD AT                         |                         |
 |       MELLISON’S HALL, WEST STREET, BRIGHTON,            |                         |
 | ON WEDNESDAY AND THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 13TH AND 14TH, 1901, |                         |
 |       Under the Exhibition Rules of The Cat Club.        |                         |
 +----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
 | RULE AS TO REGISTRATION OF NAMES OF CATS AND KITTENS.    | Also Entered in Classes |
 |                                                          |     numbered as per     |
 | Every Cat or Kitten exhibited at a Show under The Cat    |       Schedule.         |
 | Club Exhibition Rules MUST be Registered at the Cat Club.|                         |
 | Fee 6d.                                                  | Nos.                    |
 |                                                          |                         |
 | Every Cat or Kitten which may have changed ownership     |                         |
 | since Registration MUST, before Exhibition, be           |                         |
 | Transferred to its new owner in the books of The Cat     +-------------------------+
 | Club. Fee One Shilling.                                  |  Please not to write in |
 |                                                          |       this space        |
 | To change the name of a Cat or Kitten, when allowable,   |                         |
 | the fee is One Shilling.                                 |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 |  _See The Cat Club Exhibition Rules, Nos. 1 to 6,_       |                         |
 |                     _in the Schedule._                   |                         |
 +----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
 |                 CERTIFICATE OF ENTRY.                    |   Kindly fill in the    |
 |                                                          |   amount enclosed for   |
 | I hereby Certify that the Cat or Kitten to be exhibited  |   for Fees, &c., as     |
 | by me as below is _bona fide_ my property, and I enter it|   under:--              |
 | at my own risk, subject to the Exhibition Rules of The   |                         |
 | Cat Club, and the Regulations of this Exhibition as      |             | £ | s.| d.|
 | arranged by the Committee.                               | Cheque      |   |       |
 |                                                          |             |   |   |   |
 |   Has this Cat been Registered at The Cat Club           | Post Office |   |   |   |
 |     (_see note above_) ----                              | Order       |   |   |   |
 |                                                          |             |   |   |   |
 |   Has this Cat been Transferred (_if purchased_) to      | Postal      |   |   |   |
 |     yourself as owner in the books of The Cat Club       | Order       |   |   |   |
 |     (_see note above_) ----                              |             |   |   |   |
 |                                                          | Cash        |   |   |   |
 |   Name of Exhibitor (in full) ----                       |             +-----------+
 |     (Title, Rev., Mr., Mrs., or Miss. _See Rule 3._)     | Total £     |   |   |   |
 |                                                          |             +-----------+
 |   Address ----                                           |                         |
 |                                                          +-------------------------+
 |   Name of Cat or Kitten (as registered at                |                         |
 |     The Cat Club) ----                                   |                         |
 |     (If in Stud Book, add number.)                       |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 |   Breed ----        Colour ----                          |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 |  See         { Date of Birth ----       Sex ----         |                         |
 |  Exhibition  {                  (Male, Female or Neuter.)|                         |
 |  Rules       { Breeder ----                              |                         |
 |  1 to 6      {                                           |                         |
 |  of The      { Sire ----                                 |                         |
 |  Cat Club    { Dam ----                                  |                         |
 |  in the      {                                           |                         |
 |  Schedule.   { Prizes won ----                           |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 | Particulars must be given as registered at The Cat Club. |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 | Price £ :  : (_If for Sale._)      _Date_ ---- 1901.     |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 | N.B.--No MILK will be given to any Cat or Kitten unless  |                         |
 |   specially requested here----. Water will be provided   |                         |
 |   otherwise.                                             |                         |
 |                                                          |                         |
 | ONE FORM IS SUFFICIENT FOR ONE CAT OR KITTEN IN ANY      |                         |
 |                   NUMBER OF CLASSES.                     |                         |
 +----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
 | No Entries will be accepted without Fees.                                          |
 | Postage Stamps taken Thirteen to the Shilling.                                     |
 |                                                                                    |
 | Exhibitors are particularly requested to write distinctly, and also to be careful  |
 | to name correctly the Class in which they intend to exhibit their Cat or Cats.     |
 |                                                                                    |
 | All Correspondence and Entries to be addressed to Miss F. SIMPSON, Durdans House,  |
 |                            St. Margaret’s-on-Thames.                               |
 +------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

The exhibiting rules should be carefully studied, and intending
exhibitors must pay great attention to the classification set forth the
schedule so as to determine the correct class in which to enter their
cats. If there remains any doubt in the mind of the novice, then it is
best to consult some reliable and well-known breeder, giving a full
description of the cat you wish to show.

It is a grievous disappointment if through ignorance or carelessness a
good specimen is labelled “Wrong class.”

It is always stated in the schedules that the entries close on a
particular date, and that after this none can or will be received.
Experience proves, however, that this is often not a law of the Medes
and Persians, for the date is frequently of an elastic nature, and
therefore it is always worth while for an intending exhibitor to write
requesting that, if possible, his entry may be received, although it is
forwarded after the advertised time of closing. Many exhibitors are not
aware that by paying an extra shilling they can generally secure a
double pen for their cats. It is not usual for the secretary of a show
to send a receipt for entries and fees, as the tallies and labels which
are forwarded later serve as an acknowledgment for these. When by any
chance labels, etc., are not received in time to be used by exhibitors,
or they are lost or mislaid, then the hampers should be addressed to the
secretary of the show, and a note of explanation enclosed. The entry can
then be looked up, and the pen number discovered. If cats are entered in
joint names, then it is desirable that the owners should let the
secretary know to whom to send the labels and tallies, as if these are
only forwarded a day or two before the show to the partner who does
_not_ keep the cat, complications may arise. If litter classes are
provided at a show, it is well for the intending exhibitor to send the
whole litter, as the number of the family is taken into consideration in
judging, and perhaps a large litter of six may take over a smaller
litter of three, even though the quality of the trio is in advance of
the larger family. As regards pairs of kittens, I would say select two
kittens as near alike as possible in colour, size, and quality; they
need not be of the same litter, but it is as a “pair” they will be
judged, so if one exhibit is much inferior to its fellow then the value
of the pair is seriously diminished. A defective eye or damaged tail
will tell against a cat or kitten in the show pen, therefore it is
useless to throw away entry fees upon these blemished, though perchance
dearly loved, creatures.

[Illustration:

  RICHMOND CAT SHOW: ARRANGEMENT OF TENTS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

The question of ribbons to suit the colours of the various cats is one
deserving of consideration. Many exhibitors make the mistake of using
broad ribbons and making very big bows, but both long and short-haired
cats present a neater appearance with narrow ribbons, and the bow should
be stitched in the centre, so that it cannot come undone and thus give a
dishevelled appearance to the puss. The metal tallies will hang more
gracefully round the neck if a slip ring is run through the hole of the
tally and then the ribbon is put through the ring. Cushions and hangings
for the pens are not at all desirable, even if they are permitted. They
collect germs and become offensive, and moreover it is much better that
all exhibits should be placed on the same footing—namely, a bed of hay
or straw.

If owners are unable to accompany their exhibits to the show, it is more
than ever necessary that secure, comfortable, and safe travelling boxes
or hampers should be used for the transit of the cats. It is not
advisable, nor is it generally allowable, for more than one cat to be
sent in a hamper to a show.

The question of hampers and travelling appliances has been dealt with in
a previous chapter, but I would earnestly impress upon exhibitors not to
send their cats away on journeys, long or short, in tumble-down hampers
and unsafe packing cases. Whether hampers or boxes, I would here suggest
that whichever is used let the fasteners be secure and yet easy to
manipulate. Straps should be attached to the box or hamper, as in the
confusion and hurry of show work these, if left loose, may get mislaid.
The labels should be so arranged that they may be conveniently turned
over for the return journey, where, on the reverse side, ought to be the
owner’s name and full address. It is most important that these should be
distinctly written. I recommend all exhibitors to insure their cats when
sending them to a show. The charge is 3d. for every £1, and having paid
our money we take our chance, which is perhaps a less hazardous one than
if this precaution had been neglected.

The arrangements, or rather want of arrangements, as regards the transit
of live stock on our railways leave much to be desired, and therefore it
behoves fanciers and exhibitors who value their cats for their own sakes
and for their intrinsic worth, to do all in their power to mitigate the
discomforts of a journey and the risks that must necessarily attend the
conveyance of live stock by rail. Some fanciers make it a rule never to
exhibit unless they themselves can take and bring back their cats, and
though this necessarily entails a great deal of trouble and some
expense, yet there is an immense satisfaction in feeling our pets are
under our own supervision. There is also an advantage in penning your
own cats, and if you arm yourself with a brush and comb you are able to
give some finishing touches to pussy’s toilet previous to the judges’
inspection and awards. Let me recommend a metal comb, and a brush such
as is used for Yorkshire terriers, which has long penetrating bristles,
but is neither too hard nor too soft.

Disqualification of cats or kittens at shows may arise from various
causes. First, if the cat has not been registered, or if it can be
proved that the animal has not been in the possession of the exhibitor
for fourteen days before the show, or if a wrong pedigree has been
given, or the date of birth of a kitten is incorrect. Any attempt at
“faking” will disqualify an exhibit, and in some cases the too free use
of powder on white and silver cats is a disqualification in the eyes of
some judges. Exhibitors have been known to dye the chins of tabby cats
and treat white spots on self-coloured cats in the same manner. Such
“faking,” as it is popularly called, is always risky, as well as a most
undesirable operation, and if resorted to ought not to be passed over by
a judge who might detect the artifice and yet lack the moral courage to
expose the offender. Let me warn exhibitors against the evil practice of
over feeding their cats at shows. It is so much better for a cat to
starve for two days than to overload its stomach with the plentiful
supplies brought by an over-anxious exhibitor. The sanitary arrangements
at present existing at cat shows do not allow of such a course, and if
one meal of raw meat and plenty of fresh water is supplied by the show
authorities pussy will fare much better than being stuffed with a
variety of dainties brought in paper bags.

[Illustration:

  MRS. GREGORY’S “SKELLINGTHORPE PATRICK.”

  (_Photo: W. J. Smith, Lincoln._)
]

Whilst the inmates of your cattery are attending shows it is a good
opportunity to give an extra cleansing and airing to their houses, and
on their return be careful to destroy the hay or straw contained in the
hampers or boxes, and thoroughly disinfect these, leaving them out in
the open air for a day or two before packing them away. It is generally
advisable to give a slight aperient to grown cats after they come back
from a show, for it often happens that these cleanly creatures refuse to
make use of the scanty accommodation provided for them in the show pens,
and thus complications may arise unless attention is paid to their wants
on their return. If many cats are kept, and some are sent to a show, on
no account allow these to mix with your other animals on their return.
It is a wise precaution to keep them apart for a few days, more
especially if you have young kittens to consider.

The prize cards should be returned in the hampers when sent back to
exhibitors. If these are soiled or broken on their arrival, a request to
the secretary asking for fresh ones will probably be attended to.

Every member of a cat club and exhibitor at a show has a right to lodge
a complaint with the secretary and committee of the club under whose
rules the show is held, if an injustice has been done to an exhibit in
the opinion of the exhibitor. According to the rules a deposit has to be
paid, which can be reclaimed unless the complaint is considered
“frivolous.”

Show promoters cannot afford to give their money away without some
return or provisional stipulation, and therefore fanciers must not
complain if when a class does not fill it is either amalgamated or only
half the advertised prize money is given. This latter plan is by far the
more satisfactory. There has probably never been a show of any live
stock held where complete satisfaction has been given; but, generally
speaking, “grumbling” is a most mistaken and pernicious habit, and
exhibitors should strive to become good losers. If they cannot learn
this lesson, then the remedy remains in their own hands, and they had
better keep their cats at home rather than run the risk of being
disappointed themselves and of causing unpleasantness to others. If a
judgment is obviously wrong, then the triumph is with the best cat, and
we should take our defeat in a sportsmanlike manner.

[Illustration:

  “INQUIRY.”

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

In July, 1902, a cat section in connection with the annual dog show was
held in the Old Deer Park, Richmond. This proved a great success, and
entries numbered over three hundred. A few words in description of this
show may be appropriate here, especially in view of the photographs
(specially taken) which illustrate this chapter.

Its chief features were the twenty-five entries in the litter classes
and the ring class for neuters only. Objection is often made to litter
classes, and yet these are certainly the most attractive. I think that
double pens should be provided, and special food ought to be supplied
for the little ones. It stands to reason that very young kittens cannot
be fed like the grown cats, and it is only natural that if big pieces of
meat are thrust into the pen for the mother the hungry little creatures
will make a rush for it. They bolt down the hard lumps, and these remain
undigested in their tender little stomachs. It is not to be wondered at
if gastritis, inflammation, and other distressing ailments supervene. It
is much better to let the mother do without her usual meat rations and
content herself with good, nourishing baby food, such as Mellin’s or
Ridge’s, rather than run the risk of providing her with such which will
injure her little kittens. With ordinary supervision no evil
consequences should ensue from the introduction of litter classes,
especially at a one day show. It is not, however, advisable to have
litter classes at shows held during the winter months. But in perfect,
warm weather no fatalities will be reported. Certainly the mothers with
their families prove a great attraction, and as woollen balls, attached
from the top of the pens, are provided for the amusement of the kittens,
they delight themselves and their audience with their playful frolics.

The ring class for neuters _only_ was an innovation and proved very
successful, and although some of these pet pussies declined to show
themselves off to the best advantage, yet they did not “go” for each
other as is sometimes the case when the males are within measurable
distance of each other. The illustration given is from a photo specially
taken for this work, and shows the judges deliberating on the respective
merits of the neuter cats. On this occasion a famous Blue Persian owned
by Madame Portier carried off the honours. He behaved very well on the
lead, and his grand shape and wonderful coat made him an easy first.

Another illustration shows the judges at work awarding the special
prizes, which in many cases have to be decided conjointly. Miss Frances
Simpson and Mr. C. A. House are comparing notes and determining which of
the first prize kittens is deserving of the special for the best in the
show. On this occasion Mrs. Bennet, a well-known breeder of Blue
Persians, was awarded the coveted prize.

A general view of one of the rows of pens is given, but on this
particular occasion no covering was supplied for the benching, and,
therefore, the aspect of the show pens leaves much to be desired. The
travelling baskets being placed under the pens, these should be hidden
from the public gaze in order to give a neat and tidy appearance to the
show. The best material for this purpose is red baize. The custom of
allowing exhibitors to pen their own cats enables them to give their
pussies a final brush up before they are subjected to the critical
examination of the judge. Our illustration represents Mrs. Peter Brown,
a well-known breeder of Blue Persians, attending to the toilet of her
beautiful “Bunch,” who on this occasion repeated her successes at the
Botanic Gardens, and carried off the highest honours in the Blue Female
Persian class (_see_ page 73). And now to pass on to another portion of
our subject.


                                JUDGING.

A standard of points for all long and short-haired cats was drawn up by
a sub-committee of the Cat Club, of which I was a member; but since
specialist clubs have come into existence, having each their own list of
points, nothing much has been seen or heard of the Cat Club’s standard.
It is just as well to have some definite lines upon which fanciers and
exhibitors may base their ideas, and so aim at, if they cannot attain
to, the height of perfection set forth in these standards. They are
really not meant for judges, because I venture to assert that a judge is
no judge if he requires anything besides his own personal conviction,
experience, and common sense when called upon to decide the various
points in the different breeds. A good judge of old china will not
search for the mark to know whether the specimen is Chelsea or
Worcester. He will tell you “it is marked all over”—that is, he knows a
good bit of stuff, even if it should not have the gold anchor of Chelsea
or the square mark of Worcester ware. So it is with a good all-round
cat. It appeals at once to the eye of the connoisseur, just as a
worthless specimen is at once put out of the ranks of winners.

[Illustration:

  RICHMOND CAT SHOW: JUDGES AT WORK.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

It is the greatest error not to have thorough confidence in oneself when
undertaking to judge cats, or, in fact, in judging any animal, or any
thing. No one should undertake to judge if they wish to seek the counsel
of others. They must have the courage of their _own_ convictions, and,
although some amount of training may be required, I think that judges
are born, not made; and people who have not a keen power of observation
and a faculty of coming rapidly to a fixed conclusion can never hope to
become satisfactory or competent judges. There are many cat fanciers on
whose judgment of a cat I should implicitly rely, and who know a good
specimen when they see it, but if placed before a row of twenty or
thirty cats of a breed they seem to lose their heads and get hopelessly
confused, and then the reporter says, “We could not follow the awards.”
There is no doubt that judges of cats are severely handicapped. Firstly,
cats are such terribly timid, shrinking animals that when dragged out of
their pens with great difficulty—for the doors are most inconveniently
small—they often struggle so violently that, for fear of hurting the
animal or of its escaping, the judge will swiftly restore it to its
resting place without having obtained much satisfaction from his cursory
examination. Unless judging pens are provided, there is really no chance
of making fair comparisons between two cats which may appear of almost
equal merit. How is a judge to decide on the form of limbs and general
build of a cat when holding it in his arms or seeing it huddled up at
the back of its pen?

An agitation is now on foot for having cats judged in a ring, and, no
doubt, in time this will be the order of the day at our shows; but
fanciers will have to train up their cats in the way they should
go—namely, when quite young they must be accustomed to a lead and also
be constantly brought out amongst strangers. As an example, I would
refer to the starting gate recently introduced into this country on the
racecourse. It was no use to attempt it for the old stagers, but
trainers soon accustomed the two-year-olds to the innovation, and I
believe many, if not all, the objectors are now converted to the new
system of starting racehorses.

[Illustration:

  TYPE OF CAGE AT THE RICHMOND CAT SHOW.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

In judging a class, I first go round and mark the absent cats; then I
note down those that could not under any circumstances take a prize. If
there is a large class—say, of twenty to thirty specimens—I mark off all
poor and seedy-looking cats until the number is reduced to about eight
or ten; then I begin to search for the winners. At this point I take out
each specimen, and, if no judging pen is provided, I get someone to
assist me, and by bringing out two cats at a time I can make comparisons
and note down any remarks in my book for further reference. It often
happens that one particular cat will stand out prominently from all the
rest in a class, and then there is no difficulty about the first award.
It is always well to give a “reserve” and to distribute—but not too
freely—the V.H.C., H.C., and C. cards. It does not do to make these too
cheap, and scatter them all over the class. V.H.C. might be awarded to a
cat in splendid coat, but which failed in head and eyes; H.C. to another
specimen with hardly any coat and poor head, but correct in eye; and C.
to a promising youngster without any serious fault, only with no
striking point of merit. A good judge must thus weigh the pros and cons
and have a reason to give himself or anyone else for each degree of
merit, from first prize to the humble C. And here I would mention that
there is a nice and a very nasty way for an exhibitor to question a
judge’s award. To be attacked suddenly with the query, “Why have you not
given my cat a prize?” is quite enough to make a judge retire into his
shell and refuse any explanation; but if asked to kindly give a reason
why a certain animal has failed to win, and to explain why one specimen,
apparently a fine cat, should be lower than another, I am sure any judge
would gladly give the inquirer the benefit of his larger experience and
the reason for his awards. It is a mistake for a judge to distribute the
full complement of prizes in a class when and where the exhibits are not
possessing of sufficient merit. A first prize cat should be a good
specimen of its kind, and it is much better to withhold this award than
to give it to a poor representative of his breed. It also reflects
discredit on a judge, for an exhibitor wishing to boast of his honours
may publish that his “Tommy Atkins” took first under so-and-so, when
perhaps there were only two cats in the class. It is quite legitimate
for a judge to ask permission of the show authorities to award an extra
prize in a large class with several fine specimens; and if he has
withheld others in a poor and badly filled class then there is no extra
burden put on to the funds of the club. A great deal should be left to
the discretion of the judge, and in the matter of special prizes, if one
is offered for, say, the best long-haired white cat, and only one or two
specimens are on show, and these are neither of them good types of this
breed, then the judge should be empowered to withhold the prize. Such a
course may be an unpopular one, but I am sure it is the correct and
fairest one, for it is a farce to award first prize and specials to an
inferior animal just because he happens to be without other competitors.
Anyone who has judged the large classes of blues and silvers which now
appear at our principal shows will bear me out in my suggestion that
such classes, numbering perhaps thirty and more exhibits, should be
subdivided according to age. Such an arrangement would be welcomed by
judge and exhibitor alike. At the Crystal Palace Show in 1901 the blue
kittens numbered thirty-nine in the class, male and female, the age
limit being three to eight months. How could a judge be expected to
satisfactorily award three prizes in such a huge class? And I know that
many superb specimens on this occasion had to be content with a V.H.C.
card, which it would have gone to my heart as a judge to place on their
pen.

[Illustration:

  MR. C. A. HOUSE,

  EDITOR OF “FUR AND FEATHER.”

  (_Photo: A. & G. Taylor._)
]

[Illustration:

  MR. T. B. MASON.

  (_Photo: C. L. Eastlake, Leeds._)
]

If there is a prize offered for the best cat in the show, the judge or
judges have not to consider which is their favourite breed or which is
the most fashionable colour, but just which cat is the best possible
type, which specimen is the nearest perfection, and which is exhibited
in the best all-round show condition. In long-haired classes the length
and quality of coat and fulness of ruff go a long way towards a high
place in the awards, and, as I have before remarked, condition is a most
important factor in the judges’ estimation. In the self-coloured classes
of blues and blacks a judge should make diligent search for white spots
on throat or stomach. Formerly cats thus blemished were relegated to the
“any other” class, but it has been wisely decided by both clubs that
cats with white spots should be judged in their own classes, and that
this defect should count as a point or points against them. This is as
it should be, for to place self-coloured cats in an “any other colour”
class seems absurd. They are black and blue cats in spite of a few white
hairs, and should be judged as such. They may never aspire to a first
prize, at any rate at a large show; but surely a really fine black or
blue cat, with correct eyes, grand head, and good shape, even with the
unfortunate spot, should and ought to score over a poor specimen with
green eyes and long nose. In the tabby classes a judge will first
consider the ground-work and markings, and to these premier points
special attention should be given, as there is a tendency to breed tabby
cats which are barred only on heads and legs, the body markings being
blurred and indistinct. It is not unlikely that in due time the “any
other colour” class will no longer form part of the classification at
our large shows. Formerly this used to be the largest class of any, but
nowadays the entries are becoming small and beautifully less. It is not
worth while for a fancier to keep these specimens—they do not fetch any
price, they are not valuable as breeders, and it is quite a toss-up
whether they can win in such a mixed company. I remember the time when
blues were entered in the “any other colour” class, and when blue
tabbies were more numerous than silvers or blues. It is really a most
difficult task for a judge to give his awards at a local show where all
sorts and conditions of cats are placed in the one class. Such an
arrangement is good for neither man nor beast. And then, again, at our
large shows it behoves a judge to be very level-headed to cope with the
numerous brace, team, and novice classes, for one cat may be entered in
all these, besides being in the open cat and kitten class; and woe
betide the unfortunate judge who makes a slip, for the wrath of the
exhibitor and the sarcasm of the reporter will be poured out upon him.
No doubt it is a grave mistake to reverse one’s own awards, and yet
judges are but mortal, and “to err is human.” It is hard when cat
fanciers take to judging the judges and their judgments. A judge may be
absolutely ignorant of the owners of the cats, and thus utterly
unbiased; yet there will not be wanting those who will pick holes in
their characters, and see in their awards clear proof of personal spite
and party favour. The intense suspiciousness of some fanciers and the
readiness with which they impute low motives to others is greatly to be
deplored.

[Illustration:

  THE TOILET.

  MRS. PETER BROWN AND HER PRIZE CAT.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

I will here quote from an article by Mr. C. A. House, the well-known
editor and judge of live stock. Under the heading of “The Judging of
Cats,” Mr. House says:—“All my awards are based on the idea that each
breed possesses a distinctive feature, and that distinctive feature must
be the one to which most consideration is given. After the chief
features come others, such as shape, coat, colour, etc., and the premier
awards should be given to cats possessing the best all-round
properties.... Selfs, above all things, should be pure in colour. For
instance, a blue should be blue, and a black, black. Yet a little
rustiness of colour should not be allowed to outweigh a host of other
good properties. Colour, however, is hard to breed rich and pure, and
should at all times be more highly valued than size, or even coat. The
same with markings. Only those who have tried to breed markings know how
difficult it is to get them anything approaching perfection. Nothing is
more fleeting than marking, and nothing more tantalising to the breeder.
Summing up the matter, my own opinion is, and has been for years, that
the cat fancy has been hindered and hampered by judges judging the
exhibits because they belong to so-and-so, or had won so-and-so under
so-and-so.... I was much amused at one incident at Westminster where a
big champion had suffered defeat. The fair owner was heckling the judge,
and he in reply to her remarks made this answer: ‘It makes no difference
to me had the cat belonged to the Queen herself; I should then have done
the same. I don’t judge cats on what they have previously won or because
they belong to any particular person. I judge them on their form at the
time, and it makes no difference to me if a cat has won fifty firsts or
none at all.’ This reply was more than the exhibitor had bargained for,
but all honest-minded fanciers must acknowledge the judge was right.
What is sadly needed in the cat fancy to-day is more of this sturdy,
unflinching determination to judge cats and not their owners. Cat
exhibitors have much to learn yet, and the sooner the morale of the
judging arena is raised the more healthy will the fancy become and the
more quickly will it advance.”

[Illustration:

  BLUE PERSIAN KITTENS.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

Another of our well-known judges, Mr. T. B. Mason, writing on the same
subject, says:—“In my judging engagements I have very often come across
exhibits with good-coloured eyes, but not the correct shape. A small
eye, however good the colour may be, will give the cat a disagreeable,
sour expression. With this shape of eye we generally see a narrow, long
face, which should keep any exhibit out of the prize list in good
competitions. Let it, however, be clearly understood, I do not want eyes
to have undue weight in the general conditions of cat judging; but they
are important, and as such ought to have due and careful attention at
the hands of breeders and judges alike. Two things in the judging of
short-hairs weigh heavily with me, namely, pale colours and light-marked
heads and white lips. These defects, in my opinion, ought to put out of
the money those that possess them in good competition. I perfectly agree
with Mr. House about the standards. They are useful both to the breeder
and judge; but for the judge to take the standards and try to judge by
them at any show would be foolish indeed. All judges are expected to
know the varieties they are called upon to judge, and to have the
faculty to weigh up the good points and defects of the specimens before
them, and place them accordingly.”

[Illustration:

  KITS WITH A TASTE FOR FLOWERS.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

[Illustration:

  TWO KITTENS BRED BY MISS WILLIAMS.

  (_Photo: H. Jenkins, Lowestoft._)
]


                          MANAGEMENT OF SHOWS.

Now to turn our attention to the management of shows, and upon this
question I feel I am fairly competent to give an opinion, as I have
acted as show manager and as show secretary to some of our largest
exhibitions in London and at Brighton. The office is indeed no sinecure,
and very few fanciers, exhibitors, or visitors have any idea of the
enormous amount of forethought required, to say nothing of physical and
secretarial labours, to make a big show run smoothly. The responsibility
also is great, for a conscientious manager feels he has valuable live
stock in his temporary possession, of which he has, so to speak, to
render up account. There are many mixed shows held throughout the
country where a cat section is given, and it is to be regretted that in
most, if not all cases, the poor pussies are badly provided for and
generally go to the wall. At a dog and cat show everything goes to the
dogs! Secretaries wishing to promote successful cat sections at their
mixed shows should secure some well-qualified person to have entire
control of this department. It is certainly true that, of all live
stock, cats require the most consideration and supervision, and yet to
the masculine mind of a show secretary it would appear that the cats can
look after themselves. There is no doubt that the first step towards
making a show successful is to engage the services of a competent,
energetic, and painstaking manager and secretary. It is also very
desirable to appoint a really good working show committee, the members
of which should each undertake some particular duty in connection with
the show. For instance, one member might superintend the feeding,
another could be responsible for obtaining promises of special prizes,
another devote him- or herself to verifying the prize tickets placed on
the pens, and so on. A system of advertising a show must be decided upon
by the show committee, and notices sent to the various journals which
are circulated amongst fanciers. The class and prize tickets must be
ordered in good time either by the secretary of the club or the manager
of the show.

The best time of the year for a show as regards the appearance of
Persian cats is in December or January. Then, if ever, these particular
cats should be in the best show condition. As regards kittens, the early
summer or autumn is the best period, as spring kittens will then be
ready to make their bow to the public. It is much to be regretted that
the two principal shows of the National Cat Club—namely, the Botanic
Gardens and the Crystal Palace Shows—should be held respectively in June
and October, when Persian cats are in poor coat.

Quite three months before the date of the show a managing secretary will
start work. Catalogues of previous shows must be collected together, in
order to ascertain the names and addresses of likely exhibitors.

Special prizes are now a great feature at all cat shows, and a good deal
of extra work is entailed by writing to obtain promises of these for the
various breeds. If possible, it is well to appoint someone who is in
touch with those who are likely to become donors, and to hand over this
department. I would advise anyone undertaking this branch of the show to
have a book, and to head each page with the respective classes of long
and short-haired breeds, and then when a special is received—say, for
the best black Persian cat—to place this on the page set apart for
specials for this particular breed. Keep a separate list for kittens,
and decline to accept specials given in the form of stud visits or for
cats bred from such and such a sire; these savour too much of
self-advertisement. There are so many specialist societies nowadays, and
as these provide their own specials the show executive is considerably
relieved of the duty of obtaining prizes. Of course, there are always a
certain number of challenge cups, medals, and specials given by the club
holding the show, and care should be taken to distribute these fairly
amongst the various classes. It is usual and advisable to limit the
competition of the majority of these special prizes to the members of
the club. I do not approve of a special prize being offered for the best
cat in the show, as it is almost impossible for the judges to arrive at
a satisfactory decision, and considerable heartburnings are generally
the result of such a competition. A very useful mode of assisting a show
is by guaranteeing classes; and I would suggest yet another plan,
namely, to subscribe so much towards the expenses of the show. These are
necessarily heavy, and it has been stated that no cat show can ever be
made a paying affair.

As regards the specialist societies, I think it seems the correct thing
that the club intending to hold the show should instruct its secretary
to write to the secretary of each specialist society to ask if he is
willing to support the show by prizes or by guaranteeing classes, and to
name the latest date for receiving particulars of the support to be
given. The specialist societies have their own judges, and it is only
natural when they are offering handsome prizes that a claim should be
made for first-class judging in the interests of the breed. It is
therefore essential, as matters at present stand, for one of the judges
from the list of the specialist club to be selected to give awards in
the classes connected with the society. It is important to obtain as
full a list as possible of special prizes from societies and outside
donors in good time for insertion in the schedule, as a tempting list
will ensure a better entry. In the schedule the exhibition rules of the
club should be printed, and in addition there should be a list of
arrangements in a prominent position setting forth details as to the
opening and closing of the show, the time up to which exhibits are
received, the earliest hour at which they may be removed, and the prices
of admission. The names of the judges, with their respective classes,
should be clearly set forth, and it should be mentioned whether classes
will or will not be amalgamated or cancelled. A few advertisements of
stud cats and trade notices should be obtained, as this means grist to
the mill and helps to pay for the printing of the schedules and
catalogues.

[Illustration:

  RICHMOND CAT SHOW: THE RING CLASS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

The question of classification is an all-important one, and needs the
consideration of a careful show committee, well versed in the ways of
cats and of fanciers. A list of the classification used by one or two
big cat clubs has been given. Of course, at smaller shows it is often
impossible to give separate classes for several breeds or to divide the
sexes; but my remarks in this chapter will refer to the customs and
arrangements of large shows, such as those held by the National Cat Club
at the Crystal Palace, and the Cat Club at Westminster. I do not think
it is good policy on the part of a show committee or management to
amalgamate classes. It is much better to advertise in schedules that
when entries are fewer than, say, four or five, then the judges are
empowered to withhold any of the prizes; or, again, in the case of a
very small class, half prize money might be awarded.

[Illustration:

  “MINDING SHOP.”

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

Having decided on the classification, and given as liberal and
attractive a one as is possible and practicable, it is well to consider
the number of schedules likely to be required, and then start addressing
the wrappers. In each schedule must be inserted two or three entry and
registration forms. The entry forms, with fees, are returned to the
secretary, and the registration forms to the person who keeps the
register of the club holding the show. And here I would remark on the
mistake it is to have two registers for cats. It is very confusing for
exhibitors, and a double expense, as the National Cat Club and the Cat
Club each charge a shilling. Then, again, as the National Cat Club has
recently passed a rule disqualifying all cats exhibited at Cat Club
shows, the confusion is worse confounded. Some fanciers having large
catteries divide their exhibits and send to both National Cat Club and
Cat Club shows; but this new registration rule falls heavily on cat
fanciers who are keen to exhibit their specimens and anxious for the
pleasure of obtaining prizes, and desire to profit by showing their stud
cats or having an opportunity of disposing of their stock. The National
Cat Club shows since the passing of this rule have suffered
considerably, both from lack of entries and by the absence of some of
the fine champion cats that, having been exhibited at the Cat Club show
in January, were thus debarred from appearing at the Botanic Gardens and
Crystal Palace shows. How much simpler and better it would be if both
clubs could and would agree to have _one_ register kept by an
independent person, not necessarily a catty individual, and that the
fees should form the salary of such a person. A small fee might be
charged when reference was desired by fanciers as to the pedigree of any
cats. If the secretary of a show happens to be acquainted with the
members of the cat fancy, he will be able to use his discretion as to
the number of entry and registration forms needed. In some cases, where
he is sending to a well-known breeder and possessor of a large cattery,
more numerous forms will be required. Schedules should be sent out quite
a clear month in advance, and the entries should close about ten days
before the date of the show. The secretary will have a book in which he
will note down each entry as it is received, placing it under the
correct class heading, and, of course, these can only be numbered up
when entries close. The entry forms should be filed and kept for
reference. Then comes the work of arranging and writing the labels, and
placing these with the tallies, entrance tickets, and removal orders in
envelopes and addressing them to the exhibitors. These should be posted
four clear days before the show.

During this time the secretary will be able to compile the catalogue for
the printer, and arrange to have an instalment of copies the night
before the opening day of the show, also to draw up the judges’ books.
Letters should be written to the judges and veterinary surgeons
acquainting them with the hour at which they are desired to present
themselves at the hall, and a complimentary pass ticket should be
enclosed. A pass should also be sent to the representatives of the
Press, to the veterinary surgeon, and to those who may be giving their
services as stewards. Distant exhibitors will write requesting
catalogues to be forwarded to them, and a list should be kept. A
secretary will do well to provide himself with strong cord, scissors,
brown paper, writing materials, labels, telegraph forms, stamps, and
other useful articles.

[Illustration:

  “THIEVES.”

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

In these days of specialist clubs it is necessary for the secretary to
have a list of members of each society supporting the show, as the
prizes being confined to members the judge will have to refer to the
secretary’s office for information before making his awards.

The day before the show will be fully occupied in superintending the
arrangement and putting up of the benching and pens. A conveniently
sized glass case should be ordered for the special prizes, and this must
be placed in a prominent position. The prizes should all be distinctly
labelled with the donor’s name and the breed of cat for which each is
offered. The case should be one which locks up, and then it is not
necessary to have any supervision of the contents. It is best for some
two members of the show committee to undertake the arrangement in the
case of the special prizes. Two men should be engaged to take the
tickets and money at the entrance gate, and in the sales office a clerk
will be required to receive purchase money and give receipts. At a large
show it is necessary to employ four or six stewards to collect the
judges’ slips as they complete each class, and take them to those in the
office appointed to write out the tickets. These same stewards should
also undertake to place them on the pens. And here let me say how much
better it would be if some arrangement could be made for the prize
tickets to be fixed in a rack at the top of the pen, instead of being
thrust between the wires, where a large number almost hide the cat, and
frequently they are torn down by the inmates of the pen.

[Illustration:

  MISS SIMPSON’S “CAMBYSES.”

  (_Photo: Gunn & Stewart, Richmond._)
]

A good manager will have all in order well before the hour when the cats
are received, and if the veterinary engaged is in attendance the cats
can be examined and, when passed, placed at once in their proper pens.
It is very important to entrust the work of penning to those who are
used to handling cats, and no better men can be found than those
employed by Messrs. Spratt, who, as everyone knows, are the universal
providers at cat shows, as at every other live stock exhibition. It is a
question whether hay or straw is best for bedding. I incline towards the
latter if it is the fine wheaten straw, as hay, if it becomes at all
damp, will stick to the long-coated cats. I also prefer dry earth at the
back of the pens to sawdust, for the same reason. I trust we may ere
long be able to provide something better in the way of a cat pen than
those at present in use. The doors should open the full height of the
cage and two thirds of the width, so that the cat can be more easily
taken out.

[Illustration:

  MRS. DRURY’S BROWN TABBY, “PERIWIG.”

  (_Photo: Kerby & Son, Ipswich._)
]

There is no doubt that, considering the peculiar nature of cats, some
more adequate arrangement should be made in the sanitary accommodation.
The earth scattered at the back of the pen amongst the bedding is not
all that could be desired. What we want is a false bottom, and an earth
pan or tray sunk in it about two inches deep, on the plan of the bird
cage, so that it can be drawn out and fresh earth supplied, and
replaced. Greater care should be paid as regards the security of the
fastenings of the pens, and the wires of some of them are too wide
apart, so that young kittens can easily make an exit. It is well known
that cats have extraordinary powers of escaping whenever and wherever
escape is possible.

I disapprove as strongly as do the cats of any disinfectant being
sprinkled or placed _inside_ the pens. Each pen must, of course, bear a
number; but instead of the different classes being numbered, it is much
better to have them named, and the large placards fixed high about the
pens by means of split sticks of Japanese bamboo. Thus anyone seeking
the blue or the brown tabby class will have no difficulty in locating
it, even without a catalogue.

It is very important that all exhibits should be examined by a qualified
veterinary surgeon before being penned, and if a cat is seriously ill
the owner should be at once communicated with and the specimen returned.
If it is a doubtful case, perhaps a running eye or high temperature,
then the cat should be placed apart in a properly arranged, and if
possible warmed, hospital room to be again examined. Remember it is
always better to disappoint one exhibitor by refusing his cat, than to
disgust everybody by bringing their carefully trained and dearly loved
pets into contact with disease. It is necessary to appoint an official
to check off each exhibit as it is passed, and in the event of
pronounced illness or some other objectionable feature to make a note of
this for future reference.

[Illustration:

  A LITTER OF BLUES.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

As regards the feeding of exhibits, I am in favour of raw beef or cooked
meat cut into small pieces or else put through a mincing machine, and
water to drink. For many reasons it is not desirable to provide milk; it
is apt to turn sour, and it certainly more easily collects germs of
disease, and so may prove a fruitful source of evil.

The Cat Club started the idea of having china saucers instead of the
usual tins, and these are decidedly better in every way. A one-day show
is no doubt best for the cats, but for the exhibitors and the executive
a two-days show is really preferable. If the exhibits are allowed to be
penned up till eleven o’clock on the morning of the show, the judging
ought to be got through and the tickets placed on the pens in two hours
with a competent staff, and the show opened at one or 1.30.

A smart secretary will arrange with his printer to have a list of awards
printed with the utmost speed directly after the class judging is
finished. This can either be given in the catalogues themselves or a
separate sheet inserted in the catalogues. A large board ought to be
hung in a conspicuous and convenient position, and the list of class
winners and the winners of special prizes entered on it. This is better
than having the slips pinned upon a board. They are often very
indistinctly written, and are apt to get torn down. Let the closing hour
on the first night be eight or nine o’clock, when the hall should be
cleared and the pens covered over. I consider one good feed of raw meat
ought to suffice during the day, with fresh water continually supplied.
The hour for opening on the second day may be ten o’clock, and before
then the pens ought to be cleaned out, fresh straw given where needed,
and disinfectant sprinkled up and down the passages between the rows of
pens—not in them. Careful attention to these points will ensure the show
being free from disagreeable odours by the time the public are admitted.
It is a wise plan to arrange and announce that the show closes, say, at
five p.m. on the second day, so that exhibitors can, in many cases, get
home with their cats the same night. It is unreasonable to expect to be
allowed to depart before the time fixed, even though in some cases half
an hour would save a train. As regards a one-day show, it is almost
impossible for a secretary and manager to get through the necessary work
and to open in anything like time. There must be a scramble, and for the
exhibitors to be obliged to present themselves and their cats at some
unearthly hour in the morning is very trying and most inconvenient. Then
a two-days show is, of course, an advantage as regards the entrance
money. The Cat Club used to have a stringent rule against exhibitors
penning their own cats, but at the Westminster Show this rule was
amended, and cats could be penned by their owners or representatives on
the night before the show, but not in the morning. No evil result
followed this concession on the part of the authorities, and therefore I
trust this very natural desire on the part of the exhibitors to see
their precious pussies safely into their temporary quarters may always
be permitted at Cat Club shows.

In order to facilitate the work of the judges, it is well to have their
books carefully and clearly arranged, and this especially applies to the
list of special awards. I instituted a plan at Westminster Show, in
1901, which gave great satisfaction, but which entailed a lot of extra
work for the secretary. I am sure, however, this special arrangement
lightened the labours of the judges, and hastened the appearance of the
special prize cards on the pens. I had separate books for the special
awards, and carefully cut out of the schedules the prizes pertaining to
each judge. Thus, if Mr. A. had black, white, and blue long-haired
classes, every challenge medal and special offered for these cats I
arranged in order on one side of the page, with the numbering as it
appeared with them in the schedule. So in the left-hand page would be,
say, “Special No. 10, for best long-haired black,” and on the right-hand
page “Awarded to No. ....,” leaving a blank for the judge to fill in the
number of the winner. Any prizes that had to be awarded in conjunction
with other judges, such as for best long-haired cat in the show, I made
a note of to this effect. Let me add that I gummed the printed portions
relating to the prizes, cut from the schedule, into the judging books,
so the judges needed neither schedule nor catalogue to refer to. In
preparing judges’ books it is very helpful to place male and female (M.
and F.) after each catalogue number in the mixed kitten classes, to
avoid reference for the special awards; and this should also be done in
the catalogue itself, as very often the name of the kitten does not
indicate the sex, and would-be purchasers are obliged to make inquiries.

I am always an advocate for having selling classes for cats and kittens
at shows, where the price should be limited to £5 5s. in the long-haired
classes, and £3 3s. in the short-haired classes. It would be an
assistance if someone who understood cats, and was also a good salesman
or saleswoman, undertook to preside over the selling classes. The 10 per
cent. commission deducted by the show authorities is a material help,
and often a little pressure and persuasion, combined with useful
information, will decide a wavering purchaser. A class I should like to
see introduced into our shows is one for kittens bred by exhibitors. I
am of opinion that more encouragement should be given to fanciers to
keep the best of their litters for exhibition. Lady Marcus Beresford had
the happy inspiration of starting breeders’ cups for competition at Cat
Club shows, and special prizes are often given for the best kitten bred
by exhibitors. But these are tiresome awards for a judge to make; he is
obliged to make inquiries from someone with a catalogue, and even this
reference will not always suffice. It is always pleasant to win prizes,
but an additional pride would naturally be felt if, in a large class of
kittens bred by well-known exhibitors, the son or daughter of our own
breeding should be awarded first and special.

[Illustration:

  JUDGING IN THE RING AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE.

  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Crystal Palace._)
]

With respect to a ring class, which is often held at some of the
National Cat Club shows, I cannot say that it is very interesting to see
a collection of toms, females, and neuters, long- and short-haired,
being dragged along by their anxious owners, whilst the puzzled judges
try hard to decide which of the motley and mixed assembly is most worthy
of honours. I think that for a ring class neuters alone should be
eligible, or at any rate until we have trained our young cats to behave
properly on a lead. There need be no necessity for the neuters to be
entered and penned in the show, but they could be charged a higher fee
for the ring class; and I believe that many owners of neuters would not
object to their precious pets being on exhibition for ten or twenty
minutes, led by themselves into the ring, but who will not let them be
cramped up in a pen for two days. Neuters are always at a disadvantage
in the show pen—they are generally too large and too lazy to be properly
seen, and a ring class for these specimens would be a very attractive
feature at our cat shows. A row of chairs should be placed round, and
sixpence a seat charged. It is quite absurd to mix up the sexes, and
dangerous to allow tom cats to come within fighting distance of each
other. At a recent show great excitement was caused in the ring by the
sudden attack of one famous stud cat on another, and it was lucky that
nothing worse than a torn and bleeding ear was the result of this
onslaught. Another class I should like to see at some of our large
shows, and certainly at the summer N.C.C. Show, is a class for stud
cats, which should be judged quite irrespective of coat, and special
attention directed to form of limb, size of head, and massive build in
awarding the prizes. This might not be an attractive class, but it would
be an instructive one, and give the veterans a chance of proving of what
stuff they are made. A young untried male will often take all the
honours in his class, and the stud cat of a busy season is forced to
take a back place, probably on account of services rendered. Anyhow,
this idea might be carried out as regards the two largest
classes—namely, those for silver and blue Persians. In former days there
used to be classes at some of the shows in which the cats were judged by
weight, but these have wisely been done away with.

[Illustration:

  MISS KIRKPATRICK’S BLUE KITTENS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

The question of open judging at cat shows has frequently been discussed
in catty circles, and several fanciers have given their opinions on this
subject. Mrs. Neate, a well-known fancier, writes thus in _Fur and
Feather_:—“It would indeed be a step in the right direction if cat shows
were run on (as far as possible) the same lines as dog shows. Much of
the absurd mystery that at present envelops our cat shows would vanish
if exhibitors were permitted to be present during the judging, and I
feel sure that the majority of cat fanciers would not be so wanting in
etiquette and good taste as to hinder the judges or any of the officials
in discharge of their onerous duties.” No doubt there is much truth in
these remarks; but, at the same time, I do not think fanciers take
sufficiently into consideration the very timid, shrinking nature of the
cat when they advocate open judging. It is often most difficult for a
judge to properly examine a cat, even when he or she is quietly going
round giving the awards; it would be still more trying to man and beast
if a collection of strangers were pressing forward on all sides.

What I consider is more practical than open judging for cats is that
some arrangement should be made so that judges may be enabled to compare
the points of the various exhibits, and for this purpose I consider that
judging pens on movable tables should be provided at all shows, as were
adopted by the Cat Club at Westminster. By these means the work of the
judges would be much simplified, and the cats more satisfactorily and
quickly judged.

Supposing a special prize or medal is offered for the best cat in the
show, then I think it is interesting and instructive to have the first
prize-winning cats placed, if possible, in pens, and to arrange for the
award to be given in public during the show by the judges in conjunction
with each other. Such a plan was adopted at the last Manchester Cat
Show, and much satisfaction was expressed at this innovation.

Having given some suggestions as to the classification, I would again
refer to points of management in shows. At the closing hour on the
second day the hall should be cleared, and only exhibitors or their
representatives allowed to remain. An efficient staff of attendants
should at once set to work to assist in packing up the cats belonging to
those exhibitors who intend taking them away. After these have all left,
then the manager should direct his attention towards those exhibits that
should be started by the night mails. The catalogue must be consulted,
and a good way is to mark with a cross on the pen tickets those cats
that must be packed up; and, having previously ordered the railway vans
at a certain time, the precious packages should be sent off as speedily
as possible. Those exhibits left over till the following morning should
be fed again and started at daybreak.

[Illustration:

  “ROSE OF PERSIA.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

There is a sense of immense relief when the last hamper has been
fastened down and seen off the premises. And here let me say how much
exhibitors can contribute towards the speedy and safe despatch of their
pets, if only they will provide substantial and well-appointed
travelling baskets or boxes. Amidst all the hurry and confusion of
packing up an immense amount of extra trouble is given by having to lace
up a hamper with string, or nail down a box that has no other means of
being made secure! I speak from experience, and therefore I plead for
more consideration to be extended to the show manager and his
assistants, and, above all, to the poor pussies themselves.

At every show that is held there are a number of exhibitors who try the
patience and courtesy of the manager or secretary, or both, by
requesting to be allowed to remove their cats before the advertised
time. Of course, it is only natural that those fanciers residing at a
distance should wish to make tracks home and catch early trains for
their own comfort and convenience and the welfare of their pussies. But,
looking at the matter from a secretary’s and a visitor’s point of view,
it is certainly hard that perhaps some of the best prize cats should be
absent from their pen whilst the public are paying their money at the
gate; but, having made a rule, it is best to stick to it, and no cat
should be taken away till the fixed hour under any pretext whatever,
unless a veterinary certificate of illness is obtained.

It is always open to the management to advertise an earlier hour for the
removal of exhibits on payment of a certain sum, but this should be made
a substantial fine, especially in the case of a prize-winner. A lower
figure might be named for other exhibits. As regards cats or kittens
purchased at the show, it is certainly an inducement and incentive to
buyers if there is a rule that these exhibits may be removed at any
time.

According to the rules of the two leading clubs a certain fixed time
must elapse before the prizes are sent out. In some cases this is a most
uncertain and unfixed time, and many complaints have been made through
the cat papers of the long drawn out period between the prize being won
and the prize being received. No doubt, immediate distribution of prizes
after the show would lead to complications, for objections might be
lodged within the given time allowed by the rules, and such objections
would have to be brought before the committee of the club; therefore it
is obvious that successful competitors must allow, say, a month to
elapse before showing signs of impatience. It is then the manager’s
business to send the money awards, and the secretary of the club is
generally accountable for the distribution of the “specials,” which
certainly call for a special acknowledgment from the recipient to the
donor of these prizes.

As regards the financial aspect of a cat show, the first important point
is to make the entries pay for themselves—that is, supposing your prize
money in each class is £1, 10s., and 5s., then you need twelve entries
at 3s. to carry you through. And here let me remark that, considering
the character of our first-class shows and the value of the special
prizes offered, I am inclined to think that entry fees are too low, and
that they should be more in accordance with the fees charged at dog
shows. It is always advisable to make a difference between members of
the club holding the show and outsiders. Thus, if 5s. is the entry fee
for members, then 6s. or 7s. 6d. might be charged to non-members. New
recruits to a club are often gained by this arrangement. The usual
commission on sales is 10 per cent., and then there is the gate money,
which somehow is generally disappointing, for truly the outside public
are not partial to cats, nor attracted to exhibitions of the feline
race. I have always contended that exhibitors themselves ought to be
charged an entrance fee—say, half-price admission on presentation of
their exhibitor’s pass, which in many cases would only be sixpence, yet
one or two hundred of these small coins would materially assist the
exchequer; and surely no cat fancier would grumble at this tax on their
resources when they consider how much trouble and expense is entailed in
providing them with a favourable opportunity of exhibiting their pets,
and with a possibility of winning golden guineas and silver trophies.

Another plan is to advertise in schedules that exhibitors of more than,
say, two entries would be allowed a free pass. Fanciers will be tempted
to send additional cats, and thus swell the entries, in order to secure
their free admission ticket. I do not think it would be a bad plan to
have a “Contribution Column” on the entry forms for members’ and
exhibitors’ voluntary donations towards the expenses of a show which, if
well managed, is worthy of the utmost support from the cat-loving
community.

“Every mickle makes a muckle,” and it should be the earnest desire of
each individual member of a club to do something, however small, towards
keeping a balance on the right side of their treasurer’s accounts.


                          BUYING AND SELLING.

I believe that a Bow Street magistrate once asserted that anyone owning
a stud dog or selling a dog was, in the point of law, a dealer. I do not
know if the same decision would apply in the cat world. Anyhow, there
are few fanciers who do not desire at some time or other to dispose of
their cats and kits; and, again, there are many who keep stud cats, yet
cannot be considered dealers in that sense of the term. The best way to
set about trying to sell our surplus stock is to advertise in the cat
papers, in which case it is advisable to fully and fairly describe our
animals and to name the price required. If profit is to be considered,
it is not advisable to keep kittens more than eight weeks. Very soon
after this period they begin to lose their fluffiness and grow leggy in
appearance. There is also the risk of illness and death. It is better,
therefore, to be willing to accept a moderate sum for kittens at eight
weeks old rather than to keep them to see how they turn out. It is a
clear case of “a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.”

I have always thought that there is a good opening for any enterprising
person well versed in cat lore and cat fanciers to start an agency in
London, where cats and kittens might be sent on approval, for would-be
purchasers to call and interview them. There might be a system of
messengers who would meet cats and see them off at London stations. In
connection with such a cat agency a register might be kept of cats for
sale or cats wanted and arrangements made as at the Army and Navy Stores
for having a certain number of animals on view. These could be boarded
at so much per week, and commission charged on the sale.

A list of names and addresses of those willing to receive cats as
boarders would be very useful, and many ladies who do not choose to
advertise could and would, I am sure, avail themselves of the means of
letting fanciers know they could undertake the charge of pets during
their owners’ absence from home. Many and frequent are the letters I
receive on this subject, especially as the summer vacation approaches.

A day and hour for the visit of an experienced veterinary might be
arranged, so that country fanciers could send or bring their sick cats
for advice. All sorts of cat appliances might be on sale. It would be
convenient to have a writing-room for the use of fanciers, where
correspondence on catty matters could be carried on. Perhaps a tearoom
could be added, and bedrooms, if space was available, for fanciers
coming up to attend London shows. Anyhow, a list of suitable rooms might
be kept which could be personally recommended.

                   THE BLUE PERSIAN CAT SOCIETY PEDIGREE FORM.

              Breed and Sex——————————————  Breeder—————————————————

              Colour—————————————————————  Date of Birth———————————

                              Name of Cat———————————
     ======================================================================
 PARENTS.    GRAND-PARENTS.   GREAT GRAND-PARENTS.    GREAT GREAT GRAND-PARENTS.
     ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————
          Sire.     {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {               {——————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {——————————————————————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {               {——————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
     ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————
          Dam.      {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {               {——————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {——————————————————————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
                    {               {——————————————————————————————————————
                    {               {                       {        _ex_
     ——————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————————
                   Prizes Won, Remarks, &c. —————————————————

    These Forms, at 8d. per dozen, can be obtained on application to Miss F.
              SIMPSON, Hon. Sec., 9, Leonard Place, Kensington, W.

In these days, when competition is so keen and occupation so difficult
to obtain, the idea of starting a cat agency should commend itself to
some who, being in touch with members of the cat fancy, and wishing for
lucrative employment, might embark on this novel undertaking. Needless
to say, it would be most desirable to have the cat agency in a central
part of London, and in close proximity, if possible, to some of the main
railway stations. I think that, if only as a means of assisting fanciers
in the purchase and disposal of their cats and kittens, this idea of an
agency might be successfully worked. Many breeders become very
disheartened at the inability to find purchasers for their kittens. A
complaint was recently made by a lady living in the Isle of Wight. She
writes: “No one seems to care for breeding in this island, and people
are not willing to give more than about five shillings for pedigree
kittens.” No doubt fanciers living in the country and away from any
catty centre have but little opportunity of finding a sale for their
surplus stock. I would suggest photography as one means of making known
the perfections of their pussies. A start in the right direction has
been made by Mr. Landor, of Ealing, whose clever pictures of kittens are
so well known. He is willing to take portraits of pretty, fluffy kits
and good cats on special terms, provided he retains the copyright of
such photographs. It is always handy to have a good photograph to send
by post when endeavouring to dispose of our pets, and by such means
fanciers may be spared the trouble and risk of sending their valuable
kittens on approval.

[Illustration:

  “MISCHIEF.”

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

Naturally, for unknown cat fanciers it is more difficult to effect sales
through advertisement, and in their case it is necessary to offer to
send on approval at buyer’s risk and cost; and if an application is made
from an entire stranger, then the purchase money should be deposited in
the hands of some reliable and independent third person. Some fanciers
entirely decline to send their cats on approval, and then it is very
requisite to enter fully into particulars, and, if possible, to send a
photograph. It is best to give the faults and failings as well as the
good points, so that disappointment and disagreement may not follow
between the purchaser and seller. Buyers should endeavour to learn
something about the person from whom they purchase their cats; and it as
well to ask not only for age and full pedigree, but whether the cat has
been exhibited, and if it has taken any honours, and at which shows. It
sometimes happens that valuable animals may be picked up for low prices
at shows; but there is always a risk, and this is especially the case
with young kittens, who more easily contract any disease. In buying a
cat or kitten it is always advisable to make inquiries as to the way in
which it has been fed, so as to continue the same regimen for at least a
few days. The pedigree of a cat or kitten should be sent at the time of
purchase, and it is much easier to fill this in on a properly drawn out
form, and certainly it is pleasanter to receive the particulars thus
intelligently written out. I give a copy of the forms I drew out for the
use of blue Persian members, but these can, of course, be used for cats
of any breed.

[Illustration:

  OUR PLAY-ROOM.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]

Here let me quote from an article in that excellent American paper, _The
Cat Journal_, headed “Unreasonable Buyers.” The writer says:—“One of the
most difficult things with which the cat seller has to contend is the
unreasonable buyer. There are buyers who, finding a cat to suit them,
pay the price and are satisfied. There is, however, another class that
it is best to let alone. They are never satisfied, and blame the seller
for everything that happens either on the road or after the kitten is
received, and many of them also think if they are sharp they will be
able to buy a $100 kitten for $10 or $15, and when they get such a
kitten and they discover that it is not worth $100, they are disgusted,
and have a lot to say about unfair dealing, etc. If a kitten that has
been a pet is taken from its surroundings, and sent on a long journey,
the rattle and the unusual conditions of such a trip places her in a
state of nervous terror, so that she very rarely shows off to good
advantage in her new home. The purchaser, if a true cat lover, will
appreciate all the trouble of poor little pussy, and give her the
tenderest treatment and coax her to make the best of her new
surroundings. It is a very rare thing for a kitten to come from the box
after a long journey looking just as the new owner expected. Tired,
homesick, and frightened, she will not eat, and is altogether a pitiable
looking object. It is always advisable to put a new arrival in a room by
herself, with a comfortable bed and conveniences, entirely away from the
rest of the cats and kittens, and allow her to become acquainted with
the members of the family gradually. Do not allow other cats to come
bothering around till the new member of the family is entirely
acquainted with its surroundings. Especially be very cautious in
introducing two male cats.

“Sellers must be very cautious in sending out their stock, and buyers
must not expect too much. Give the new member of the family a little
time to know things before you write your letter of complaint. Be sure
you are not expecting too much for the price you paid.”

The question has often been asked, “Can cats be made to pay?” and,
naturally, novices in the fancy wish to know the best way in which to
make a good start.

Here I would say how much may be done by well-known and influential
members of any fancy if they will give themselves a little trouble in
helping the novice, who, after all, is the backbone, so to speak, of
every fancy, and hence it is very essential that beginners should start
on the right lines and with reliable, and therefore profitable, stock.
Speaking from experience in the cat fancy, I can say that several
persons have come into the ranks and gone out of it again, in many cases
through sheer disgust because of the deceptions practised, and of which
they, as novices, have been made the victims. I hold that if beginners
are to be retained as members of a fancy, they should be treated kindly
and liberally by the experienced fancier, especially when it is a
question of purchasing stock. It is much to be lamented that novices are
frequently treated in a reverse manner, and fanciers (so-called) seize
upon an opportunity of getting rid of superfluous and often inferior
specimens to those who are unable to discover good from bad in the cats
offered to them.

At the same time, it is a pleasing fact that there are many true
fanciers in the feline world who, having made their names as breeders,
prize-winners, and perhaps judges, put themselves out to give valuable
advice, and often spare no pains in endeavouring to obtain good stock
for the novice at reasonable prices.

Another question often asked is, “Does showing pay?” In answer to this
query, I give an extract from the pen of the clever weekly correspondent
of _Fur and Feather_, “Zaida,” who says:—“To those who keep their cats
for pleasure, who really love them and can afford to despise the small
‘takings’ available, keep your cats at home and do not show. Expense
does not count with this class of exhibitor, but risk to the welfare of
their best-beloved pussies undoubtedly does. To those who are trying to
make money by their cats, we would urge: harden your hearts, learn how
to show, where to show, and when to show; and recognise the expense,
risk, and trouble involved as part of the unavoidable outlay which is to
bring in a certain return. Undoubtedly, a show is a heavy expense, and
will always leave you out of pocket. Even if you conduct it on the most
selfish terms—the ‘give-nothing’ and ‘take-all-you-can’ system—you will
be exceptionally lucky if you clear your expenses. You cannot expect to
sell your kittens well if you do not exhibit.

“If you possess a stud cat, he must be seen and known before you can
hope to have a demand for his services. Your own eye must be continually
trained by comparison of your own stock with the prize specimens of
others. In short, if you wish to make money, you must spend money. On
the other hand, never exhibit except at first-rate shows, and never be
tempted to show an animal out of condition. If you can afford to buy
animals already well known in the show world, cats of renown, for whose
offspring there will always be a keen demand, you may possibly abstain
from exhibition. This plan, however, involves a very large initial
outlay. Then, again, the happy people who have won their laurels, whose
names are always associated with first-rate animals of a particular
breed, they, indeed, can afford to rest in peace, and show no more.
Other people will buy their kittens, and do their exhibiting for them,
and also do that mournful nursing and burying that too often follows a
show. Undoubtedly, it is fascinating to show successfully; but, on the
whole, we think the most enjoyable shows are those where one goes to
look at other people’s exhibits and leave one’s own at home.”

A few words as to the stud fees and arrangements for visiting queens
will not here be out of place. The usual fee for the services of a stud
cat is fixed at £1 1s., but some fanciers are willing to accept less,
especially if their cat is not a well-known prize-winner. A higher
charge is often made if the railway journey has to be followed by a cab
fare, or if the owner, having a valuable stud cat, does not wish to
encourage many visitors. The carriage of the queen should always be
defrayed by the sender, and if a telegram and return insurance is
desired, then these sums expended should be refunded to the owner of the
stud cat. It is desirable to announce the despatch or intended despatch
of a queen, as it may not be convenient to receive her. The usual time
to keep a visitor is from three to six days, and then the owner of the
stud cat should give notice of the return. In case the first visit
proves unsuccessful a second visit is usually allowed by courtesy
without any extra payment, but this must not be taken as a matter of
course, and it is best for the owner of the queen to ask permission to
send again. If through a mistake in the time of sending a cat apparently
fails to mate during two visits, it can only be by the kindness of the
stud cat’s owner that a third visit is permitted for the one fee. If,
however, the queen has been known to have mated on each occasion, a
third visit gratis cannot be expected even if there is no result. A fee
once paid for a visit is not returnable. It is sometimes a matter of
arrangement between fanciers to have the choice of a kitten instead of
the mating fee, but this transaction does not commend itself unless the
parties are on very friendly terms. A clear understanding should be
arrived at on all occasions between the sender and the receiver, and
thus any after unpleasantness may be avoided. It is catty etiquette to
forward the fee when sending the queen; or, at latest, immediately on
her return. A label for the return journey should be fixed inside the
lid of the hamper. This is a saving of trouble to the owner of the stud,
and is also a means of identification.

[Illustration:

  MR. F. W. WESTERN, THE SECRETARY OF THE SANDY CLUB SHOW.

  (_Photo: Kingham, Bedford._)
]

In selecting a young kitten for purchase out of a litter, take note of
the size of head and width between the ears. In self-coloured kits look
out for white spots, and avoid those with long tails. Fanciers should
strive to resist the temptation of buying too many cats and kittens of
different breeds. To the novice and the beginner I would say, Buy two or
three good specimens, carefully selected; these will be worth quantities
of doubtful ones, which, as a matter of fact, have, as a rule, no value
at all. Seize every opportunity which comes across your path of seeing
and examining well-bred, prize-winning cats, and attending shows. The
cleverest fancier and most successful breeder can improve himself by
observation and education.

Do not be offended if you are told by those who have had a larger and
longer experience in the fancy, and who are really experts, that you
have made a mistake in any purchase. If you resent their criticisms, you
may, and probably will, accumulate much rubbish as a monument of your
own conceit. A great deal may be learnt from books, but more from
observation. Above all, do not, when you have acquired some knowledge,
form too high an estimate of your own powers and of your own cats; a
true fancier is always ready—nay, anxious—to learn, well recognising
that ignorance alone claims to be omniscient.


                              LOCAL SHOWS.

As an example of the ever-increasing interest shown in cat sections at
local shows, the following account, kindly supplied to me by Mr. F. W.
Western, the secretary, will be of interest:—

[Illustration:

  OFFICIALS OF THE N.C.C.C.

  (_Photo: Mrs. G. H. Walker._)
]

“Sandy Show has long since outgrown in size and importance the title it
bears, viz. ‘The Exhibition of the Sandy and District Floral and
Horticultural Society.’ The first schedule, issued in 1869, catered for
plants, flowers, fruit, vegetables, poultry, and cage birds. In 1880
pigeons were introduced, and in 1883 rabbits were added. Later, in 1899,
dogs put in an appearance with four classes. It was not, however, until
1894 that our friend ‘pussy,’ in whom we are especially interested, made
her _debut_ at Sandy, and as we look at the schedule for that year we
are driven to the conclusion that none but a philosopher could have
drawn up such a classification for our pets. The trouble which we now
frequently experience at a cat show of being ‘wrong classed’ could not
well arise on that happy day in August 1894, when eight catteries were
represented in the one and only class, viz. ‘Any variety, any age, male
or female.’ But if our pets made a modest bow to the public in that
year, they have lived to be proud of their position. In the succeeding
year three classes were provided, bringing together 31 cats. From this
date the cat classes have shown substantial improvement. The year 1900
found Sandy with five classes and 41 entries. By this time the cat fancy
throughout the country had come into prominence; clubs had been
established, and specialist societies were springing into existence.
With a leap forward the cat section of the 1901 show numbered 20
classes. This was far too bold a bid for popularity to be lightly
esteemed. The support was obtained of the Cat Club, the Silver Society
(to-day the Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society), the Short-haired Cat
Society, and the Siamese Club.

“Generous aid was given by many individual lovers of cats, and fifty
special prizes, in addition to the class prize money, were offered. The
show was attended with success, both as regards the number (about 150)
and the quality of the exhibits. From a public point of view, moreover,
the result was most gratifying.

“The cat tent was crowded throughout the day, and this section was
acknowledged on every hand to have been one of the best features of the
show.

“With such success attending their first earnest venture in cats, it is
not surprising to find that the committee resolved still further to
increase the classification. In August 1902, therefore, 32 classes were
arranged, of which 21 were guaranteed. Special prizes numbered 85, and
the cat section had the support of all the specialist societies.

“With such attractions the splendid entry of 1901 was eclipsed, and at
the very worst time of the year for cats as many as 266 entries were
made. Long-haired cats were decidedly well represented, and in the blue
kitten class 21 specimens were penned. In the short-haired classes some
noted winners appeared.

“Ring classes were provided, and proved a great attraction to the
public. The local classes were proof that Mrs. F. W. Western has
succeeded in interesting some of her friends in the hobby, and the
specimens to which the honours fell would have done well in the keenest
competition.”

Mention was made in the list of clubs on a previous page of the Northern
Counties Cat Club, which was founded in 1900. The committee decided on
holding a one-day kitten show in September of that year, and the judges
selected were Miss D. Champion, Miss Frances Simpson, Mr. T. B. Mason,
and Mr. L. P. Astley. Entries came up well, numbering 154, and this
novel undertaking was in every way a great success. The Northern
Counties Cat Club kitten show is now an annual fixture, and on October
1st of 1902 a really splendid exhibition of promising youngsters was
held at Bellevue, Manchester. Twenty-two classes were arranged, and over
fifty specials offered. Entries were twenty in excess of the previous
year, and would have been still higher in number had not sickness
prevented several well-known silver breeders from exhibiting. The litter
class numbered 17, and these, with the splendid blue classes, were the
chief glory of the show. There were 18 pairs of blue kittens and 40
entries in single blue kittens, and it was most noticeable how few of
these specimens failed in eyes. There were rows of gleaming orange orbs
that rejoiced the heart of the Hon. Sec. of the Blue Persian Cat
Society.

The kitten show of 1902 may fairly be classed as another success for the
Northern Club.

A similar show for cats and kittens is held annually in December in
Manchester by this enterprising club. I am indebted to Mrs. G. H. Walker
for the group of officials and members of the Northern Club. The photo
was taken by Mrs. Walker at the Manchester kitten show of 1902.

In connection with the dog show of the Ladies’ Kennel Association, an
exhibition of cats is now held annually at Harrogate under the rules and
patronage of the National Cat Club. The first venture in this popular
and fashionable water resort was made by Mrs. Stennard Robinson in 1901,
when entries came in splendidly; but rain descended most disastrously,
and seriously interfered with the success of the show and the attendance
of visitors. In 1902 the weather proved most favourable, but the cat
section suffered considerably as regards numbers of exhibits in
consequence of the date clashing with that of the Sandy Show, held also
on August 28th. On this occasion the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison was
advertised as judge, but owing to ill-health her place was taken by Mrs.
Stennard Robinson, and Mr. J. B. Townend, of the National Cat Club,
undertook the management. The Midland Counties Cat Club held its first
show in Birmingham. The classification was on a liberal scale, and
several of the classes were guaranteed. Several of the specialist clubs
supported this first venture of the Midland Counties Cat Club. A new
departure in the matter of shows may shortly be attempted, and a scheme
has been submitted to the cat world by the Hon. Sec. of the Silver and
Smoke Persian Cat Society, that the specialist societies should combine
and hold a show in the West of England. Each society is to be asked to
bear a part in the expenses, and secretaries will probably hold a
meeting to consider the best ways and means of carrying out such an
undertaking. It is not intended that such a show should be in any
opposition to those held by the parent clubs, and registration in either
of these clubs will be enforced; but, to quote the words of a well-known
fancier and supporter of the specialist societies, “It is simply a way
of escape from the enforced division of interests, and a means for
permitting the cats of all club persuasions to meet on equal ground. As
matters now stand, open competition is a thing of the past, and the
sooner it becomes a possibility again the better for the cat fancy. On
this ground, therefore, we think all unbiased minds will accept with
pleasure the scheme submitted to the public by the secretary of the
S.S.P.C.S.”

[Illustration:

  SANDY STEALING THE MILK.

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS HARPER.

  (_Photo: B. Tugwell, Haywards Heath._)
]

The Scottish Cat Club, which has Lady Marcus Beresford for its
President, holds its annual show during the winter months, and its
exhibition follows closely on that of the Midland Counties.

Under the list of winter shows mention may be made of the following,
where, in connection with other live stock, cats play a more or less
important part:—Peterborough, Sheffield, Hounslow, Kendal, Bedford,
Caterham, Hinckley, Hamilton, Doncaster, Yarmouth, Stratford-on-Avon,
Bristol, Haverfordwest, Stockton, Cheltenham, Taunton, Epsom, Hexham,
Larkhall, Stirling.

In this list I have made no mention of the great championship show of
the National Cat Club, held annually at the Crystal Palace in October,
to which the whole of cat creation looks forward with awe and longing.
This is one of the greatest events in the cat world, and is always
eagerly looked forward to by fanciers in all parts of the British Isles.
In the schedule for the exhibition in 1902 no fewer than 216 special
prizes were offered. Many of these were given by the following
specialist clubs, who generously supported this annual fixture:—The Blue
Persian Cat Society, the Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society, the
Chinchilla Cat Club, the Orange, Cream and Tortoiseshell Society, the
Siamese Cat Club, the Manx Cat Club, and the British Cat Club.

The names of the judges acting on this occasion were as follow:—Mrs.
Greenwood, Miss Forestier-Walker, Miss G. Jay, Miss Cochran, Miss F.
Simpson, Mr. Louis Wain, Mr. Sam Woodiwiss, Mr. C. A. House, and Mr.
Jung.

In our latter-day shows the work of the judges is considerably augmented
by the numerous specials that have to be awarded amongst the winners in
the well-filled classes, and as regards the Crystal Palace show of 1902,
the patience and skill of the judges making these awards were taxed to
the uttermost.

[Illustration:

  SILVER CATS BELONGING TO MRS. CLARK, OF ASHBRITTLE.
]

The Cat Club’s show has been held for three years in succession at St.
Stephen’s Hall, Westminster Aquarium, about the beginning of January,
and it is at this season that the really finest exhibition of Persian
cats is witnessed, for at no other time are long-haired cats in such
grand coat and good condition as in the middle of winter.

It is no wonder, therefore, with so many shows held throughout the
length and breadth of the land, that the cult of the cat is becoming
more and more widely known and appreciated, and that the fancy is really
assuming such proportions that there can be no doubt of its permanent
position amongst us.




                              CHAPTER VI.
                         THE “POINTS” OF A CAT.


Before entering upon the distinctive breeds of cats, of which I propose
to treat fully in the ensuing chapters, I would draw attention to the
accompanying diagram of a cat, and will proceed to point out the general
contour of the animal, whether long or short-haired.

[Illustration: [THE “POINTS” OF A CAT.]]

Having given a table of reference, I will take the points of the cat as
arranged in order:—

No. 1, Ears: These should be small, and rounded at the tops, carried
somewhat forward, and not wide open at the base. In the Persian
varieties especially the inner surface should be hidden by a growth of
fur extending from the face, termed ear tufts. It is a beauty in the cat
to have the ears set well apart, giving an appearance of greater width
to the head. The outer portion of the ears should be evenly covered with
soft, short, downy fur.

No. 2, Eyes: These ought to be round, large, and full. A small, beady
eye is a great disfigurement in a cat. The eyes should be set straight
in the head, not slanting like those of a Chinese. In the Persian
varieties a fringe of overhanging fur greatly improves and softens the
expression. The colour varies in different breeds, but in green, orange,
or blue eyes, purity and depth of colour should prevail. Very often an
orange eye is spoilt by an inner rim of green, and a blue eye is
weakened by a paler shade of blue, giving the appearance of an opal.

No. 3, Skull: Should be broad, with width between the eyes and ears.

No. 4, Cheeks: Well developed.

No. 5, Face and nose: These should be short; if the contrary, a “snipey”
appearance is given to the cat, which quite spoils the expression.

No. 6, Chest: Should be full and broad.

No. 7, Neck: Short and full.

Nos. 8 and 9, Shoulder and fore arm: These call for no special remarks;
but in male cats especially firm and massive limbs are most desirable.

No. 10, Paw: A large, broad paw, with short but not stumpy feet. In the
Persian varieties the tufts are an additional beauty.

Nos. 11 and 12, Body and back: There is a diversity of opinion as to
whether a cat should be long in the body or of cobby build. I incline to
the latter as regards beauty of form, but I am of opinion that female
cats with long bodies are the best breeders. All cats should be low in
the legs.

No. 13, Tail or brush: In both breeds this should be short rather than
long, and in the Persian varieties broad and spreading. The tail should
be carried almost on a level with the body, and slightly curving upwards
towards the end. A too-tapering tail is a defect.

Nos. 14, 15, and 16 call for no further remark beyond the desirability
of symmetry in form.

The foregoing list of points in a cat may be of some service to novices
in the fancy, but it is necessary to add that, as in all animals,
condition is a very important factor. A cat may be perfect in all
points, and yet if in either the long- or short-haired varieties the
coat lacks softness of texture, and in Persians the fur is matted or
draggled, such specimens cannot expect to find favour in the eyes of a
critical judge, or even an ordinary lover of cats. In short-haired
breeds there is an unmistakable gloss on the coat of a cat that is in
good health. A spiky appearance of the fur always denotes poor
condition, and greatly detracts from the charms and chances of our pets
or show cats. A great deal depends in keen competition upon condition.
It turns the scale in a vast majority of instances. Therefore, as great
attention should be paid to this point as to those set forth in the list
I have given.

A small yet distinctive feature in a cat is the whiskers, and these vary
in colour, according to the breed. They should be strong and yet
sensitive, and curving slightly inwards. It is supposed to be a sign of
strength if a cat’s whiskers attain a great length.

[Illustration:

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]




[Illustration:

  A BLUE PERSIAN BELONGING TO MRS. WELLS.

  (_Photo: Ward, Hounslow._)
]




                              CHAPTER VII.
                      LONG-HAIRED OR PERSIAN CATS.


In classing all long-haired cats as Persians I may be wrong, but the
distinctions, apparently with hardly any difference, between Angoras and
Persians are of so fine a nature that I must be pardoned if I ignore the
class of cat commonly called Angora, which seems gradually to have
disappeared from our midst. Certainly, at our large shows there is no
special classification given for Angoras, and in response to many
inquiries from animal fanciers I have never been able to obtain any
definite information as to the difference between a Persian and an
Angora cat. Mr. Harrison Weir, in his book on cats, states that the
Angora differs somewhat from the Persian in that the head is rather
smaller and ears larger, fur more silky with a tendency to woolliness.

It is, however, my intention to confine my division of cats to
long-haired or Persian cats, and short-haired or English and foreign
cats. In both these breeds there are “self-coloured,” “broken-coloured,”
and “any other coloured” varieties.

In the foregoing references to the diagram of the cat I have touched
upon the points of the animal, which are practically the same as regards
the form of body and limb in both long- and short-haired breeds of cats.

In comparing the dispositions of these two breeds, I think it is
generally allowed that Persian cats are not so amiable, or so reliable
in their temper, as the short-haired varieties. I am inclined to think,
however, that they are more intelligent, and have a greater instinctive
desire to make themselves at home in their surroundings. They are
apparently as keen hunters of prey as the short-haired cats. When we
come to the question of stamina and general health, I certainly think
the Persian must, so to speak, “go to the wall.”

It is a common belief that, in human beings, if the hair grows long and
thick it is a sign of great strength and a good constitution; but as
regards cats the longer the coat the weaker the animal. This I have
specially noticed in Persian kittens, and have remarked that little
mites with unusually long fur are the most difficult to rear, and suffer
from extreme delicacy. Perhaps in-breeding amongst Persian varieties has
been more carried on than with the short-haired breeds, which are
allowed a greater freedom of choice, and therefore are the result of
natural selection.

Apart from the question of health and strength, Persian cats require a
great deal more care and attention on account of the long fur. In the
spring Persian cats begin to shed their coats, and this process
continues through the summer months, and it is not till about October
that the new fur begins to grow again. Persian cats may be considered in
their finest condition during the months of December and January. It is
a wise provision of Nature that during the coldest months these somewhat
delicate cats should have their warmest clothing. It has often been a
matter of surprise that cat shows should ever be held in the summer,
when long-haired pussies present a most unkempt and moth-eaten
appearance. In this condition they are not likely to win converts to the
cult of the cat; but from an educational point of view these unclothed
specimens give the judge an opportunity of displaying his ability, for
it needs a really capable judge, with experience, knowledge, and good
common-sense, to allow for absence of coat, and to place the awards
accordingly. Under summer skies shape and bone will have their innings,
whereas a grand winter coat may hide a multitude of sins that even the
eagle eye of the most astute judge may fail to discover.

At the same time, for a breed of cats called “long-haired” the coat
ought to demand the greatest consideration; for what is the good of the
most perfect shape in a Persian cat, if it is exhibited out of coat and
almost like an English short-hair in a class set apart for long-haired
specimens? No doubt many breeders of Persians have been led through
disappointment to join the ranks of short-hair breeders, for it is
indeed very vexatious and tantalising, after having entered a
grand-coated cat a month before a show, to find your precious pet
persistently scratching out her fluffy frill and shedding the chief
glory of her breed before the eventful day when you had hoped to reap
golden awards.

[Illustration:

  “GENTIAN,” OWNED BY LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

As regards Persian kittens, the change of coat takes place between the
ages of three and six months. In some cases long-haired kittens will
cast their fur to such an extent as to present the appearance of an
uneven short-haired specimen, whereas in others the shedding process is
so gradual that the transition stage from a kitten to a cat is hardly
more discernible in the long- than in the short-haired breeds. Any
severe illness may cause the fur to come out of Persian cats at any
season of the year, and the growth of the new coat will be retarded by
poor condition of the skin. In both long- and short-haired cats, as in
other animals, the teeth are the chief guide in deciding the age, and a
kitten may be said to become a cat after six months, when the adult
dental process is completed, and the second set of teeth has become
established. And here I would quote from Mr. John Jennings’ interesting
book on “Domestic or Fancy Cats” in support of my twofold
classification: “Of the many varieties or breeds of the cat with which
we are now familiar, it must be remembered that, however crossed,
selected, re-crossed, domesticated, or what not, we have but two breeds
on which the superstructure of what is known to-day as the
‘classification of varieties’ has been reared—viz. the long-hair or
Eastern cat, and the short-hair or European. The term ‘breed’ is even
here used advisedly, for whatever the outer covering or coat, colour, or
length of fur, the contour of each and all is practically the same.

[Illustration:

  MRS. HERRING’S “CHAMPION JIMMY.”

  (_Photo: W. Morice, Lewisham High Road._)
]

“Nor is this confined to mere outline. Take the skull, for example,
which measured in the usual manner with shot, making due allowance for
difference in size, is not only similar in the different varieties of
either long- or short-hair, but even in the wild cat the anatomy is
similar, the slight variation being in a great measure explained by its
different conditions of life and diet, and is in unison with the fact of
how even the ordinary domestic cat will undergo a change in taking up a
semi-wild, outdoor existence.”

At the present time there is no doubt that long-haired cats are the more
popular, and, judging by the entries at our large shows, the numbers may
be taken as four to one. A slight reaction has set in since short-haired
societies have been formed, but the fascination for fluffy pets and
pretty pussies will, I think, always predominate, for the less
attractive points of the English domestic cat do not appeal so strongly
to the heart and the eye of the general public.

It may be remarked by the readers of “The Book of the Cat” that very few
pictures of short-haired cats are reproduced; and it is just because the
long-haired pussies are so much more attractive that they are brought
into greater prominence in this work. It is more difficult to obtain
nice photographs of short-haired cats, probably because the owners of
these less expensive pets do not think it is worth while to spend their
money or to go to any trouble over having a good picture taken. As
regards the coloured plates appearing in this work, care has been taken
to instruct the artists to bring out as prominently as possible the
special points of the cats, long- and short-haired. It is the first time
that coloured plates of the different kinds of cats have been attempted;
and it is hoped that, as types of each breed, these will prove useful to
fanciers and instructive to the cat-loving public.




[Illustration:

  THE HON. MRS. McLAREN MORRISON’S CATTERY AT KEPWICK.
]




                             CHAPTER VIII.
                        SOME NOTABLE CATTERIES.


Before entering upon a description of the various breeds, it may be
interesting to my readers to give a short account, with illustrations
(photographs for which have been specially taken for this chapter), of
the catteries of some well-known fanciers who have not confined
themselves to any special breed or variety.

Lady Decies’ catteries, at her pretty summer residence at
Birchington-on-Sea, are indeed most perfect in their arrangements, and
every detail for the comfort and well-being of the inmates is
considered. The stud cats have separate single houses, with good-sized
wired-in runs, and luxurious and cosy sleeping apartments in the rear.

The main cattery is in a sheltered portion of the grounds, and will
accommodate a large number of cats. The runs are arranged with boxes,
benches, chairs, and ladders, and the sleeping places, built of brick,
are most comfortably fitted up. By a system of wooden blinds the strong
sea breezes and the bright rays of the summer sun can be regulated.
There are side blinds and top blinds. The floors of the spacious
catteries are wood, covered with cork carpet, and they are raised about
a foot from the ground, so that there is a free current of air passing
under the boards, thus securing absolute freedom from any damp.

In the house there are three rooms set apart by Lady Decies for her
pussies. In two of these the queen mothers have their families, and the
other is used as the cats’ kitchen. The beds for the cats are specially
designed by Lady Decies. The walls of the cats’ rooms are adorned with
pictures by Louis Wain, and there is a display of prize cards won by
Lady Decies’ famous cats. “Zaida,” so well known as the winning silver
female, is the privileged occupant of Lady Decies’ boudoir, and here the
aristocratic little lady makes herself at home on the soft cushions and
couches.

The famous “Lord Southampton” is now in the possession of Lady Decies,
and resides in one of the up-to-date catteries at Beresford Lodge. He
was purchased at a very high price. Since his change of ownership he has
not frequently appeared in public, but in the past he was a noted
winner. It is, however, as a silver sire that he attained his success
and made his name. It is well-nigh impossible to mention his numerous
winning children. His name in a pedigree is a safe guarantee for quality
and colour.

The two Siamese cats have warm quarters in the stable cottage.

Lady Decies’ pets comprise both long- and short-haired cats. Among the
latter “Xenophon” is generally considered as the best specimen of a
brown tabby, and has a long prize-winning record. A woman and a boy are
kept to attend to the wants of these aristocratic animals.

The Bishopsgate cattery may be said to have won a worldwide renown, and
those who have been privileged to visit the ideal residence of Lady
Marcus Beresford will agree with me that it is impossible to give any
idea either by photography or description of the delightful dwelling
places set apart for the pussies belonging to this true lover and
fancier of the feline race.

There is the cat cottage, where the attendant has her rooms, and where
the other apartments are especially fitted up for the cats. Here the
Siamese have their quarters, and the sun streams in at the windows,
which face due south. Opposite to the cottage, as may be seen in the
illustration, are some of the cat houses, and in the centre is the
kitchen. The cat attendant stands at the door, and some of the pussies
are having their midday meal. The celebrated “Blue Boy II.” occupies a
house, and in the background is a grass run, securely wired in, which is
used as a playground for the pussies. In the hot summer weather this is
shaded by the lovely spreading beech trees of Windsor Park.

The stud cats’ houses are splendidly arranged with sleeping places and
nice large runs. The space in the centre in front of these runs is used
as an exercise ground for the females and kittens. The garden-house
cattery is, indeed, an ideal one, being a bower of roses in the
summer-time, and in winter an ivy-clad retreat. This house is divided
into two apartments, and these are generally used for the queen mothers
and their families. On the shelves along the windows the pussies sit and
sun themselves.

Truly the lives of inmates of the Bishopsgate catteries are spent in
peace and plenty, and when their little span of life is over they find a
resting place under the shadow of the grand old trees, and a little
white tombstone with a loving inscription marks the spot of pussy’s last
long sleep.

Lady Marcus Beresford has had almost every breed of cat under the sun at
her catteries, but of recent years she has specially taken up silvers,
blues, and Siamese, and a grand specimen of each of these varieties is
in the stud at Bishopsgate. Amongst some of the celebrated cats owned by
Lady Marcus Beresford I may mention “Lifeguard,” a grand orange of
massive build; “Tachin” and “Cambodia,” two imported Siamese with
perfect points; “Cora,” a tortoiseshell-and-white of great beauty, and
“Kismet,” a brown tabby of exquisite shape, both imported; and “Cossy,”
a smoke that has found a home in America. At the present time three of
the most notable inmates of the Bishopsgate cattery, representing blues,
silvers, and Siamese, are “Blue Boy II.,” “Beetle,” and “King of Siam.”

[Illustration:

  BISHOPSGATE, GENERAL VIEW.
]

[Illustration:

  CATS’ EXERCISE GROUND.
]

[Illustration:

  THE STUD CATS’ HOUSES.
]

[Illustration:

  CAT COTTAGE AND KITCHEN.
]

                        SCENES AT “BISHOPSGATE.”

                (_Photos: Cassell & Company, Limited._)

One of the largest catteries in Scotland, where the fancy grows apace,
is owned by Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart, of Seagate House, Irvine. Mrs.
Stewart has possessed several notable cats of different breeds. Her blue
stud cat “Ronald” has made himself a name in the south of England as
well as in the north. Mrs. Stewart has had silvers, creams, brown
tabbies, and is now the owner of the celebrated black stud cat “Dick
Fawe,” who has sired many winning kittens. The severe weather of this
part of Scotland seems to suit these Persian cats, for a healthier,
hardier set of pussies one could not wish to see than those disporting
themselves in the pleasantly situated catteries of Seagate House. Mrs.
Mackenzie Stewart is a most enthusiastic fancier, and often takes the
long journey down South to bring her pets to the London shows. She has
acted as judge in Scotland and England, and a contingent from the
Seagate cattery is generally to be seen and admired at most of our large
shows.

[Illustration:

  A SLEEPING BOX IN LADY DECIES’ CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

To old fanciers and exhibitors the name of Mrs. H. Warner is familiar.
It was as Mrs. Warner, in 1889, that the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison
first exhibited a black cat called “Imp” at the Crystal Palace Show; and
as black cats are said to bring luck, this puss took a first, and, thus
encouraged, his owner commenced her “catty” career. In the following
year, I note, by the catalogue, that Mrs. H. Warner had fourteen
entries, and amongst these were two imported cats and the celebrated
black Persian “Satan,” who departed this life in 1902. As late as 1897
this superb fellow, with glorious orange eyes, won everything he could
(in spite of his age) at the Crystal Palace. There remains a worthy son
of this worthy sire at the Kepwick cattery, named “Lucifer.”

[Illustration:

  LADY DECIES VISITING HER PETS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

It was in 1890 that Mrs. McLaren Morrison, then Mrs. H. Warner, made her
name as an exhibitor of white Persians; for no less than six of this
breed put in an appearance, and gained prizes at Sydenham. Mrs. McLaren
Morrison writes:

“I have always been lucky with black cats, both long- and short-haired;
but I especially love white Persians, and, in fact, at one time I owned
a ‘white cattery.’ I may say I still have some good specimens—namely,
‘Musefer,’ ‘Queen of the Pearls,’ and ‘Lily.’ I love the imported cats,
and always get them when I can. I have nine now at Kepwick. One of these
hails from Patagonia and one from Afghanistan. My cattery at one time
was twice again as full as now; but my losses have been great, and I
have reduced the numbers so that I may give more attention to the young
stock.

“It is only recently I have really gone in for orange Persians,
encouraged by the wins of ‘Puck’ at the Botanical. I love this beautiful
variety, but consider the queens of this breed very delicate. I have
owned some fine blues at different times, and purchased for £25 a
beautiful fellow, bred from ‘Beauty Boy,’ at the Crystal Palace many
years ago; but, alas! he came home only to die. Foremost amongst my
blues ranked my late Champion ‘Monarch,’ who held the Beresford Cup. Of
late years I have taken up silvers. My first Chinchilla was Champion
‘Nizam,’ ancestor of such cats as ‘St. Anthony’ and ‘Ameer.’ I bought
‘Nizam’ at the Crystal Palace in the early days of silvers, and he only
took second prize, because, I was assured, he was ‘too light’ for first.
I have a few Russians. I am most devoted to my pussies, and have tried
to persevere in breeding good stock in the face of very great
difficulties. I do not much care about running the risk of showing, but
a true fancier likes to support all well-arranged cat shows.”

[Illustration:

  MRS. MACKENZIE STEWART’S CATTERY.
]

Mrs. Collingwood, of Leighton Buzzard, is a most ardent lover of cats,
but it is only of recent years that she has been before the public as a
fancier and exhibitor. During this time, however, many have been the
honours showered on the lucky inmates of the Bossington cattery.

Mrs. Collingwood has great difficulty, so she tells me, in keeping her
number of cats down to about thirty! She likes these to be equally
divided between long- and short-haired pussies; so there are all sorts
and varieties. Blues have been great favourites, and Mrs. Collingwood is
on the Blue Persian Cat Society Committee. “Royal Bobs,” a big, massive
blue male, has done a lot of winning. He was bred by the Princess
Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein. His sister “Jill” also inhabits one of
the twelve cat houses distributed over five acres of the Bossington
grounds. These smaller houses are mostly on wheels. The larger houses
are kept for females and their families, and sometimes a corner of the
hay-loft is set apart for a nursing mother. The male cats have their
liberty during the morning, and then the females enjoy their afternoons
out. Mrs. Collingwood does not keep a stud cat, but there are neuter
pets that have their run about the house, and have their meals in a
corner of the dining-room. Mrs. Collingwood intends going in strongly
for smokes in the future; and although possessed of extremely good
short-haired cats, this ambitious fancier is desirous of breeding a
perfect silver tabby and a likewise equally perfect orange tabby.
“James” is a beautiful specimen of a silver tabby, and during this year
alone has won eight first prizes. At Altrincham he had the honour of
claiming championship and silver medal for the best cat in the show,
beating all the long-haired cats that generally carry off this coveted
prize; and at the Crystal Palace he was the admired of all admirers,
with a number of prize tickets covering his pen. I know many cat-loving
people, but I do not think I have ever seen greater devotion shown to
the feline race than is displayed at Bossington. Mrs. Collingwood is
ever ready to support cat shows by entries, by guaranteeing classes, and
by giving handsome prizes. Her cats are always shown in the pink of
condition, and it is seldom they appear in the pens unless their devoted
mistress is in attendance. Mrs. Collingwood kindly had the accompanying
photographs specially taken for this chapter.

Perhaps no name is better known in the cat world than that of Mrs.
Herring, of Lestock House, Lee, who has for nearly twenty years been a
prominent fancier and breeder of both long- and short-haired cats. Mrs.
Herring is a member of the National Cat Club Committee, and also belongs
to several of the specialist clubs, and is a member of the Cat Club and
the Northern Counties Cat Club. At all the principal shows this
enthusiastic lady is a prominent figure, and in the quantity and quality
of her exhibits she generally leads the way.

[Illustration:

  THE IMITATION TREE, MRS. CLARKE’S CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

At some of our large shows Mrs. Herring has entered from 25 to 30 cats;
and I have known and seen these arrive with their mistress in a large
omnibus or van. It is no light undertaking to prepare such a number of
pussies for show, and then to convey them carefully to the place of
exhibition.

Mrs. Herring started with a short-haired silver tabby called “Chin,” and
then turned her attention to long-haired brown tabbies; and although
every variety of cat, both long- and short-haired, may be said to have
existed from time to time in the Lestock catteries, yet it is with
tabbies perhaps that Mrs. Herring has chiefly made her name and fame.
Champion “Jimmy” was a superb specimen of a well-marked silver tabby,
and he carried everything before him in the show pen. He passed away in
1900, and I do not think we shall see his like again.

Amongst many celebrities in the feline world which have been born or
bred, or have found their habitation at the Lestock cattery, I may
mention “King Saul,” the noted tortoiseshell tom who still holds a
unique position at our shows, and won the Coronation Cup at the
Botanical show. “King Alfred,” a long-haired silver tabby, and “King
David,” a massive blue, are also well-known winners of the present day.
Mrs. Herring bred some sensational silver tabby long-haired kittens, and
two of these—“The Duchess” and “Princess Lestock”—were exhibited
respectively at the Westminster and Crystal Palace shows, and both were
speedily claimed at the high catalogue price. “Floriana,” a huge,
handsome long-haired brown tabby, who formerly belonged to Mrs. Herring,
has recently found a home in America. Siamese and Russian cats have not
been strangers to this cattery, where sometimes the number of inmates
has been over forty! Within the last few years Mrs. Herring has had to
reduce her stock, owing to the complaints of neighbours, who showed no
sympathy with the feline race, and some excellent, well-arranged cat
houses had to be removed, as they somewhat encroached on a neighbouring
garden wall. It must have been a trying time, and the weeding-out
process a most difficult one, for such a really warm-hearted and devoted
fancier as Mrs. Herring, whose pussies are all pets, and who personally
supervises her cattery at Lestock House.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CLARKE’S CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

It is not given to all, particularly in large towns, to have at their
disposal such an amount of waste space as their more fortunate brethren
of the country. I have therefore asked Mrs. S. F. Clarke, whose cat
photographs have been a delight to all our readers, to tell us how she
manages in her town residence at Louth. Here are her notes.


                BREEDING BLUE PERSIANS IN LIMITED SPACE.

“The successful breeding of blue Persian cats in a space so limited that
a grass run or green trees are things to be desired rather than
attained, requires nice judgment and great care. The space at my command
for cat keeping and breeding purposes is only a back yard, some 14 yards
long by 6 yards wide. This very limited space is further curtailed, on
one side, by my husband’s laboratory; while the cattery and its covered
run cut off another strip at the end, of 7 yards by 2 yards, reducing
the ground available for open air exercise and run to a patch about 18
feet by 12 feet, and a flagged portion some 21 feet by 6 feet.

“The space between the front of the laboratory and the flagged path
being occupied by a small independent house and covered run, is very
useful either for isolation or as a separate home for growing kittens.
The boundary wall is supported by 4-foot wire netting supported by
3-foot iron stanchions, thus allowing a free edge at the top of about 12
inches to be bent _inwards_ and left _loose_. This I find a sufficient
safeguard against my own cats getting out or strange cats getting in—a
very important matter at all times, but especially so at certain
periods, if breeds are to be kept pure and pussy not allowed to make her
own arrangements.

[Illustration:

  THE HON. MRS. McLAREN MORRISON.

  (_Photo: Esmé Collings, Hove._)
]

“If I were asked for the very best design for building, fitting up, and
furnishing a small cattery, I fear I could only answer that requirements
differ so in individual cases that it is impossible to draw a
hard-and-fast line that will meet all circumstances. Here is a photo of
my own (p. 107). It is the outcome of my personal experience, and
answers my requirements fairly well. It is a lean-to structure, about 7
yards long by 2 yards wide. The back and one end is formed by the north
and west boundary walls, while the east end joins the dwelling-house,
thus giving it a south aspect and complete shelter from north and east
winds. It is divided into two unequal portions, the smaller (east)
portion, 6 feet by 6 feet, forming the cat house proper; the longer
portion is the covered run. The front of the house is built of 1-inch
wood, with a lining of wood leaving an air space of about 3 inches
between the outer and inner surface of the front and dividing partition.
The roof is of corrugated iron, with a ceiling of wood about 4 inches
below. This arrangement of double walls and roof secures reasonable
warmth in the winter, but not quite sufficient coolness for mothers and
kittens during the height of the summer. So the roof is then covered
with a large white sheet hooked to the wall about 12 inches above the
roof and carried over a rail in front about the same height, and there
securely fastened. This arrangement insures not only a reasonable
temperature, but also a never-ending source of exercise and amusement
for both cats and kittens, some gambolling above, while others hide
beneath the sheet. An ordinary sun blind along the front completes the
summer arrangements. The front of the covered run is closed in with inch
mesh wire netting from ground to roof, fitted on the inside with
removable shutters, 18 inches high, and, above these, removable
window-sashes, closing in as desired. These are held in place with
turn-buttons, so they are easily removed or replaced in a couple of
minutes, a great convenience in wet or changeable weather, and proving
very cosy in the winter. The run is fitted with shelves for the cats to
lie upon, a table, sleeping boxes, earth pans, two chairs, and an
artificial tree covered with cork, which is a source of great pleasure
when the cats are confined by bad weather to the run. The open run
consists, as before mentioned, of a space about 18 feet by 12 feet; this
is covered with gravel (which in such limited space should be renewed at
least once a year), with the exception of a strip some 18 inches wide by
6 feet long on the west side, and two small corners on the east side,
_reserved for grass_. This grass reserve, which is most important for
the keeping of Persian cats in good health, is renovated every spring
with fresh lawn seed, and should either of the patches suffer unduly
from special attentions from the pets, it is wired in so as to protect
it until it recovers. By this plan my cats secure a supply of grass all
the year round. In the centre of the gravel space I have another
artificial tree (_see_ photo), about 8 feet high; it is as great a
favourite as the one in the run, and as it is hung with a loose cord, a
few ping-pong balls, etc., it is a never-ending source of fun and
frolic. To supplement the ground space, I place ladders leading to the
tops of the roofs of the outbuildings and cattery, which afford extra
space for exercise and a charming, interesting, and envious outlook for
the cats into my neighbour’s garden. It is surprising how soon the
kittens learn to climb up and enjoy the roofs.

“The sleeping house contains two wired-in runs going round two sides,
about 2 feet by 12 feet long, containing nest-box, earth pan, etc. These
are very useful for keeping a queen and litter of small kittens in.
There are also two smaller wired-in runs, 2 feet by 6 feet, fitted like
the larger ones, so that a cat may be shut up at any time if necessary.
The queens sleep in the smaller runs in the winter. Beneath the runs a
small cupboard is very useful for odds and ends of all kinds.

“In so limited a space cleanliness is of the utmost importance. The
house and runs should be swept out, and the earth pans should be
changed, washed, and disinfected _every day_. The question of supplying
dust for the pans may prove a source of anxiety to the breeder confined
to a limited space. In winter the dwelling-house fires supply about
sufficient ashes daily; in summer I am compelled to fall back upon
sawdust, which answers the purpose very well, only entailing a little
extra litter in the runs and more grooming of the coats. Whatever the
difficulty in this direction, it _must_ be overcome and the pans daily
changed. The floors and shelves, both in cat house and covered run,
should be washed with hot water containing some disinfectant at least
once a week, and the wired-in runs for cats and kittens thoroughly done
out with hot Sanitas distemper every time they are required for fresh
occupants. All bedding should be changed at least once a week, and as
little of it used as possible in summer. All plates, etc., used for food
must be thoroughly washed after each meal.

“In a space such as I have described my cats have to be kept, for they
are allowed into the dwelling-house by special invitation only; but they
each receive this treat at least once during the day.

“As to the number of queens: _two_ or _three_ are ample where space is
so limited. Where the fresh air run is a back yard, blues are the very
best of all colours, as with a daily grooming they always look clean and
presentable. In a space such as we are considering I would not on any
account recommend the keeping of a stud cat. The want of necessary
exercise would be cruelty to it; and the very limited surroundings
unfair to those who might wish for his services.

“It is of imperative importance that the queens you commence with be of
pure blue pedigree; if prize-winners so much the better, as their
kittens will sell more readily.

[Illustration:

  MRS. COLLINGWOOD AND “JAMES II.”

  (_Photo: Alice Hughes, Gower Street._)
]

“When mating, be sure that your queen is in perfect health, and do not
mate her too young—in my opinion twelve months is young enough, in the
interest of mother and family. See that the stud cat chosen be also of
the best possible strain. That he be a noted prize-winner is of less
importance than that he should be able to produce _kittens that will
win_. He must have size, bone, strength, soundness of colour, length of
coat, and good eyes. These are indispensable requirements if good blues
are to be produced. He should especially be strong in those points where
your queen may be somewhat weak; thus if the queen be deficient in
length of coat or frill, or in colour, shape, or boldness of eye, see
that the selected stud cat excels in those points, and so, as far as
possible, correct and balance the points required between the parents.
One must not expect to find perfection in any one cat. By using care,
judgment, and forethought in mating our pets, we shall go a good way
towards establishing in our strain the points necessary to build up the
perfect blue Persian.

“All my kittens have been born in a Japanese dress basket, with the lid
standing on its side and the bottom half thrust into it cradlewise. The
outside of the basket proper is trimmed with a flounce, which helps to
keep out draughts; over the top is thrown a small cloth table-cover,
which covers, at will, the whole or part of the opening, thus making the
little one’s house a pretty thing to look at. When any one of my queens
is about to have a family I ‘flee-flea’ her, which I consider most
essential for the future comfort of both mother and kittens; then I
bring her into the house three or four days before the expected event.
For the time being the expectant mother becomes the house cat. I let her
find her own bed, which has already been prepared for her, by carefully
closing all other places she might be likely otherwise to choose. When
her time comes I stay with her during her trouble; but _never interfere_
unless it is absolutely necessary.

“A few encouraging words, and the fact that one is near, seems to give
her comfort. If a queen shews much exhaustion, I give a little Brand’s
Essence with a few drops of brandy in a spoon; but if all goes smoothly
I let well alone. There is no need to press food upon the mother; she
will not require it until some time after the births are complete. A
little warm milk or gruel offered between the births may sometimes prove
a comfort; but many queens will not touch it. For about three weeks,
that is to say until the little ones creep out of their beds, I keep the
queen and her family in the dwelling-house with me, changing her bed
every other day. After the first week I make it a rule to handle the
kittens at least once a day, and if the queen has more than three to
bring up I begin, at two weeks old, feeding them three times a day with
a few _drops_ of warm sweetened milk from a spoon, increasing the
quantity very gradually as they grow. I never wake the kittens to feed
them—sleep is as necessary as food; but always arrange to feed them just
after the little ones wake; they are then hungry, and that is the best
time to assist and relieve the mother. It is surprising how soon the
kits enjoy being fed and look out for the friendly spoon.

“As soon as the little ones can get out of their bed they must be
introduced to a shallow tin filled with ashes or earth. I prefer ashes
to sawdust for very little kittens, and I find at a month old they will
regularly use it. This early lesson in cleanliness is invaluable, as
later on, with reasonable care, they never forget it. When the kittens
are from three weeks to a month old I remove them, with the mother (or
foster-mother), to their own little run in the cattery, where I visit
them three or four times a day. When they grow stronger, and as early as
the weather will permit, they are introduced to the open-air run, the
sunshine, and the other cats.

“I begin the grooming as early as possible, daily brushing the little
things in their bed or on my lap; it improves the fur, and the more they
are groomed the sooner they get to like and enjoy it. When grooming
kittens two or three months old, I generally have three or four trying
to get under the brush at the same time, endeavouring to push the
favoured one out of the way. I am strongly of opinion that the frequent
handling of kittens does not do them any harm, but does tend to improve
their temper and increase their gentleness. When I have callers the
kittens are invariably fetched, introduced to, and fondled by the
visitors, so that they become not the least afraid of strangers; as a
result, when they go to new homes they come out of their basket without
fear, making themselves immediately at home, much to the comfort of
themselves and their new owners.

“The best time to dispose of kittens is at about eight weeks old.
Breeders with limited space _must_ sell young and quickly, keeping only
the one or two of the season they may either wish to show or turn into
next year’s brood queens. To get overcrowded is to court disease and
disappointment, so sell early for the best price you can get; but sell
you must, even if the price does not seem anything approaching the true
value of the kittens. The first loss will be the known loss—most
certainly far less than that involved in the risk of keeping one or two
more kittens than your space should accommodate.”

[Illustration:

  A MORNING MEAL AT BOSSINGTON.

  (_Photo: A. J. Anderson & Co., Luton._)
]




[Illustration:

  BLACK PERSIAN “JOHNNIE FAWE” OWNED BY DR. ROPER.

  (_Photo: Lavender, Bromley._)
]




                              CHAPTER IX.
                            BLACK PERSIANS.


Never have these truly handsome cats received the amount of admiration
and attention which they deserve. There are fewer breeders of black
Persians than of any other variety, the two most noted fanciers being
Dr. Roper and Mr. Robert Little. Both of these gentlemen have owned and
exhibited very handsome specimens; Miss Kirkpatrick has also bred some
lovely black kittens. The entries in the black classes at our shows are
almost invariably the smallest; but as a specialist club for
black-and-white Persians has been started, it is hoped more
encouragement will be given to the breeders of these handsome
self-coloured cats.

As in the other self-coloured cats, the chief point is absolute
uniformity of colour throughout. It is fatal for a black cat to have a
brown, rusty tinge; it should be a glossy jet black, betraying no bands
or bars in the full light, and having no under-coat of a lighter shade,
and, above all, no spot or tuft of white hairs on the throat. This
latter is a very common fault amongst black cats, and it is one which
takes away enormously from the value of the specimen, for either show or
breeding purposes. In some other varieties of Persian cats two, or even
three, colours for eyes are permissible; but a really good black cat
must have the full round eyes of deep orange, and very attractive are
these gleaming orbs, shining forth from their dense black surroundings.
When black cats are changing their coats they often present a very rusty
appearance, and newly born kittens are sometimes like balls of brown
fluff. These, however, frequently grow up the very best-coloured blacks.
This breed is very strong and healthy, and often grow into large,
massive cats. A tortoiseshell female is a splendid mate for a black
male, and some of the most noted blacks have been bred in this way. Two
brown tabbies will generally produce one, if not more, good blacks in a
litter.

Black cats have been found very useful to breeders of silver tabbies and
smokes for this reason—that these two breeds require to have their
markings and colourings intensified. That is, a silver tabby with dark
grey markings is not a true type, and a smoke with an upper coat of
cinder colour does not represent the true smoke. Therefore the
introduction of a black cross is often a great advantage to these
breeds. There is certainly not much demand for black kittens, and we
never hear of very high prices being asked or given for these, or,
indeed, for full-grown cats. But as “every dog has his day,” so,
perhaps, there is a good time coming for blacks; and certainly beginners
in the fancy might do worse than to provide themselves with a thoroughly
good black queen, for, anyhow, in exhibiting the chance of honours is
very much greater than when competing in classes in which there are so
many entries, as in the case of blues and silvers.

For very obvious reasons black cats are the very best animals for those
living in London or near large towns. They can never present a dirty
appearance, and, therefore, in this particular they will always score
over the whites, creams, and silvers. To keep their coats glossy and
bright black cats should be well brushed and groomed. They will repay
for this care and attention. Our American cousins call self-coloured
cats “solid,” and as applied to blacks this is especially expressive,
for a black should not have a suspicion of any other colour than a dense
black. If, when the coat is blown apart, a shading of grey or blue is
seen it is a great defect. The nose should be black, and the pads of the
feet also.

[Illustration:

  CHAMPION “MENELIK III.” (AMERICAN).

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. BOND, WASHINGTON.
]

I do not remember having seen or heard of an imported Persian black cat.
In an article on imported cats in _Our Cats_ the writer (whose name is
not given) says:—“White cats with blue eyes are not often to be obtained
from abroad, neither are the blacks warranted to possess the amber eyes
voted correct by up-to-date cattists. I know of a black queen straight
from the land of cats and the palace of the Shah himself; it had the
most glorious emerald eyes it is possible to imagine—as different from
the ordinary run of green as flaming amber is from faded yellow. This
cat, a Persian among Persians, had a coat as black as the proverbial
jet—perfectly black throughout—long and straight, of fine, silky
texture, but not giving one the impression of massiveness that is such a
prominent, feature of the type of imported cat. Moderate in size,
slightly built, with an expression so foreign that it amounted to
weirdness, this cat could with a dash of imagination have been worked up
into the incarnation of a spirit, a soothsayer, the veiled beauty of a
harem, a witch, snake charmer—what you choose; but always remain
something far apart from prosaic England, something tinged with romance
and the picturesqueness of the mystical East. This black cat was
undoubtedly a typical Persian.”

As there is such a dearth of good black cats in England, it is a pity
some enterprising breeder does not try to import a really splendid
specimen, which might bring luck to himself and the fancy.

In looking back to the old catalogues of Crystal Palace shows, I find
the same scarcity of blacks exhibited as at the present day. In 1886 the
black male class is marked “no entry,” and in 1889 Mrs. H. Warner (now
the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison) makes the sole and only entry of “Imp”
in the black class. It was in the following year, however, that this
same well-known lady fancier exhibited “Satan,” a black that was never
beaten whilst it lived. It was the most remarkable of unapproachable
excellence I can remember—a veritable triton among minnows.

In many of the accounts of our largest shows I remark such paragraphs as
these: “Good blacks with orange eyes were conspicuous by their absence.”
Or again: “The black classes, as usual, were poorly filled.” It is,
therefore, high time that this beautiful breed should receive more
attention at the hands of fanciers, and that not only beginners but
those who are well known in the cat world should take up blacks, and, as
the expression goes, “run them for all they are worth.” At present Dr.
Roper’s and Mr. R. Little’s black Persians have it all their own way.
Mrs. Lenty Collins frequently has a look in with her wonderful big-eyed
“Forest Beauty,” and Mrs. Crowther, in the North, is faithful to this
her favourite breed of cats; but we want some more dusky beauties to
swell the ranks of black Persians.

As everyone knows, a vast deal of superstition is connected with a black
cat. This is what Harrison Weir has to say on the subject:—“It is often
said, ‘What’s in a name?’ The object, whatever it is, by any other would
be the same; and yet there is much in a name. But this is not the
question at issue, which is that of colour. Why should a _black_ cat be
thought so widely different from all others by the foolish, unthinking,
and ignorant? Why, simply on account of its colour being black, should
it have ascribed to it a numberless variety of bad omens, besides having
certain necromantic power? In Germany, for instance, black cats are kept
away from children as omens of evil; and if a black cat appeared in the
room of one lying ill, it was said to portend death. To meet a black cat
in the twilight was held unlucky. In the ‘good old times’ a black cat
was generally the only colour that was favoured by men reported to be
wizards, and black cats were said to be the constant companions of
witches; and in such horror and detestation were they then held that
when the unfortunate creatures were ill-treated, drowned, or even
burned, very frequently, we are told, their cats suffered martyrdom at
the same time. It is possible that one of the reasons for such wild,
savage superstition may have arisen from the fact of the larger amount
of electricity to be found by friction in the coat of the black cat than
of any other; experiments prove there is but very little either in that
of the white or the red tabby cat. Be this as it may, still the fact
remains that, for some reason or other, the black cat is held by the
prejudiced ignorant as an animal most foul and detestable, and wonderful
stories are related of their actions in the dead of the night during
thunderstorms. Yet, as far as I can discover, there appears little
difference either of temper or habit in the black cat distinct from that
of any other colour, though it is maintained by many even to this day
that black cats are far more vicious and spiteful, and of higher
courage, and this last I admit. Still, when a black cat is enraged and
its coat and tail are well ‘set up,’ its form distended, its round,
bright, orange eye all aglow with anger, it certainly presents to even
the most impartial observer, to say the least of it, a most ‘uncanny’
appearance. But, for all this, their admirers are by no means few; and,
to my thinking, a jet-black cat, fine and glossy in fur and elegantly
formed, certainly has its attractions.”

But although black cats are supposed to be harbingers of evil under some
conditions, yet in others they are credited with miraculous healing
powers. In Cornwall, sore eyes in children are said to be cured by
passing the tail of a black cat nine times over the part affected; and
in some parts of the country the presence in the house of a black cat is
both an antidote and a cure for epilepsy.

[Illustration:

  KITTEN BRED BY MISS KIRKPATRICK.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

I think that most cat fanciers are inclined to believe in the possible
luck that a stray black cat may bring them, and perhaps be more inclined
to take in a stranger of this particular breed than one of another
colour.

There is an old Scotch proverb that says:

                “Whenever the cat o’ the house is black,
                The lasses o’ lovers will have no lack.”

The celebrated “Fawe” strain of black Persians is well known in the
fancy. Dr. Roper has sent me some notes on his famous prize-winning
cats, together with some useful information regarding the breed with
which his name has become associated:—

“For many years black Persians were a most popular breed; but, like
fashions, for the time being other colours, I regret to see, are
obtaining more notice from fanciers. For years I plodded away to breed
what I considered a perfect black Persian; at last my labours were
crowned with success. What can equal a richly coloured, heavily coated,
deep orange-eyed black?

“In breeding blacks, like any other colour, it is essential you should
procure the best of stock, and be prepared to give a fair sum for such,
otherwise you are almost sure to be disappointed in your results, and,
maybe, retire as a fancier of this colour and try some other; but you
will meet with the same fate if you hold the same views as to expense. A
black Persian should be perfect in colour, with absence of white hairs,
cobby in shape, short in leg, tail bushy and not too long, eyes large
and deep orange, a good broad head, ears short with tufts and well set
apart, short face, coat long and silky.

“Having stated the points, I will now give my experience of breeding.

[Illustration:

  MRS. LITTLE’S BLACK PERSIAN “COLLEEN.”

  (_Photo: D. Nottle, Beckenham._)
]

“In my opinion, it is most important the sire should be a black, and one
of his parents a black, whatever colour the queen is. I have had
greatest success in breeding from a black sire and a tortoiseshell
queen. Through this cross you may get either blacks or tortoiseshells.
As an instance I quote ‘Johnnie Fawe’ (black) and Champion ‘Dainty
Diana’ (tortoiseshell). From these I have bred many good blacks, amongst
them ‘Dick Fawe,’ ‘Lady Victoria,’ and other good ones; also good
tortoiseshells, three of them having taken championships. Blacks may
also be bred from a black and a blue, or two blacks—in this case, cross
the sire with one of his progeny, which I have found very successful. I
admit there are other ways of breeding blacks, but in my experience the
three ways I have suggested have proved to be the most satisfactory.

“In breeding, to be sure of success so far as the eyes are concerned, if
possible it is better that both parents should have orange eyes, the
deeper the better; but it is most essential the sire should have good
orange eyes. Notwithstanding the queen’s eyes being light amber, by
crossing with a good orange-eyed sire the kittens are very likely to
have good-coloured eyes, but not _vice versâ_. As an instance, I once
purchased a very handsome black queen, perfect in all points with the
exception of the eyes, which were very light amber. I mated her to ‘Dick
Fawe,’ who had the deepest orange eyes I have yet seen in a black; the
kittens developed orange eyes. I have mated in the opposite way, and the
result has been unsatisfactory so far as the eyes have been concerned,
and if breeding for show the colour of the eyes is most important. The
late Mr. Welburn, a well-known judge, once said in one of his reviews of
blacks at a large show (I think it was the Crystal Palace), ‘I scarcely
think that eyes alone should carry an award, yet it is always best to
uphold the desired properties so hard to obtain.’

[Illustration:

  THE CAROL SINGERS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

“Having bred a litter of black kittens, it is unwise to make up your
mind what colour they are going to be until they have attained the age
of six months. I remember once giving away a kitten at three months old
which I called iron grey and thought would or could never be black. Six
months after I saw my friend, who thanked me very much for the lovely
black kitten. Two months after seeing him I saw the cat: there were no
white hairs, and the colour was a perfect black. This last Richmond show
I showed a black kitten, aged seven months; it took a first, a second,
and a special. At three months old I thought it was going to be a smoke.
It was claimed by the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison. I have a kitten now,
aged three months, perfectly bronze in colour and a grey frill. I have
no doubt at seven months old it will be a perfect black. I have given
these illustrations in order that those who are thinking of going in for
blacks should not give up all hope of the kittens becoming black until
the age I have stated.

“I breed my kittens from January to July, and find they do much better
in the catteries, all of mine being separate; and I find Spratt’s
movable runs most useful. In showing blocks they should be brushed and
rubbed with a Selvyt cloth daily one month previously and kept free of
matted hair. The application of Brilliantine or American Bay Rum in
small quantity brushed on gives a perfect gloss to their coats.”

[Illustration:

  BLACK-AND-WHITE PERSIAN CATS.
]




                               CHAPTER X.
                            WHITE PERSIANS.


A great change has taken place of late years in the quantity and quality
of these beautiful cats, for whereas formerly blue eyes were considered
quite a rarity, now it is seldom we see any yellow-eyed white cats
exhibited at our principal shows. The most perfect type of a white
Persian is assuredly to be found amongst the imported cats; there is a
certain beauty of form and silkiness of fur which is not possessed by
the specimens bred in this country. They are also generally
distinguished by unusually long coats, round heads, tiny ears, and
wonderful toe tufts.

[Illustration:

  “JUNGFRAU,” SIRE AND GRANDSIRE OF MANY AMERICAN WINNERS.

  (_Photo: W. F. Arnold, Oak Park, Ill._)
]

One of the most lovely white imported cats was exhibited by Lady Marcus
Beresford at the Westminster Cat Club Show in 1900. The best judges
declared that there was not a fault to find with “Nourmahal,” but her
career was a short one. These imported cats are often of a rather savage
disposition, and, although they can be sweet-tempered enough with human
beings, they are extremely fiery with their fellows. There are two
points peculiar to white cats—they are frequently stone deaf, and they
very often have odd-coloured eyes. Certainly the deafness is a drawback,
and in selecting a white cat care should be taken to ascertain if the
specimen is possessed of sound hearing. Needless to say, there are many
ways of arriving at the solution of what is really a mysterious
dispensation of Providence, for why should one particular breed of the
feline race be so constantly minus this useful sense? Then, again, as
regards the quaint arrangement of different-coloured eyes. One might not
be so surprised if the eyes of white cats were sometimes pink, for their
noses are pink, and the cushions of their feet, and, as in human beings,
we might expect to have albinos amongst cats, namely white with pink
eyes; but Harrison Weir states he has never seen pinkeyed whites,
although it has been asserted that they exist. This peculiarity,
however, of odd eyes seems only to be found in white cats, the two
colours being blue and yellow. Occasionally white cats have wonderful
seagreen eyes; and, although these are decidedly very uncommon, no
colour is so completely in accord with the purity of the coat as eyes of
heavenly blue. The tone should be not so much of a sapphire as of the
deep forget-me-not blue. One of the drawbacks to white Persians is the
difficulty of keeping them in spotlessly clean condition. This is
absolutely impossible if they are living in or near a town, and
certainly a white cat soiled is a white cat spoiled.

As regards the mating of blue-eyed white cats, I have been told by
experienced breeders of this variety that kittens with blue eyes are
just as frequently bred from odd-eyed parents, or, at least, when one of
the parents has different-coloured eyes. It is easy to tell whether the
baby blue eyes are likely to retain their colour or turn yellow. If at
about three weeks or a month old the blue becomes tinted with green,
then surely but sadly may we make up our minds that these kittens have
not a distinguished career before them, for they will see and be seen
with yellow eyes. It is a pity to try mating white cats with any other
variety, as broken-coloured cats will probably be the result. It
frequently happens that white kittens, when quite young, have smudges of
grey on their heads; these gradually disappear. In America white cats
seem prime favourites, and the demand exceeds the supply for importation
of white Persians with blue eyes. At the last Beresford Cat Club Show
the entries in the white classes were very large. The classification
included and provided for golden and blue-eyed whites, and these were
subdivided according to sex, and all the classes were well filled. Mrs.
Clinton Locke’s “Lord Gwynne” is a noted white stud cat on the other
side of the water, as is also Mrs. Colbourn’s “Paris.”

The devotees of the white cat in our own country are not many in number.
I may mention Mrs. Finnie Young and Miss Hunt, who are perhaps the most
successful breeders of whites in Scotland; and in the south we have Mrs.
Pettit, whose tribe of blue-eyed whites I had recently the pleasure of
seeing. No more lovely specimens could be imagined, and I counted more
than a dozen long-coated, full-grown, bonnie blue-eyed beauties, walking
about in the woods surrounding Mrs. Pettit’s dwelling place near St.
Leonards-on-Sea. The illustration shows Mrs. Pettit surrounded by eight
of her pretty white pussies. Mrs. Westlake, Mrs. Nott, Miss White
Atkins, and Miss Kerswill are all successful and enthusiastic breeders
of white Persians.

[Illustration:

  MRS. McLAREN’s WHITE PERSIAN “LADYSMITH.”

  (_Photo: C. Reid Wishaw._)
]

Several well-known fanciers keep one white cat amongst their flock. I
may mention the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, the owner of “Musafer,” a
famous imported puss, and Lady Decies, the former possessor of “Powder
Puff,” who has recently been presented to H.H. Princess Victoria of
Schleswig-Holstein. There is always a keen demand for white kittens,
either as pretty pets or, if with correct coloured eyes, for breeding
purposes, and, doubtless, when more encouragement is given to this
beautiful variety, there will be an increase of fanciers of the white
cat, whose praises have been sung in fairy tales, nursery rhymes, and by
novelists who have a weakness for describing interiors with a beautiful
white Persian cat reclining on the hearthrug.

[Illustration:

  MRS. PETTIT WITH HER WHITE PERSIANS.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

I am indebted for the following notes on white Persians to Miss M. Hunt,
whose beautiful white cat “Crystal” appeared on an earlier page, and by
an unfortunate mistake was stated to be the property of Mrs. Finnie
Young:—

“The blue-eyed white Persian is, I consider, one of the most interesting
to breed, and, in my experience, no more delicate or difficult to rear
than any other Persian.

“I have had them now for nearly four years, and, I think I may say, with
a good deal of success. I bought ‘Crystal’ in 1898, when four months
old, and she certainly has been a good investment. Out of the sixteen
white kittens she has had, ten of them have been blue-eyed.

“The very best kitten I owned was never exhibited; he went to Mrs.
Champion, who considered him the best and healthiest kitten for his age
she had ever seen. Unfortunately, he died suddenly shortly after she had
him. He was by Champion ‘White Friar’ _ex_ ‘Crystal,’ and was one of the
same litter as ‘Jovial Monk,’ which did so much winning for Miss Ward,
who purchased him from me at the Crystal Palace, where he took first.
‘Crystal’ herself has only once been beaten by a white cat, and that had
not even blue eyes; but she was in splendid coat, and ‘Crystal’ was
quite out of coat. Most judges are agreed, I think, that ‘Crystal’ is
the best blue-eyed white female in the country.

“The colour of the eyes of white kits can be told much earlier than in
any other colour; some I can tell as soon as they are open, others I am
not quite sure of till they are about a fortnight old. The eyes are
generally bright blue from the beginning, without a shade of kitten grey
in them. I do not think that both parents having blue eyes makes much
difference to the number of blue-eyed kits in the litter. If one parent
is blue-eyed and the other odd-eyed the result is often just as good. I
know of a green-eyed queen which had a litter of three by Champion
‘White Friar’—all were blue-eyed.

“As to deafness, I cannot account for it at all, as it often appears,
though both parents have perfect hearing.”

“Since Mrs. Finnie Young and I purchased ‘White Friar’ in 1900, whites
have become much more plentiful in Scotland, and the competition is now
very keen indeed up North. ‘White Friar’ has had a very successful
career since he came into our hands, both as sire and on the show bench,
and can still hold his own against all comers. He has won sixteen first
prizes since 1900, besides championships and numerous specials.”

Mrs. Champion, whose name is well known in “catty” circles, and who has
now left these shores for America, did a great deal to establish a
thoroughly good strain of white blue-eyed Persians. Her celebrated
“White Friar” (now in the possession of Mrs. Finnie Young and Miss Hunt)
is justly considered the finest male specimen in the fancy. Certainly he
could only have been beaten by his son “White Tsar,” bred by Mrs.
Champion from her “White Witch.” This cat, which assuredly would have
had a notable career, was sold by Mrs. Champion for £20 to Mrs.
Colbourn, in America. He arrived in poor condition and died shortly
afterwards. I remember seeing an absolutely perfect white Persian kitten
at Mrs. Champion’s. It was by “White Friar” ex “Crystal.” He had
startling deep blue eyes, tiny ears, and broad, round head, and at nine
weeks old his coat measured nearly three inches across. Alas! though
healthy and strong, this proved too perfect a specimen for this world,
and “Crystal Friar” succumbed to the epidemic of gastritis then raging
amongst our feline pets. Referring back to celebrated white Persian cats
of the past, I well recollect the marvellous size and splendid coat of
Mrs. Lee’s “Masher,” who took the cat world by storm when exhibited at
the Crystal Palace in 1890. This enthusiastic fancier paid £21 for
“Masher,” whose show career was shortened by an accident. This cat was
remarkable in those days, if only for his grand blue eyes.

[Illustration:

  “CRYSTAL.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS M. HUNT.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

The well-known breeder and judge Mr. A. A. Clarke, whose name is more
closely connected with blue Persians, once owned a famous female called
“Miss Whitey.” I remember that this really remarkable cat was exhibited
in 1887 at the Crystal Palace, and again in the following year, when at
four years old she took first prize and silver medal in a strong class
of nine females. It seems to me that these cats, as I recollect them,
appeared half as large again as the present-day champion winning whites;
but whether this was in consequence of more profuse coat or a generally
bigger build of animal I cannot at this distance of time pretend to
determine.

Amongst the well-known prize-winners and stud white Persian cats of the
present day I may mention Miss White Atkin’s massive-limbed “White
Knight,” whose broad skull is especially remarkable in a show pen, and
commends itself to the notice of the judge. Miss Harper’s “Blue-eyed
Wanderer” has great quality and lovely texture of coat. He was in truth
a wanderer in the streets of a London suburb, and, although labelled
“breeder and pedigree unknown,” he has almost always held his own in the
white classes at our largest shows. Mrs. Westlake, Mrs. Pettit, Mrs.
Finnie, and Miss Hunt are all possessed of imported white cats, which
have proved worthy ancestors of many prize-winning kittens. There have
not been any very notable female white cats exhibited since the
appearance of Lady Marcus Beresford’s “Nourmahal,” with the exception of
Miss M. Hunt’s “Crystal” and Mrs. Pettit’s most lovely “Piquante Pearl,”
bred by her from her stud cat “King of the Pearls” and “Beautiful
Pearl.” This cat is as near perfection as possible, and has carried off
highest honours whenever exhibited. Mrs. Pettit began breeding white
Persians in 1896, and has kept faithful to this breed ever since. This
enthusiastic breeder always accompanies her exhibits, and her precious
Pearls are never seen at the smaller mixed shows. I have always heard
that white kittens are difficult to rear, and Mrs. Pettit, who should be
well qualified to give her testimony on this point, says: “Without a
doubt blue-eyed white Persians are the most delicate cats in existence.”
A well-known authority on cats, writing to one of the cat papers, says:
“What a change has taken place in our white classes, long- and
short-haired! A few years ago white cats with green or yellow eyes
frequently were prize-winners, and a blue-eyed white was looked upon as
a rarity. Now blue eyes have it all their own way, and judges are
becoming more and more exacting as to the depth of tone and quality of
the blue tint. If we could obtain a white Persian with the glorious eye
of the Siamese, it would be a treasure indeed.”

A gentleman who has lived for ten years in Assam says that he never saw
in that part of India any long-haired cats except blue-eyed whites. He
also gives an amusing account of the usual way of obtaining a cat of
this variety for a pet. It is as follows:—“You give instructions to a
native, who offers to procure you one at a certain price, but gives you
no idea where or how he means to procure it. In about a week’s time he
appears with the cat and claims the money. Things progress favourably
with your new possession for a time, but suddenly and unaccountably your
puss disappears. You are calling on some friend or acquaintance, and, to
your surprise and astonishment, there on the armchair lies, curled up,
your cat! Thus it will be seen that the wily native makes a small income
out of one cat, by stealing or enticing it away from the original
purchaser and calmly re-selling it to one of the neighbours.”

Mrs. Clinton Locke, the president of the Beresford Cat Club, has owned
some beautiful white Persians which she has imported from time to time.
This lady writes thus to _Our Cats_:—“The first white Persian I ever
owned was brought to me many years ago from Persia by a distinguished
traveller, and its eyes were amber, showing that the white cats brought
from their native land have not always blue eyes. The descendants of
this cat, mated to both amber and blue-eyed cats, have thrown blue eyes.
Two odd-eyed cats have also given blue-eyed kittens; but a pair of
blue-eyed cats has by no means always thrown blue eyes with every kitten
in the litter.”

[Illustration:

  “WHITE BUTTERFLY.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS WHITE ATKINS.

  (_Photo: E. E. Lipputt, Leamington._)
]

One of our most persistent and consistent breeders and fanciers of white
Persians is Mrs. Westlake, and therefore I am glad to be able to put
forward a few of her experiences as to the peculiarities of the breed.

Mrs. Westlake, writing from Camden Town, says:—

“My acquaintance with white Persian cats began some years ago, when I
imported a white female as a pet. I was so delighted with her that,
although for a London resident white cats would seem the least
desirable, I decided to import two blue-eyed whites for breeding
purposes. It was a litter from these two cats that tempted me to take up
exhibiting. This litter consisted of _all_ blue-eyed kittens, the tone
of the blue being exceptionally deep. Since then I have, of course,
often had a different tale to tell, and odd-eyed kittens have sometimes
predominated. This curious freak of nature connected with white cats
seems unaccountable. The two colours are generally yellow and blue, but
I have seen green and blue. I have also remarked on the very brilliant
tone of the one blue eye.

“There is a popular belief that almost all blue-eyed cats are deaf. All
I can say is that I have never had a blue-eyed white that was deaf. I
have, however, often come across those that were stone deaf, and others
with defective hearing. Again an unaccountable freak.

“White Persian cats have been declared to be the most difficult to breed
and delicate to rear. My opinion is that the delicacy is much more in
their coats than their constitutions; that is, of course, in comparison
with other foreign varieties, none of which are as hardy as the British.

[Illustration:

  IMPORTED BLUE-EYED TOM, “MUSAFER.”

  (_Photo: V. R. Clarke, Thirsk._)
]

“A few remarks as to the cleansing of white cats may be useful. As a
dweller in London, I need scarcely say that unless I occasionally gave
personal attention to my pussies they would not always be in the show
condition that I would desire. Some fanciers wash their white Persians,
but I have come to the conclusion that this treatment tends to coarsen
the soft silkiness of the fur; and therefore, for this reason, and also
because there is a risk of cats catching cold, especially in winter, I
advocate dry cleaning, and suggest the use of Pears’ white precipitated
fuller’s earth. One plan is to place the cat on a large sheet or towel,
mix a little ammonia in warm water, dip your hands in this, and pass
them over and over the fur, letting it become thoroughly moistened but
not wet. Then well sprinkle the coat with the powder, and by keeping the
animal in front of the fire the fur will soon become quite dry. Then rub
with a soft towel, and finally brush thoroughly with a clean and not too
hard brush. Your efforts will be rewarded with success, and though puss
may be considerably bored during the process, she will not resent it so
much as a tubbing. I find that white females are far more diligent as
regards their toilet than the males, who seem always to have more of the
Eastern languor and indolence in their nature. I have remarked—and no
doubt it is more noticeable in the white breed—that as soon as young
kittens are beyond their mother’s control they exhibit a marked
antipathy to keeping their coats in anything like decent condition.
Sometimes they will make a feeble attempt at washing themselves; but
something will excite their attention, and off they will go, or perhaps
in sheer fatigue will fall asleep during the toilet. Thus white kittens
will very soon present a most unkempt appearance, and the poor mother
gazes sadly at them as though the cares of a family were too much for
her, and she no longer wishes to own what was once her pride and joy—a
spotless litter!

“It has been stated that white cats are wanting in expression, probably
because of the lack of markings to give character to the face; but
breeders of whites will nevertheless agree with me that they have even
greater force of expression, not being assisted by any markings. I have
found white cats to be most affectionate, and very conservative in their
tastes. I have owned some white Persians with light seagreen eyes, and
although these are not correct, yet I must say they were strikingly
beautiful and very uncommon. I have been offered high prices by
Americans and others for my imported white female, but my ‘blue-eyed
darling’ will, I think, end her days with her devoted mistress in dear,
dirty, old London.”




                              CHAPTER XI.
                             BLUE PERSIANS.


A famous publisher once gave the following advice to a young author:
“Never take it for granted that your readers have any previous knowledge
of your subject, but credit them with ordinary intelligence.” To all
feline fanciers the heading of this chapter is a familiar household
term, but to novices in the cat world and to outsiders the term “blue”
as applied to a cat may sound rather absurd. Truth to tell, the name is
misleading, and yet the same is used in describing certain breeds of
domestic animals, such as dogs, rabbits, etc. There is also a fur much
used for trimmings of ladies’ jackets, etc., called blue fox, and this
is very much akin to the colour and texture of the fur of the blue
Persian cat, which, however, varies in tone from a dark slate to a pale
lilac-blue.

[Illustration:

  JACK AND

  (_Photo: H. Warschkarski, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

It is over twenty years ago since I exhibited the first “blues” at the
Crystal Palace Cat Show, and they created quite a sensation, for no one
seemed to have seen any cats of this peculiar shade before. Some called
them grey or lilac, and others London smoke or slate colour. One of my
pair of blue kittens was quickly claimed at catalogue price, and I
brought in the other, fearing I should lose her also. She, in her turn,
became the mother of many celebrated blues. In those early days of the
fancy blue Persians were entered in the “any other variety” class, and
most of the specimens exhibited were in reality blue tabbies. For some
years this state of things continued; but Mr. A. A. Clarke, so well
known as one of the pioneers of the National Cat Club, and as a breeder,
exhibitor, and judge, agitated with other fanciers, myself amongst the
number, to obtain a better classification for the self-coloured blues,
and in 1889 the schedule at the Crystal Palace Show contained a class
for “Blue—self-coloured without white.” For some time this breed of cats
was termed “self blues,” in contradistinction to the many blues with
tabby markings which were formerly so very common in the fancy.

In 1890 it was decided to divide the sexes in the blue cat classes, and
let the kittens compete with black-and-white. The result was an entry of
eight in each class, my famous “Beauty Boy” taking first in the male,
and Mrs. H. B. Thompson’s celebrated “Winks” first in the female
division. At Brighton in the same year the “self-blue” class was adopted
with success.

[Illustration:

  JILL.

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS BENNETT.

  (_Photo: H. Warschkarski, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

The famous blue stud cats of that period were Mr. A. A. Clarke’s
“Turco,” Miss Bray’s “Glaucus,” and my own “Beauty Boy.” Amongst other
exhibitors of blues about this time I may mention Mrs. Warner (now the
Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison), Mrs. Vallance, Mrs. Wells, Mrs. Hunt, Mrs.
H. B. Thompson, Mrs. Ellerton, and Miss F. Moore. In 1891 blues came
very much to the fore, and the entries at the Crystal Palace numbered 15
males and 17 females. At Cruft’s Show in the year 1894 a grand blue,
called “Wooloomooloo,” was exhibited by Mrs. W. R. Hawkins, and this cat
became one of the most famous of stud cats. Many of the finest blues of
to-day are descended from this noted sire. Mrs. H. B. Thompson’s “Don
Juan” was for many years greatly in request as a stud cat, and many
beautiful blues claim him as their ancestor.

A little later “Moko” became famous as the sire of a sensational kitten
exhibited by Mr. C. W. Witt at the Westminster Show of 1900. “Moko” was
sold at a high figure to Mrs. Barnett, and is now in the possession of
Mrs. Singleton, of Yeovil. Mr. A. A. Clarke was considered the best
judge of this variety, and at the Palace and Brighton he did much to
encourage the breed by offering handsome special prizes in the blue
classes.

It is true that the prize-winning cats of ten and fifteen years ago
would have had but a poor chance in the present-day competitions,
chiefly for the reason that cats of the past could look at a judge with
bright green eyes and yet be awarded the highest honours. _Nous avons
changé tout cela_, and now a blue cat without the much to-be-desired
orange eyes fetches but a small price, and is at a great disadvantage in
the show pen. An up-to-date judge may, however, be led into giving too
great a prominence to this point and thus sacrifice soundness of colour,
shape, and form. Then, again, I remember when a white spot on the throat
of a blue Persian was not considered a serious defect; now a few
straggling white hairs will cause anguish to the owner, and a judge will
promptly put down the specimen for this blemish.

Blue cats with white spots used to be relegated to the “any other
colour” class; but recently both the National Cat Club and the Cat Club
have wisely decided that such cats should be judged in their own
classes. However, I think that owners of these specimens would do well
to keep them away from the show bench, where the competition in blues is
now too keen to give any chance for defective cats to have a look in. I
may mention that the nose of a blue Persian is a few shades darker than
its fur, and the toe-pads yet a little darker.

As will be seen from the standard of points for blues, which will be
found later on in this chapter, the highest marks are given for
soundness of colour. There is a tendency to breed very light blues, and
popular fancy favours this particular type. I am inclined, however, to
prefer a good sound medium blue as being the best and safest for
breeding purposes. The lovely pale blues are beautiful to look at, but
are seldom absolutely sound in colour. Blues, whether dark or light,
should be the same tint throughout, so that when the coat is blown apart
the colour at the roots is the same as at the tips. A white under-coat
is a serious blemish, and this often appears when silver blood may be
traced in the ancestry of a blue cat. We have quite dropped the term of
self-blue, and yet this well expresses the uniformity of colour which is
so desirable. As tiny kittens blues frequently exhibit tabby markings;
but fanciers need not worry over these apparent defects, for as the coat
grows the bars and stripes are no longer visible.

It also sometimes happens that a kitten exhibits quite a light ruff, but
this is generally shed with the second coat, and eventually disappears.
There are some cats erroneously called blues by novices in the fancy,
but which in reality are blue smokes. These have probably been bred from
blues and smokes, and thus the type of each is seriously damaged. If it
is desired to breed sound-coloured blues, then it is undesirable to
cross them with any other colour save and except blacks. I have found
good results from mating blues and blacks, more especially with a view
to obtaining the deep amber eyes of the black Persians, which, for some
reason or other, are generally larger, rounder, and deeper in colour
than what we can produce in blues. Certainly all broken breeds and
tabbies should be avoided when mating blues. I have heard of white cats
being bred with blues to get a pale tint of blue; but white toes,
chests, and spots have often been the results of such experiments. I
have bred blue Persians ever since I took up the fancy, which is longer
ago than I care to remember, and I have found them strong and hardy
cats, requiring no special food, and enjoying the best of health without
any cosseting or coddling. I do not consider that blues usually obtain
any great size or weight, nor are they generally massive in build or
profuse in coat.

[Illustration:

  BLUE AND CREAM PERSIANS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

Ten or fifteen years ago I used to have my blue kittens bespoken for
about £5 each before they were born; but nowadays, when blues are so
plentiful, one must be content with lower prices, and the average sum
for a good blue kitten is three guineas. Still, I am sure that for
beginners in the fancy, wishing to combine pleasure and profit, there is
no better investment than a good sound blue queen with orange eyes. The
demand for blue kittens is really larger than for youngsters of any
other breed. They make superb pets, but it is to be regretted that blue
neuters are generally spoilt with green eyes, doubtless for the reason
that the possession of good orange eyes tempts the owner or purchaser to
reserve the specimen for stud or breeding purposes.

As one of the first breeders and exhibitors of blue Persians I feel I am
in a position to speak with authority, and I am of opinion that no breed
has made such rapid strides, either in improvements or popularity, as
blues. In this statement I am supported by our best professional judge,
Mr. T. B. Mason, who, writing to me on the subject, says: “I find ten
good blues at the present time to one we came across two or three years
ago. I am of opinion that in no colour of cats have we seen more
distinct progress than we see in blue Persians.” Such a statement,
coming from our most able and ubiquitous judge, is a valuable one. Mr.
Mason has had a large experience in cat judging during the last few
years, and his duties take him north and south, east and west.

As regards the breeding of blues, I consider that to obtain the true
sound colour blues should only be bred to blues.

I have often, however, observed that a kitten of unsound colour is to be
found in litters bred from two sound-coloured blues; the kitten may have
a white under-coat or be full of white hairs, or have a shaded ruff; but
experienced breeders will soon discover that such blemishes are but
temporary, and that the ugly duckling of a family may develop into the
flower of the flock. It is, therefore, very interesting to make
experiments and to keep an apparently worthless specimen to see what it
turns into when the first months of infancy are passed and the kitten
coat has been shed.

I have known a young blue of sound colour completely transformed in this
particular by a severe illness. Her fur became a sort of pepper-and-salt
mixture—a sprinkling of white and dark grey; but this same cat, contrary
to the prophecy of an able judge, has again changed her coat, and is now
a perfectly sound blue, even from tip to root. It was evident that her
illness had affected her coat, and that when she regained her usual
health she recovered her correct coat. As regards the eyes in blues, it
is not possible to give any exact time for the change in colour from the
baby blue to the dreaded green or hoped-for orange. This change takes
place gradually, and sometimes the period extends till a kitten is
almost a cat. There are many blue cats with what may be called
indefinitely coloured eyes; that is, neither orange, nor yellow, nor
green. This most unsatisfactory state of things may be generally
accounted for by a circle of green round the pupil, which, according to
the time of day, will be wide or narrow. Thus it is that cats with this
defect are sometimes described with “good yellow eyes,” and advertised
as such, and then, when received by the purchaser, a glint of green is
plainly visible in the inner circle. The perfect eye in a blue should be
absolutely unshaded; and there are two distinct types of eyes, namely,
the golden eye and the orange eye. The former resembles a golden coin in
tint, and the latter has the dash of red which is to be seen in copper.
Both these coloured eyes are correct, and much to be admired in blue
Persians, and no doubt as time goes on we shall find it will be the rule
and not the exception to see these perfect eyes amongst the blues of the
future. It must, however, be borne in mind that in the point of eyes
cats throw back, and two parents with good orange eyes may yet produce
one or more kittens with pale eyes of yellow or greenish hue. Although I
have dilated at length on the superiority of the orange eye in blues, I
do not wish it to be thought that a weedy, boneless cat, even with eyes
of deepest hue, would find favour in my sight; for in blues, as in all
breeds of Persians, what we ought to seek after most earnestly are good
massive limbs, plenty of bone, and broad skulls. There are too many
Persian cats of hare-like proportions, and we really want some of the
type of a good old English tabby introduced into the more aristocratic
long-haired breeds.

[Illustration:

  THE ARTIST.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

It will be interesting to up-to-date breeders of blues to hear what the
veteran cat lover and fancier Harrison Weir had to say about them
fifteen years ago. In his well-known book, “_Our Cats_,” he thus alludes
to the breed:—

“Blue in cats is one of the most extraordinary colours of any, for the
reason that it is a mixture of black (which is no colour) and white
(which is no colour), and this is the more curious because black mated
with white generally produces either one colour or the other, or breaks
black-and-white or white and black; the blue being, as it were, a
weakened black or a withdrawal by white of some, if not all, of the
brown or red, varying in tint according to the colour of the black from
which it was bred, dark grey, or from weakness in the stamina of the
litter. When once the colour or break from the black is acquired, it is
then easy to go on multiplying the different shades and varieties of
tint and tone, from the dark blue-black to the very light, almost white
grey. If whole-coloured blues are in request, then parti-colours, such
as white and black, or black and white, are best excluded.”

Many of our leading cat fanciers “go in” exclusively for blues, and keep
faithful to this one breed alone. I give a list of these, and trust I
may be pardoned if I have left out the name of any enthusiastic breeder
and lover of blues and blues alone: Mrs. Hill, Mrs. Wells, Mrs. P.
Hardy, Mrs. H. Ransome, Mrs. Bennet, Mrs. Mocatta, Mrs. S. F. Clarke
(Louth), Mrs. Cartwright, Mrs. Gregory (Lincoln), Mrs. H. B. Thompson,
Mrs. O’Brien Clarke, Miss Jay, Miss Bennet, Miss Messer, Miss Patterson,
Miss Goddard, Rev. P. L. Cosway, Mrs. Swanson, Mrs. Curwen, Mrs. Duffin,
Mrs. W. M. Hunt, Mrs. Slingsby, Mrs. Singleton, Miss Savery, Mrs.
Eustace, Mrs. Hitchcock, Miss Hooper, Miss Violet Hunt, Miss Humfrey,
Mrs. Kennaway, Mr. H. Maxwell, Mrs. Ponder, Miss Rigby, and Mr. C. W.
Witt.

[Illustration:

  BLUE KITTENS BRED BY MISS KIRKPATRICK.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

There are, of course, a large number of fanciers who, amongst other
breeds of cats, keep one or two blues, and several keep blues and
silvers only. I think I may safely say that blue Persians have the
largest number of admirers, and certain it is that at all our large
shows the blue classes are the best filled. At the Cat Club Show held at
Westminster in 1899 the number of entries in the blue female class was a
record one—there were no less than 48, and the blue males mustered 42.

Seeing, therefore, how popular this breed had become, in April, 1901, I
founded and started the Blue Persian Cat Society, a book of rules was
drawn up, and the following ladies and gentlemen appointed as officials
of the society:—


  BLUE PERSIAN CAT SOCIETY.

  _Founded April 24th, 1901._

  _Presidents_: Viscountess Maitland, Mrs. Maconochie, Miss Gertrude
  Jay.

  _Vice-Presidents_: Viscountess Gort, Lady Danvers, the Hon. Mrs.
  Maclaren Morrison, Mrs. Collingwood, Mrs. W. M. Hunt, Miss Violet
  Hunt, Mrs. Clinton Locke, Mrs. Lionel Marks, Mrs. Herbert Ransome,
  Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart, Mrs. H. B. Thompson, Mrs. Woodcock, Sir H.
  Jerningham, K.C.M.G., Sir B. Simpson, K.C.M.G., Rev. P. L. Cosway,
  Frankfort Moore, Esq., R. Storks, Esq.

  _Committee_: Mrs. Baldwin, Mrs. Russell Biggs, Mrs. Bishop, Mrs. P.
  Brown, Mrs. P. Hardy, Mrs. Collingwood, Mrs. H. L. Mocatta, Miss H.
  Patterson, Mr. Gambier Bolton.

  _Hon. Treasurer_: Mr. Russell Biggs, 1, Garden Court, Temple.

  _Hon. Secretary_: Miss F. Simpson, 9, Leonard Place, Kensington, W.

  _Judges_: Lady Marcus Beresford, Mrs. P. Hardy, Mrs. W. M. Hunt, Miss
  G. Jay, Miss K. Sangster, Miss F. Simpson, Mr. C. A. House, Mr. T. B.
  Mason, Mr. F. Norris, Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart, Miss E. Goddard, and
  Miss Kirkpatrick.


[Illustration:

  MRS. ROBINSON’S BLUE KITTENS.

  (_Photo: J. Joyner, Cheltenham._)
]

The chief objects of this society are as follow:—To promote the breeding
and exhibiting of blue Persian cats; to define precisely, and to publish
a description of, the true type of blue Persian cat, and to urge the
adoption of such type on breeders, exhibitors, and judges, as the only
recognised and unvarying standard by which blue Persian cats should be
judged; the improvement of the classification, and, if necessary, the
guaranteeing of classes for these cats at shows supported by the
society; the selection of specialist judges to make the awards at such
shows. The annual subscription to the Blue Persian Cat Society is five
shillings, payable by each member on election. At the general meeting of
the society, held in April, 1902, the number of members on the books was
183, and the honorary secretary reported that during the past year
twelve cat shows had received the support of the society, and numerous
handsome challenge prizes, badges, and specials had been offered for
competition.

[Illustration:

  MRS. WELLS’ CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

The following is the standard of points drawn up by the committee of the
Blue Persian Cat Society and approved of by the members of the society:—


                STANDARD OF POINTS FOR BLUE PERSIAN CAT.


  _Coat_ (30).—Any shade of blue allowable; sound and even in colour;
  free from markings, shadings, or any white hairs. Fur long, thick, and
  soft in texture. Frill full.

  _Head_ (25).—Broad and round, with width between the ears. Face and
  nose short. Ears small and tufted. Cheeks well developed.

  _Eyes_ (20).—Orange; large, round, and full.

  _Body_ (15).—Cobby, and low on the legs.

  _Tail_ (10).—Short and full, not tapering.

  Members should not be deterred from showing their cats if they do not
  come up to the high standard set forth in the above definition.


It is true that very few, if any, blue Persians come up to the high
standard here given, but still there is a very marked improvement in the
breed during the last year or two. The number of green-eyed blues are
steadily and surely decreasing, and the colour of the coat and size of
head are points that have been carefully attended to. In reading the
list of blue cats placed at stud in the columns of the cat papers we
cannot help being impressed with the enormous strides made of recent
years in this breed of cats alone. In a recent copy of _Our Cats_ I
counted twenty-five stud advertisements of blues, and this does not
nearly represent the entire number of blues used for stud purposes by
fanciers. This breed of Persians has become very popular in America, and
several fine cats have been exported, and have carried off the highest
honours at the New York Cat shows, held under the auspices of the
Beresford Cat Club.

Mrs. Clinton Locke, the president of the club, is an enthusiastic
breeder and admirer of blues, and has possessed the finest specimens
among American fanciers.

The names of two good “all-round” judges appear on the blue Persian
list, namely, Mr. C. A. House and Mr. T. B. Mason, and exhibitors of
this special breed—as, indeed, of any other—may feel quite sure that
their precious pets will receive justice at the hands of these two
careful adjudicators.

Mr. E. Welburn, also a blue Persian judge, was long known and respected
in the fancy, and his death in 1902 was a great loss to the cat world.
Two silver bowls have been subscribed for by his many admirers in memory
of this upright judge, and these are competed for annually at the two
largest shows of the National Cat Club and the Cat Club.

[Illustration:

  “ROKELES KISSI.”

  BRED BY MRS. BENNET.

  (_Photo: H. Warschkowski, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

Miss Jay and Miss Frances Simpson have frequently given their services
as judges at some of the shows which have received the patronage of the
Blue Persian Cat Society.

In conclusion, I would say that I am very hopeful of being able at some
future time to hold a show for blue Persians, and by dividing and
subdividing to give an attractive and liberal classification.

I have pleasure in giving a short account, with illustrations, of some
of the catteries belonging to blue breeders.

Mrs. Wells, of Isleworth, was one of the first exhibitors of blue
Persians, and has been faithful to this breed for many years. She has
wonderfully well-planned catteries, and, having plenty of space at her
command, the cats are able to enjoy lots of liberty in large wired-in
runs, planted with shrubs, and with an abundance of grass. Mrs. Wells’
blues are noted for their wonderfully fine coats. Her stud cat “Blue
Noble” has sired many noted winners, and “My Honey,” a lovely queen, has
the deepest orange eyes I have ever seen. Mrs. Wells takes the greatest
interest in her cats, and each and all are pets; in fact, so great is
the care and devotion bestowed upon them that Mrs. Wells is very seldom
persuaded into exhibiting any of her beautiful blues, and never lets
them attend any shows unless she herself is able to accompany them.

Mrs. Wells’ cottage is situated in a most rural district of Isleworth,
and one might fancy oneself miles and miles away from the busy haunts of
men. At the time the photos illustrating these catteries were taken Mrs.
Wells had eighteen blue kittens, besides several grown-up
representatives of her favourite breed. At one time Mrs. Wells was
bitten with the silver fever, and began to breed this variety; but the
litters did not give satisfaction, and she determined to return to
blues—with what success can be learnt from a visit to the gardens at
Isleworth.

Miss Gertrude Jay started cats in 1891, and her name will always be
connected with blues. Nothing has ever been exhibited to compare with
her wonderful female “The Mighty Atom” as regards beauty and shape of
head. This cat, now, alas! no more, swept the board wherever it was
shown. Twice she carried off the highest honours for best cat in the
show at the Crystal Palace. It is true that this grand specimen lacked
the orange eyes, but no judge could pass over such a perfect type of
cat, despite her one fault, and thus “The Mighty Atom” reigned supreme.
“Trixie” and “Doris,” two of Miss Jay’s noted blues, have also both won
specials for the best cat in the show at the Crystal Palace. Miss Jay is
fortunate in having some descendants of these precious cats in the
luxurious catteries at Holmwood (of which an illustration is given).
Many lovely blues may be seen revelling in the well-appointed houses set
apart at the end of the long terrace for their special use. Miss Jay
about a year ago retired from the cat fancy, and withdrew her name from
the two clubs; but she is still a vice-president of the Blue Persian Cat
Society, and often acts as judge. Her name always draws a good entry,
and, as a well-known fancier once remarked to me, “You can be sure of
getting your money’s worth when Miss Jay has the handling of the
classes.” The following few remarks from Miss Jay on her method of
judging will be read with interest:—

“I fear my way of judging is unlike most other people’s, because I do
not judge by points unless it comes to a close fight between two cats.
Of course, I consider shape and colour first, and then I mark all those
unworthy to be in any prize list; next get to work with the remainder,
and this I do, as I say, unlike most other judges, for I pick out the
cat that I would soonest have given to me that day, with the object of
showing it again at once. The point to be decided is the best cat _that_
day. It is no use beginning to think which cat will be the best in a
month’s time or which cat might have been best a month ago; it is there
_that_ day—which is best? And, to my mind, if I award first to the cat I
would rather have, with the one object of continuing to show it, _that_
surely must be the best cat in my opinion, and to that cat the first
card goes. And so on through the class, only giving one V.H.C., one
H.C., and one C., unless the class is a very large one. I know some
judges who say commended cards are very cheap, and they please the
exhibitors. True; but are you not pleasing them in a wrong way by making
them think their cat is better than it is?”

[Illustration:

  “SCARED.”

  TWO BLUES BELONGING TO LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

Mrs. Herbert Ransome is well known in the feline world as a successful
breeder of blue Persians, and as the hard-working secretary of the
Northern Counties Cat Club, and more recently as the editor of _Our
Cats_. Her two blue stud cats, “Darius” and “Darius III.,” have earned a
great reputation, not only in the show pen, but as the sires of many
lovely prize-winning kittens, notably “Orange Blossom of Thorpe,” owned
by Mrs. Slingsby, of Ouseburn, Yorkshire.

It is only of recent years that the name of Mrs. Paul Hardy has become
known in the feline world as a breeder of blue Persians. Mrs. Hardy was
a member of the Cat Club Committee, but on her removal to some distance
from London she resigned her post. To her the Cat Club is indebted for a
very beautiful design of a medal which, in silver and bronze, is
competed for at the Westminster and other shows (_see_ illustration).

[Illustration:

  CAST OF THE CAT CLUB MEDAL.

  DESIGNED BY MRS. P. HARDY.
]

Her first adventure into the domain of cat keeping was in the case of a
very fine blue cat named “Juliet,” whose first few litters were not a
great success, so that sensible cat took matters into her own hands. She
chose for her mate the raggedest black tom she could find, and though,
of course, the results of this _mésalliance_ were not at all
satisfactory from the show judge’s point of view, in later years, when
suitably mated, “Juliet” did not once throw back to a wrong-coloured
kitten. I am not sure that I can follow Mrs. Hardy to the logical
conclusion of her deductions from this fact, but I think it is worthy of
notice by those extremists who hold the view that an incorrect mating in
the first instance spoils a queen for the rest of her life.

It was at the Crystal Palace show of 1897 that Mrs. Hardy exhibited her
first litter from her blue stud “Wooshoo,” and she was then awarded a
first, a special, and two or three silver medals. Another famous cat in
Mrs. Hardy’s establishment was a blue, named “Mark Antony,” who met with
success at several Scottish shows. Later he came under the notice of
Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart, into whose hands he passed, and received a good
deal of favour at the hands of the judges. From Mrs. Stewart he passed
into the possession of the late Dr. Longwill, and was sire of the famous
Crystal Palace winning female blue, “Dolly Gray,” in 1902.

Mrs. Hardy’s success has not been achieved without some set-backs, more
particularly of recent years, since her cattery has been enlarged, and
she has had to fight her way against disease and death. Her own account
is so vivid that I quote it, so that fanciers in a like evil condition
may fight for the lives of their pets to the last:—

“I was singularly free from illness of any kind amongst them, and I
lived for some time happy in the belief that the Persian puss was in no
wise different from her short-coated sister in the robust possession of
nine lives; so I added cat unto cat, and bred for show; when swiftly
Nemesis overtook me. I showed five full-grown cats at the first
Westminster show, and twenty-four hours after the show was over my best
blue queen, a young beauty whose proud owner I had been only for one
brief month, died of acute pneumonia. A few days later influenza showed
itself amongst the others, and all four were down with it.

“What a time I had, with the experiences of a ward-nurse! But I pulled
them through, all but one young kitten of four months, in whom acute
laryngitis developed, and so she had to be put to sleep.

[Illustration:

  MISS G. JAY’S CATTERY.

  (_Photo: W. Field, Putney._)
]

“‘Wooshoo’ was given up by the vet., as he piled so many complications
into his system one after the other, developing bronchitis, gastritis,
and jaundice on the top of the original complaint. Poor fellow, for
twenty-four hours he lay _unconscious_, but I kept his heart going by
doses of _pure alcohol_ every two hours, while I fought the disease with
hot fomentations, medicated steamings, and other proper remedies.

“For just _one month_ I had to hand-feed him, and then one afternoon it
occurred to him he might try his minced oyster by himself, greatly to my
joy and triumph; and when he feebly washed his face afterwards I felt
like setting the church bells ringing!

“I am convinced, in serious cat illness, it is the _night nursing_ that
does the trick and determines whether your patient is to live or die. It
is somewhat of an effort, I admit, to have to arise two or three times
in a night (nearly always in the bitter weather, when these epidemics
occur), and, in my case, to be obliged to dress and go out of doors to
the stableyard, with a dimly burning lantern.

“In every cat lover’s career there must be some such saddening memories.
Saddest when, after the efforts of the night, and you have left hopeful
the morning will bring improvement, you return in the early dawn to note
on entering a sign that causes your heart to beat heavily—_your
patient’s bed is empty_!

“You know what _that_ means, and look round. Yes, there in a corner,
flat, stiff, and draggled, where he has crawled in the last uneasy
seeking for air, is your poor pet, still for ever!”

Mrs. Hardy, in connection with illnesses, has some advice to offer as
regards medicines which she has tested herself, and which I think will
be of service to my readers:—

“While not intending to say anything authoritatively upon the subject of
remedies for various cat ills, all of which will be most ably and
exhaustively gone into by the writer of later chapters in this book, I
might perhaps mention one or two things of which I have had personal
experience, restoratives rather than drugs, which I now keep always at
hand.

“One is a preparation of beef called ‘Somatose.’ It is sold in 1 oz. or
2 oz. tins, is in the form of a fine soluble powder, and has this
advantage over certain beef essences—that it will keep good any length
of time, and has not to be used up directly the tin is opened; while it
is no more expensive, and a little will go a long way if used as
directed.

“I make it by putting some _boiling_ water into a saucer, sprinkling
about a teaspoonful on the water, and allowing it to dissolve slowly
till cold, when it would look like weak tea. It is a most powerful
restorative and stimulant, and given _cold_ in teaspoonful doses can be
retained in the worst case of stomach irritation.

“A second good thing is Plasmon powder. I was recommended to try this by
a cat lover, for a case of dyspeptic sickness of a chronic character.
For delicate kittens it is most valuable, and I believe the very worst
cases of diarrhœa or dysentery can be cured, and the patient saved to
grow up strong and healthy, if a diet of Plasmon jelly, given cold, with
alternate meals of Somatose, also given _cold_, be persevered with until
the bowels are normal. Never give milk in _any_ form, either plain,
boiled, or in puddings, to a cat that is suffering from looseness of the
bowels. Another little hint I may be allowed, perhaps, to give: Don’t
wait for illness to come before you train your kittens to _take_
medicine from a spoon.

“I teach all my youngsters to drink easily from a spoon, beginning with
something nice—sweetened milk or the like, going on to cold water and,
when necessary, a drop or two of Salvo’s Preventive in it. Then, when it
becomes necessary for a real nasty dose, they are not in the least
nervous of the spoon beforehand, and the dose is down and gone before
they discover anything unusual. Never have I to wrap cloths round any of
my cats, or get people to hold them by main force; but some cats will
nearly turn themselves inside out when a spoon is held to their mouths!
All the fault of early training. Badly brought up! You must be _very_
patient with a young kitten; never do anything in a _hurry_. When once
you have gained a cat’s confidence it will let you do anything to it.”

[Illustration:

  REV. P. L. COSWAY’S “IMPERIAL BLUE.”

  (_Photo: G. & J. Hall, Wakefield._)
]

[Illustration:

  “UN SAUT PÉRILLEUX.”

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]




                              CHAPTER XII.
                     SILVER OR CHINCHILLA PERSIANS.


[Illustration:

  “JACK FROST.”

  BRED BY MRS. MIX, OLD FORT
  BATTERY, NEW YORK.

  (_Photo: A. Lloyd, Amsterdam, N.Y._)
]

Perhaps no breed or variety of cat has been so much thought about,
talked about, and fought about in the fancy as the silver or chinchilla
Persian. If blues are a new variety, then silvers are of still more
recent origin. Years ago this cat did not exist—that is to say, we
should not recognise the silver Persian of to-day as the silver of
bygone times, for the simple reason that the only class of silver in the
fancy formerly was the silver tabby. In those days there were
self-coloured cats and tabby, or marked cats, and broken-coloured cats.
Previous to the introduction of a Chinchilla class at the Crystal Palace
in 1894, the class for silver tabbies included blue tabbies “with or
without white,” and it is curious to read in the old catalogues of the
Crystal Palace shows the titles given to the various cats by the owners,
some describing their cats as “chinchilla tabby,” “light grey tabby,”
“silver grey,” “silver chinchilla,” “blue or silver striped.” We may
infer that these cats were either blue tabbies or silver tabbies, or
something betwixt and between. I distinctly remember the large number of
cats which in these enlightened days we should find it difficult indeed
to classify. It is often said, “What’s in a name?” But still, in trying
to describe a particular breed of cat, it is as well to endeavour to
find a term which expresses as nearly as possible both the colour and
the appearance of the animal. There has been a great deal of discussion
as to the correct name by which these delicately tinted Persians should
be called.

The National Cat Club began by classifying them for the Crystal Palace
show in 1894 as Chinchillas, and they have kept to this, although it is
really a most misleading title, as the cats are quite unlike the fur
which we know as chinchilla, this being dark at the roots and lighter
towards the tips. Now, cats of this variety ought to be just the
reverse.

It is difficult to give a correct idea of the real colour and appearance
of these cats. The fur at the roots is a peculiar light silver, not
white, as one might imagine, until some pure white is placed beside it,
and this shades to a slightly darker tone—a sort of bluish lavender—to
the tips of the coat. The Cat Club introduced the term “self silver,”
but this is suggestive of one colour only, without any shadings
whatever. Another class, called “shaded silvers,” was added; but then,
again, tabby markings are not shadings. Formerly, blues used to be
called “self blues,” but this is entirely done away with, and now we
never think of using this term, and speaking of them as blues we
understand there should be the one and only colour.

Surely, then, the simplest term and the most descriptive of these
beautiful cats is “silver,” pure and simple, for whether dark or light
they are all silvers, and so we should have blues and blue tabbies,
orange and orange tabbies, silver and silver tabbies.

Then comes the question of what is nearest perfection in this variety of
cat, which has come upon us of late years, evolved from the silver tabby
and the blue. The ideal silver, to use the words of a well-known breeder
of these cats, should be the palest conceivable edition of a smoke cat,
with fur almost white at the roots and palish silver grey at the tips,
and as free from markings as a smoke. I do not go the length of
declaring that silvers cannot be too light, for I think that it is the
delicate tips of silvery blue that lend such a charm and give such
distinction to this variety. Without these delicate tippings a silver
cat would look inartistic and insipid. There has been of late quite a
rage amongst silver breeders to produce a totally unmarked specimen; but
fanciers would do better to endeavour to obtain a light _shaded_ silver
free from tabby markings with the broad head and massive limbs, which at
present are qualities not often met with in this variety. I am quite
aware this is a most difficult task, but we must remember that “all good
things come hard,” even in breeding cats, and if it were not so half the
interest for fanciers would be gone.

[Illustration:

  “THE ABSENT-MINDED BEGGAR.”

  OWNED BY MRS. NEILD.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

[Illustration:

  “STAR DUVALS.”

  SILVER PERSIAN OWNED AND BRED BY MISS MEESON.

  (_Photo: F. Parsons, Southend-on-Sea._)
]

Having, therefore, considered what a perfect silver cat ought to be, I
will give a description of the type of cat generally bred and exhibited
as a silver. I read the following account in one of our daily papers,
evidently written by a non-admirer of these lovely cats: “The
chinchillas are very fashionable, and very difficult to breed in
perfection. They took their name from a supposed likeness the fur bears
to that of the chinchilla. But the chinchilla cat, as at present in
request, bears no resemblance to the little rodent. Most of the exhibits
are of a dirty white, tinged with lavender, with a quantity of marks and
stripes on the face, body, and paws.” Now this is not a pleasing
picture, and one that would be considered libellous by a silver breeder.
It is, however, true that at present our silvers are too full of tabby
markings, and in many cases the under-coat is not silvery white, but
light grey or pale blue. There are many silver cats with dark spine
lines and shaded sides, but they are heavily barred on the head and
legs, and the tail is frequently almost black. It is a case of tabby
blood which needs breeding out of the silvers, and which, no doubt, will
be obliterated in time, so that two distinct types of silvers will only
exist—the delicately tipped or shaded silvers, and the richly marked and
barred silver tabbies. Just as in the case of the blue Persians it took
a long while to eradicate the tabby markings which showed the existence
of tabby blood, so amongst silvers the bar and stripes need to be
carefully bred out, and we shall hope, in the good time coming, to have
not _self_ silvers, but a very near approach to this—namely, a perfectly
unmarked but yet not wholly unshaded silver cat.

[Illustration:

  “OMAR.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS A. POLLARD

  (_Copyright 1901—G. Hiller, Elizabeth, N.Y._)
]

There is a greater delicacy amongst silver cats, and more difficulty in
rearing the kittens, than in any other breed, and this may be accounted
for by the immense amount of in-breeding that was carried on
indiscriminately at the beginning of the rage for silver cats; also the
desire to obtain lightness of colour caused breeders to lose sight of
the grave disadvantages of loss of bone and stamina. Therefore it is
that among the silver cats exhibited at our shows we seldom find massive
limbs or broad heads or full cheeks. There is a tendency to hare-like
proportions, and the faces have a pinched and snipey appearance, and
noses are too long. However, great improvement is taking place, and with
the numerous stud cats now at the disposal of fanciers, there ought to
be no difficulty in making a suitable selection.

The question as to the correct colour of eyes for a chinchilla or silver
cat is still a vexed question. In self-coloured cats the broad line is
clearly laid down—blue eyes for whites, orange for blacks, and orange
for blues; but when we come to the more nondescript cats—such as silver
and smoke and tortoiseshell—there seems to be a wider margin given, and
the line drawn is not so hard-and-fast. Still, I think it is always well
to have some high standard of perfection in each breed, so that fanciers
may breed up to it, and to my mind the bright emerald green eye is the
ideal for a silver cat. I have seen very fine amber eyes which could not
fail to attract admiration; but if these are admitted, then all sorts of
eyes, not amber but wishy-washy yellow, will be the inevitable result.
So many silver cats have eyes that may be described as neither one thing
nor the other. Often one hears the remark, “Oh! but if you see
So-and-so’s eyes in the right light they are a lovely green.” But viewed
by the ordinary eye of a critical judge, they appear an uncertain
yellow. Therefore it is best to set up a standard, and I think it is
becoming an almost undisputed fact that silver cats of perfect type
should have green eyes, and by green let it be understood that the
deeper the tone the better will they accord or contrast with the pale
silvery coat.

[Illustration:

  THREE PRETTY SILVERS.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

I would here impress upon fanciers the great importance of striving to
obtain the large, round, full eye, which gives such expression to a
cat’s face. How many of our silvers of to-day are spoiled by small,
badly shaped or half-open eyes! I do not think sufficient importance is
attached by our judges to this point of _size_ of eye. Many are carried
away by the correctness of colour, and fail to deduct a sufficient
number of points for a beady, badly shaped small eye.

Colour is fleeting, and with age our cats may lose the brilliancy of
green or orange, but bold large eyes, placed well apart and not too
deeply sunk, will be lasting points in favour of our pets.

There is one rather peculiar feature in the eyes of some silver cats.
This is the dark rim which often encircles the eye. This rim decidedly
enhances the beauty of the eye, and makes it look larger than it really
is, and also throws up the colour. Light, almost white, ear tufts and
toe tufts are adjuncts which go to make up a perfect silver cat. The
nose is of a dull brick red, darkening slightly towards the edges.

Few Persian cats suffer so severely during the process of shedding their
coats as silvers, and they present a most ragged appearance at this
period of their existence. The lovely fluffy light silver under-coat
almost disappears, and the top markings stand out very distinctly, so
that a cat that in full feather would be considered a light, unmarked
specimen will appear streaked and dark after the coat has been shed. As
regards the silver kittens, it is a curious fact that these, when born,
are often almost black—or, at any rate, generally very dark in colour,
resembling smokes. It is seldom that a silver kitten is light at birth,
but gradually the markings and shadings will lessen, and perhaps just
the one mite that was looked upon as a bad black will blossom forth into
the palest silver. In this respect, silver kits are most speculative,
but in another they are cruelly disappointing, for a kitten at three
months old may be a veritable thing of beauty, and ere it has reached
the age of eight months, bars and stripes will have, so to speak, set in
severely, and our unmarked specimen of a silver kit develops into a
poorly marked tabby cat. I may say that if the kittens are going to be
really pale silvers they will in the majority of cases have very pale
faces and paws, with little or no marking, whilst the body will be
fairly even dark grey—perhaps almost black. In a week or two a change
takes place, as the under-coat begins to grow, and it will be noticed
that the kittens become more even in colour, the contrast between their
light face and dark backs will not be nearly so accentuated, and by the
time they are nine or ten weeks old they will look almost unmarked. The
reason for this is that the dark fur they are born with is really only
the extreme tips of the hair, and as their coats grow in length this
shading becomes more dispersed.

And here I will allude to the so-called threefold classification which
was part of the scheme of the Silver Society, founded by Mrs. Champion
in 1900. At the inaugural meeting Mrs. Stennard Robinson took the chair.
Voting papers had previously been distributed amongst the members,
asking for their votes on the question of establishing three classes for
silvers—namely, chinchillas, shaded silvers, and silver tabbies. The
votes recorded were fifty-four in favour of the threefold
classification, and nine against it. So this was carried by a large
majority, and the question of points discussed and settled as follows:—


                              CHINCHILLAS.


  As pale and unmarked silver as possible. Any brown or cream tinge to
  be considered a great drawback. Eyes to be green or orange. Value of
  points as follows:—

               Head                                   20
               Shape                                  15
               Colour of coat                         25
               Coat and condition                     20
               Colour, shape, and expression of eyes  10
               Brush                                  10
                                                     ———
                               Total                 100


After much discussion, Lady Marcus Beresford moved, and Mrs. Champion
seconded, the following definition of Shaded Silvers:—


                            SHADED SILVERS.


  Colour: pale, clear silver, shaded on face, legs, and back, but having
  as few tabby markings as possible. Any brown or cream tinge a great
  drawback. Eyes green or orange. Value of points:—

               Head                                   20
               Colour of coat                         25
               Coat and condition                     20
               Colour, shape, and expression of eyes  10
               Shape                                  15
               Brush                                  10
                                                     ———
                               Total                 100


[Illustration:

  “SHAH OF PERSIA.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. ANNINGSON.
]

From this list it will be seen that for colour the highest points are
given, and that eyes may be green or orange. But during the two years
which have elapsed since the formation of the Silver Society, there has
been a decided desire on the part of breeders for green eyes _only_, and
certainly our best qualified silver judges are not partial to any other
coloured eyes in this variety. In an article on the colour of eyes in
silvers, “Zaida” of _Fur and Feather_ writes: “Eye colouring threatens
to become a matter of fashion. Some eight years ago we received from a
first-rate fancier and exhibitor a letter respecting a chinchilla cat,
which later became a great prize-winner. ‘It is useless,’ wrote this
lady, ‘to think of exhibiting her on account of her green eyes.’ What a
change of opinion has marked the flight of eight years!”

It will be observed that, as regards the description of chinchillas and
shaded silvers, there is a distinction and yet no very great difference,
and herein lay the difficulty of retaining these two classes at our
shows. The lightest silvers were deemed eligible for the chinchilla
class, and then came the question for exhibitor and judge to draw the
line between the two so-called varieties, and to decide what degree of
paleness constituted a chinchilla and what amount of dark markings would
relegate the specimen into the shaded silver class. The cat world became
agitated, exhibitors were puzzled, and judges exasperated. There were
letters to the cat papers on the “silver muddle.” Show secretaries were
worried with inquiries. I recollect a would-be exhibitor writing to me
sending a piece of her silver cat’s fur, and asking whether her puss
should be in the chinchilla or shaded silver class; but even with her
lengthy description and the sample before me, I dared not venture an
opinion, and I used generally to reply to such letters by saying I did
not know in which class to enter my own silver cat, and so I was going
to keep him at home.

One correspondent, appealing through the columns of the papers, wrote:
“Everyone knows a black or white or brown tabby, but how can we
exhibitors discern between the number of shadings on our silver cats as
to which class they belong? Do kindly air my grievance, and oblige.”

It was quite pathetic to see the faces of disappointed exhibitors at the
Westminster show of 1901, when several beautiful creatures who had
travelled many a weary mile to be penned and admired were rewarded with
a “Wrong Class” ticket only. They were either too light or too dark for
the class in which their owners had entered them, and all hope of honour
and glory and golden coins and silver cups vanished into thin air! At
one show I recollect a cat was accounted by the judge a chinchilla _and_
a shaded silver, and he came off very well with special prizes for both
varieties. No doubt he really was either one or the other, or both!

[Illustration:

  “FULMER ZAIDA.”

  SILVER, OWNED BY LADY DECIES.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

It was no wonder, therefore, that a reaction set in, and exhibitors and
judges felt alike that something must be done, and that, at any rate for
a time, it would be better to have only the two classes for silvers and
silver tabbies, and that specials might be given to encourage the
lightest cats. The abolition of the threefold classification was
therefore taken into consideration when the Silver Society was broken up
by the departure of Mrs. Champion to America, and the Silver and Smoke
Persian Cat Society came into existence, with Mr. H. V. James as Hon.
Secretary.

The following are the objects of the Society:—


  The title of this Society, which (under the name of The Silver
  Society) was founded in July, 1900, is “THE SILVER AND SMOKE PERSIAN
  CAT SOCIETY.”

  The objects of the Society are:—

   1.— To improve the breeds of long-haired silver (or chinchilla),
         shaded silver, silver tabby, and smoke coloured cats and
         kittens, male, female, and neuter.

   2.— To guarantee extra classes for these breeds at shows supported by
         the Society, when necessary.

   3.— To offer prizes for the said breeds at shows supported by the
         Society.

   4.— To hold shows independently, or in conjunction with other
         Societies or Clubs when it shall be deemed expedient by the
         members.

   5.— To elect specialist judges to make the awards at shows supported
         by the Society.

   6.— To establish and maintain a standard of points for the
         above-mentioned breeds.


  It was in March, 1902, that voting papers on this burning question
  were sent out to members of the new society, with the following
  result: For the threefold classification, 20; against, 32. Therefore,
  by the wish of the majority, it was decided to give up the threefold
  classification _for the present_.

[Illustration:

  “TROUBADOR.”

  SILVER, BRED BY MRS. E. N. BARKER.
]

  The Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society is now in a most flourishing
  condition, with about 150 members. It is the fervent hope and earnest
  endeavour of each and all of the fanciers of silvers in the society to
  breed a perfectly unmarked specimen, and with perseverance we may in
  time puzzle the judge to decide which cat in a large class of lightly
  tinted silvers is the palest. We shall gradually but surely breed out
  the tabby markings if fanciers will, so to speak, nail the right
  colour to the mast and keep on striving to breed up to the perfect
  type.

  To quote Mr. C. A. House: “What is wanted is for breeders to work on
  standard lines, and not push forward with such persistency their own
  pet particular whims. All that is required is for breeders to be
  determined to breed honestly and consistently for what the standard
  advocates, and leave severely alone all excesses and exaggerations.
  Let us have chinchillas free from markings by all means, but let us
  keep our shadings, our silver colour, remembering that pure silver is
  of a bluish tinge, and is not the whitey-brown article some would have
  us accept as the ideal in chinchilla cats.” The same authority,
  writing on the threefold classification, says: “I have always
  maintained that the threefold classification in silvers was a mistake,
  and the majority of breeders, I am pleased to know, are coming round
  to that view. My opinion, when first enunciated, was not popular. With
  some it is not to-day. But many who at one time could not see the
  force of my arguments now do so, and there is a more general feeling
  that the craze for self silvers is not conducive to the welfare of the
  silvers as a breed.”

  Amongst the well-known breeders, fanciers, and exhibitors of silvers
  in the present day, I may mention Lady Marcus Beresford, who owns some
  beautiful specimens of the celebrated “Lord Southampton” strain. A
  handsomer type of silver female cannot be met with than “Dimity,” bred
  by Miss Cochran, and presented by her to Lady Marcus Beresford. Lady
  Decies is the proud possessor of the incomparable “Zaida,” whose
  record of wins is a marvellous one. As all the cat world knows,
  “Zaida” is accounted the lightest and most unmarked specimen in the
  fancy. Mrs. W. R. Hawkins has bred some wonderfully good silvers, and
  was the owner of “Sweet Lavender,” which has been acknowledged as one
  of the best of this breed that ever existed. The following are the
  principal silver breeders: The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, Mrs. G. H.
  Walker, Mrs. Neild, Mrs. Russell Biggs, Mrs. Wellbye, Mrs. Martin,
  Mrs. T. Drake, Mrs. Cubitt, Mrs. Marriott, Mrs. Balding, Mrs. Poole,
  Mrs. Ormerod, Mrs. Fawsett, Miss White Atkins, Miss Snell, Miss
  Horsman, Miss Dell, Miss Meeson, The Hon. Philip Wodehouse, Miss
  Chamberlayne.

  During the last few years a very large number of silver cats have been
  placed at stud, but we may regard three cats as the founders of the
  breed or as the pillars of the silver strain—namely, “Silver Lambkin,”
  “Lord Southampton,” and “Lord Argent.” To these worthy ancestors a
  very large proportion of the silvers of to-day can trace their
  lineage. But this noble trio is naturally being superseded by such
  stud cats as “Silver Starlight,” “Tintagel,” “Cambyses,” “The
  Absent-minded Beggar,” “Pathan of Dingley,” “Jupiter Duvals,” “St.
  Anthony,” “Rob Roy of Arrandale,” “The Silver Sultan,” and many
  others. There is, therefore, now no excuse for in-breeding, which used
  to be carried on to a great extent when so limited a number of sires
  were forthcoming. To indiscriminate and injudicious in-breeding may be
  largely attributed the great delicacy amongst silver cats. There is no
  doubt that the number of fatalities among silver kittens is far in
  excess of that of any other breed. Then, again, the size of silver
  cats compares unfavourably with others, and they are wanting in muscle
  and bone. We do not want huge, coarse, heavy silvers, but breeders and
  judges sometimes show an utter disregard for size and strength, and
  the consequence is we see a number of ladylike looking studs that fail
  miserably in these very essential points.

  Breeders should aim at the happy medium between the liliputian and the
  leviathan, but not be content unless their silver studs turn the
  scales at 10 lb. As regards the mating of silvers, a broad line to lay
  down is to avoid tabby markings. It is for this reason that smokes
  have been wisely selected by most breeders as the best cross for a
  silver. It is more than probable that in many cases some nondescript
  sort of kittens will be the result. These sort of light smokes are
  exceedingly pretty cats and make fascinating pets, but they are
  useless for breeding purposes or exhibiting. I have known of some
  handsome specimens that have wandered from class to class, only to be
  disqualified in each and either, and it was a case of, “When judges
  disagree, who shall decide?”

  Several experiments have been tried of crossing a white Persian with a
  silver in order to get pale coloured kittens, but this appears seldom
  to succeed unless the whites have silver blood in them. Some breeders
  have tried blues with silvers, but there is the danger of introducing
  the grey blue under-coat which gives such a smudgy appearance to a
  silver and is suggestive of a badly coloured smoke. It does not at all
  follow that the mating of two light silvers will produce
  light-coloured and unmarked kittens, yet this cross and the smoke are
  the safest. It must be a work of time, as we have before said, to
  breed out the tabby markings of many generations.

  The name of Mrs. Balding is as well known to breeders of silvers of
  the past as it is at the present day. In the past, however, it was as
  Miss Dorothy Gresham this enthusiastic fancier won her laurels. I well
  remember the sensation caused by the appearance in the show pen of the
  “Silver Lambkins” at the Crystal Palace in 1888. To breeders,
  exhibitors, and cat fanciers generally the following account of
  chinchillas from the earliest days, specially written for this book by
  Mrs. Balding, should be exceedingly interesting:—

  “There is probably no variety of long-haired cat which has caused so
  much discussion, notwithstanding that, with the exception of the
  light-coloured reds, which have been designated ‘creams,’ the
  chinchilla is the cat which has most recently gained distinction as a
  separate variety. The notoriety which the chinchilla enjoys has been
  in great part brought about by the delicacy of its appearance and the
  difficulty that has been experienced in the production of a perfect
  specimen. Many cats are called chinchillas and are exhibited as such,
  often winning prizes, but very few indeed are of the pale silver tint,
  with bright emerald eyes, and with no bars or stripes on the legs or
  head.

[Illustration:

  A PERFECT CHINCHILLA.

  TWO VIEWS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “The chief subjects that have been under discussion in connection with
  the chinchilla cat have been the colour of eyes and the shade of the
  coat; but, with regard to the former, I think it must be acknowledged
  that green is a more suitable accompaniment to silver than yellow or
  orange, and, as regards the latter, that silver, with dainty sheen
  evenly distributed, is more to be desired than a patchy grey, dull in
  hue and unattractive to the eye. As a matter of fact, these shaded
  grey specimens are in reality only ill-marked silver tabbies. They
  must, however, not be altogether despised, as they have been the
  steppingstones which have led to the creation of the chinchilla.

  “It is something like twenty years ago that, amongst the competitors
  in the classes for long-haired tabbies at the Crystal Palace and other
  important shows, was occasionally to be seen an alien with the ground
  colour of the silver tabby, but with very few stripes on the body.
  These cats were evidently sports from the silver tabby, so much so
  that the class for that section was the only one open to them; and,
  although they invariably showed great quality, breeders were loth to
  exhibit them in the medley of different-coloured tabbies, where one of
  their chief beauties—the absence of stripes—became a disadvantage.
  Their only chance of distinction lay in putting in an appearance at
  provincial shows, where the authorities were sometimes to be induced
  to attach two cat classes to the rabbit division—one for long-haired
  of any colour, and the other for short-haired. In this indiscriminate
  assemblage, no colour having been stated, chinchillas when present
  wrought great havoc, although it cannot be denied that the judges of
  the day gave precedence to a well-marked silver tabby.

  “Amongst these outcasts was a cat of striking beauty, whose like has
  not been seen again. This was ‘Sylvie,’ of unknown pedigree, owned by
  the late Mrs. Christopher, at whose death she became the property of
  the late Miss Saunders, of Peterborough. A beautiful portrait of this
  exquisite chinchilla is given in Mr. Harrison Weir’s book ‘Our Cats.’
  When judging at the Crystal Palace in 1886, this connoisseur and judge
  of worldwide repute awarded her first prize, medal, and special for
  the best long-haired cat, getting over the difficulty of her silvery,
  unmarked coat by calling her a very light blue tabby, though the
  puzzle was to find the tabby.

  “Another chinchilla of the early ‘eighties was Miss Florence Moore’s
  ‘Queenie,’ who would, had chinchilla classes been provided at that
  time, have been loaded with championships and honours. In colour she
  was as light as any of our present-day celebrities, and might easily,
  from her freedom from markings, have earned the dubious compliment of
  the uninitiated so highly prized by owners of chinchillas of being
  mistaken for a grubby white. Miss Florence Moore, who later on had one
  of the best and largest catteries in the country, bred ‘Queenie’ from
  her ‘Judy,’ winner of many first prizes, a heavily marked silver tabby
  of Mrs. Brydges’ noted breed, and ‘Fez,’ a light silver cat with
  indefinite stripes.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BALDING’S “SILVER LAMBKIN.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “Mrs. Brydges can claim the distinction of having owned, something
  like half a century ago, some of the first long-haired cats ever
  imported into England. A coincidence worthy of note is that though
  there is no record of her having bred or possessed a chinchilla, two
  never-to-be-forgotten pairs of chinchilla kittens—Miss Florence
  Moore’s ‘Chloe’ and ‘Dinah,’ winners of first and medal on three
  successive occasions at the Crystal Palace, Brighton, and Bexley, 1887
  (they being the only chinchillas at any of these shows), and Miss
  Gresham’s ‘Silver Lambkins,’ who swept the board in 1888, winning the
  specials at the Crystal Palace from forty-six pairs of other
  competitors of all colours—could in each case trace descent to the
  Cheltenham stock ‘Chloe’ and ‘Dinah,’ through the afore-mentioned
  ‘Judy’ and the ‘Silver Lambkins,’ through their sire ‘Rahman,’ also
  bred by Mrs. Brydges.

  “Still more remarkable, these two couples of youthful prodigies were
  first cousins, on the other side of their pedigrees, the noted ‘Fluffy
  II.’ and ‘Beauty’ being bred by Mrs. Vallance.

  “‘Chinnie,’ the Mother of chinchillas, is familiar in name to every
  breeder of this lovely variety, and the following letter, of the early
  ‘eighties, relating to her birth and buying, will perhaps prove
  interesting to the up-to-date silver fancier. It is copied from the
  original in the possession of Mrs. Vallance. One guinea appears to
  have been a price to talk of in those days. Now, one would be tempted
  to hide the fact of such a small amount, and if a specimen were
  offered to us at this low figure we should certainly desire it to be
  sent on approval.


                                   THE VICARAGE, SANDAL MAYNER,
                                           NEAR WAKEFIELD,
                                                   _October 14th, 1882_.

    ‘_To_ Mrs. VALLANCE.

    ‘MADAM,—The kitten I have to sell is quite pure bred. The mother I
    bought for £1 1s. when quite a kitten from prize parents. The father
    is one we bred partly from Mrs. Radford’s breed and partly from a
    splendid tom cat that was found living wild at Babbicombe, and that
    we had in our possession for some months, but unfortunately he is
    lost again now—I am afraid permanently. I think this kitten promises
    to be very like the mother. She is very handsome and has good
    points—brush, ear tips, and so on—but I consider her rather small.
    But the kitten may be finer, as the father is a large cat. Miss
    Grant’s are related to ours on the father’s side, but Mrs. Radford’s
    very distantly, if at all.

    ‘I do not think these Angora kittens are delicate. We have never
    failed in rearing them. The more new milk they have, and the better
    feeding, the finer cats they are likely to make. We do not have much
    trouble in keeping ours at home, as we live some distance from the
    village. We always give ours their principal meal at 6 p.m., and
    keep them shut up in a hay-loft until next morning. If you have a
    box wherever the kitten lives, with sifted sand or cinders in it,
    kept in a corner, you will find that the best way to ensure habits
    of cleanliness. If I hear nothing from you to the contrary I will
    send the kitten on Wednesday morning, 19th, by the early train from
    Derby station; and if you are not satisfied with the kitten I am
    willing for it to be returned within a day or two, if the return
    journey is paid and I am let know beforehand when to expect it.

                                               ‘I remain, yours truly,
                                                           ‘GRACE HURT.’


  A letter redolent of lavender and old-world deliberation, but words of
  wisdom for all that. The reported delicacy of long-haired cats would
  trouble us less if we had more of the new milk and hay-loft system.
  Raw meat, raw eggs, new milk, fresh air, grass, and water are the sole
  ingredients required to rear the most valuable kitten.

  “‘Chinnie’s’ size is another interesting point. She grew to medium
  weight, but was remarkable for symmetry of form rather than bulk.”

  “Some of the loveliest chinchillas are small, but ‘Nizam,’ ‘Tod
  Sloan,’ ‘Ameer,’ ‘Silver Lambkin,’ ‘Laddie,’ ‘Lord Argent,’ ‘Silver
  Mist,’ ‘Cherub,’ and ‘St. Anthony’ stand out as being as large, or
  larger, than any cats of other colours, and the majority of them have
  also the purity of colour, broad heads, and short legs so often
  lacking in large cats. The legginess and want of quality which
  frequently accompanies size doubtless cause our leading judges to deem
  it of little account.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BALDING’S “FLUFFIE TOD.”
]

  “The name chosen by Mrs. Vallance for her new acquisition proves that
  even in those early days the term chinchilla was in vogue. ‘Chinnie’s’
  wins were third Maidstone, Sittingbourne, V.H.C. Oxford, Maidstone.
  Her charming little mate ‘Fluffy I.,’ a very pure silver with
  undecided tabby markings, also showed the quality of coat and cherub
  face for which their descendants have been unsurpassed. He was bred in
  1883 by Miss Acland from imported cats, and won first and medal at
  Maidstone, Cheltenham, and Ealing, second Ryde, V.H.C. Crystal Palace,
  Oxford, and Lincoln. His career ended in 1886, when he disappeared.
  Tradition whispers he was destroyed in the village.

  “In April, 1885, ‘Chinnie’ produced a litter by ‘Fluffy I.,’ two
  members of which—‘Vezzoso’ and ‘Beauty’—have earned undying fame in
  the annals of chinchilla history. ‘Vezzoso,’ a marvel of lavender
  loveliness, in his one brief year of existence won first in the open
  class and silver medal for best in show Albert Palace, 1885, first
  Louth, Maidstone, second Frome, third Lincoln.

[Illustration:

  “SEA FOAM.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MR. LAUGHTON.
]

  “In fatal 1886 ‘Vezzoso,’ who belied his exquisite appearance by being
  very undomesticated, like his maternal grandfather the wild cat of
  Babbicombe, roamed to return no more. ‘Lost in the woods’ is his
  epitaph.

  “An even more tragic fate befel ‘Fluffy II.,’ the 1886 son of ‘Fluffy
  I.’ and ‘Chinnie,’ who after winning first Crystal Palace, first and
  silver medal for best in show Brighton, second Albert Palace and
  Ealing, and siring the two before-mentioned kittens of the year, died
  in 1887 from the effects of an accident in which he was internally
  injured. Thus within little more than a year Mrs. Vallance lost three
  of the most promising young cats anyone could possess. At the time
  their owner scarcely realised their value, and allowed them absolute
  freedom, with such sad results.

  “But undoubtedly the best result of the ‘Fluffy’ and ‘Chinnie’
  alliance was ‘Beauty,’ from whom, as already stated, came the ‘Silver
  Lambkins.’ As a kitten she became the property of Miss Howe, of
  Bridgyate, near Bath, and later, by a breeding arrangement with the
  Miss Greshams (now Mrs. Bridgwater and Mrs. Balding), had three
  remarkable litters of chinchilla kittens, the first by ‘Rahman,’ who
  shortly afterwards strayed from home and was lost. This was the litter
  which produced four queens, including the two ‘Silver Lambkins,’ and
  which (with the exception of one renamed ‘Mimi,’ who went to America
  with her owner) all unfortunately died.

  “The second of Bridgyate ‘Beauty’s’ litters was by Mrs. Shearman’s
  ‘Champion Perso,’ a magnificent light smoke with remarkable coat and
  wonderful mane, winner of a large number of first and special prizes.
  In this lot was a tom kitten destined to be a pillar of the chinchilla
  stud book, the ‘Silver Lambkin,’ named after his deceased
  half-sisters. The chief beauties of this remarkable cat are his size
  and muscular frame, the length and thickness of coat, and the enormous
  frill inherited from ‘Champion Perso,’ which spreads Elizabethan like
  round his shoulders and falls to his feet in front, a cascade of
  silvery white fluff several inches long. To ‘Perso’ may be traced in
  some degree ‘Silver Lambkin’s’ success as the sire of unmarked cats,
  and to ‘Beauty’ their pale colour, green eyes, and perfect shape,
  which have won for her descendants by ‘Lambkin’ upwards of 150 first
  prizes.

  “At the time ‘Silver Lambkin’ was bred there was no chinchilla stud
  cat, and no one had thought of trying to breed chinchillas, for whom,
  as before stated, there was no encouragement at shows or at home.

  “The third litter which brought further fame to ‘Beauty’ was by ‘Bonny
  Boy,’ who in the early nineties was placed second in the class for
  silver tabbies at the Crystal Palace, but was considered by admirers
  of chinchillas to be the best cat in the whole show—an honour,
  however, which came to him a month later when at Brighton he was
  awarded the special for the most perfect specimen of the Persian breed
  in the exhibition; he had previously been claimed at Sydenham, by the
  Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, at his catalogue price of £6 6s., and was
  afterwards renamed ‘Nizam.’

  “The only information that could be obtained about this beautiful cat
  was that he was exhibited by Mrs. Davies and that he came from Wales.
  Report suggested that he was imported, but there is no evidence of any
  chinchilla cat having been sent from abroad.

[Illustration:

  MRS. WELLBYE’S “SILVER LOTUS.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “‘Beauty’s’ litter by ‘Nizam’ consisted of one male and four females,
  two of which, as ‘Twin and I’—so named because they were so exactly
  alike—won first prizes and medals wherever shown. Another was sold by
  me to Mrs. Martin, which, as ‘Lambkin Queen,’ was the foundation of
  the afterwards noted cattery at High Wycombe. ‘Twin’ eventually went
  to Mr. Lawton, who renamed her ‘Queen of the Mist.’ Mated with ‘Silver
  Lambkin’ she produced ‘Sea Foam,’ the first chinchilla to win a prize
  in a class solely confined to cats of the colour. There was an amusing
  coincidence about this win, inasmuch as after considerable trouble had
  been taken to get a separate class for chinchillas, the judge gave the
  first prize to a heavily marked silver tabby, thus totally ignoring
  the desired object. This occurred at the Crystal Palace in 1893 or
  1894. The two first classes ever given for chinchillas were this one
  and that given at Cruft’s first cat show at Westminster, held in
  March, 1894.

  “The next that was heard of ‘Twin’ was that she had succumbed from the
  effects of swallowing a needle. ‘I,’ registered as ‘I, Beauty’s
  Daughter,’ remained the whole of her lifetime at The Lodge, Penge,
  where, when paired with the pale blue ‘Champion Bundle,’ ‘Southampton
  Duchess’ was the result, the latter the mother of the ‘Silver
  Lambkin’s’ most sensational son ‘Champion Lord Southampton,’ who was
  sold by Mrs. Greenwood for £60, when he became the property of Lady
  Decies, this being probably the highest price that has ever been given
  in England for a cat of any variety. ‘Champion Lord Southampton,’ who
  has been a very great winner, is remarkable for the lightness of
  colour and slight markings of his kittens, this being undoubtedly due
  to the strain of blue in his blood. Many beautiful cats own him as
  sire, notably Miss Leake’s ‘Seraph,’ Mrs. Bluhm’s ‘Silver Sultan,’
  Mrs. Neild’s ‘Absent-minded Beggar,’ Miss White Atkins’ ‘Tintagel,’
  Mrs. Tyrwhitt Drake’s ‘Musa,’ Mrs. Rickett’s ‘Empress Josephine,’ Mrs.
  Earwaker’s ‘Buxton Cloud,’ Mrs. Geo. Walker’s ‘Woodheys Fitzroy,’ Mrs.
  Barnes’ ‘Nourmahal,’ winner of the Chinchilla Club challenge for the
  best kitten, 1899, and a daughter of ‘Champion Fulmer Zaida,’ shown by
  Lady Decies at the Crystal Palace in 1901, also ‘Green-eyed Monster.’

[Illustration:

  MRS. WELLBYE’S SILVER “DOSSIE.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “Whilst speaking of ‘Tintagel’ it may be remembered that he sired a
  charming litter exhibited by Mrs. Poole, which were first at the
  National Cat Club show at the Crystal Palace, and one of which won as
  a single kitten at the Botanic Gardens in 1902.

  “Other famous progeny of ‘Silver Lambkin’ are ‘Silver Mist,’
  ‘Watership Cæsar’ (who won the gold medal at Boston, U.S.A., for the
  best cat in the show, 1902), ‘Silver Tod Sloan,’ ‘Silver Owl,’ Mrs.
  Bluhm’s ‘Silver Lily,’ ‘Silver Squire,’ and ‘Mowgli,’ the last-named
  bred by Mrs. Dunderdale, but later the property of Mrs. Smyth, of
  Forest Hill, one of the most enthusiastic admirers of chinchillas, who
  has in her possession the stuffed figure of ‘Beauty.’

  “A chinchilla that gained a considerable notoriety was ‘Sweet
  Lavender,’ the property of Mr. Hawkins. This was a beautiful specimen,
  very light in colour. The latter was also a distinctive feature of the
  Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison’s ‘Ameer,’ a son of ‘Lambkin Queen,’ who
  stands prominently forward as one of the most perfect of his kind.
  Mrs. Martin’s ‘St. Anthony,’ whose name appears in the pedigrees of
  several winners, is a brother of ‘Ameer.’

  “As the sire of Lady Decies’ ‘Champion Fulmer Zaida,’ the most lovely
  chinchilla female that has ever been seen, ‘Silver Laddie,’ who is now
  unfortunately gone to his happy hunting grounds, can claim to have
  been one of the most noted of sires, more particularly as he was also
  the father of many others of great value, prominent amongst which were
  Miss Horsman’s ‘Aramis,’ Miss Snell’s ‘Starlight,’ ‘Silver Cherub,’
  ‘Lady of Quality’ (one of the most perfect chinchillas ever bred),
  ‘Charterhouse Pixie’ (the dam of ‘Tod Sloan’), and numberless others.

  “Not only as a chinchilla, but when competing with all breeds of cats,
  both long and short-haired, ‘Champion Fulmer Zaida’ has proved her
  excellence, and has on more than one occasion secured the cup at the
  Crystal Palace for the best cat in the whole show. She was bred by
  Mrs. Bluhm, one of the pioneers of chinchillas, and, it is stated, has
  now won 136 first and special prizes, and that Lord Decies has refused
  £90 for her.

  “‘Zaida’ has also produced some first-class kittens, amongst which was
  Miss Stisted’s ‘Pearl,’ the owner of the latter pretty queen being a
  most devoted admirer of the chinchilla and sparing no expense to
  further its interests.

  “Mrs. Bluhm’s strain of chinchillas are all very light in colour, and
  show great quality, which may also be said of those of Mrs. Wellbye,
  whose ‘Silver Lotus’ and ‘Veronica,’ daughters of ‘Silver Squire’ and
  ‘Dossie,’ did so much winning in their day.

  “Miss Meeson has also shown considerable enthusiasm in her endeavour
  to reach the ideal, her best efforts having resulted in ‘Jupiter
  Duvals,’ of wide fame.

  “Two clubs have been formed in connection with the chinchilla cat—one,
  the Silver Society, embraced other coloured cats besides the
  chinchilla, this eventually becoming the Silver and Smoke Persian Cat
  Society. It was owing to this club encouraging shaded, or marked,
  silver cats and orange eyes that the Chinchilla Club was formed by
  Mrs. Balding. This Club has the honour of having as patron H.S.H.
  Princess Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein, who owns and exhibits some
  beautiful chinchillas, and Lord Decies as vice-president.

  “The Chinchilla Club gives its support and specials, besides
  guaranteeing classes at any show whose management apply. The
  conditions on which the specials are presented is that the cats to
  which they are awarded must be the property of members of the club,
  prize-winners in their respective classes, and registered cats.

  “The club prizes usually consist of half a guinea in each class, and
  the more coveted Special of the club’s badge for the best chinchilla
  of either sex. Badges were selected in place of the ubiquitous medal,
  because most of the dainty professional beauties very soon obtain a
  considerable number of the latter, and smart little badges were more
  appreciated.

  “The club’s present challenge trophy for chinchilla kittens is a solid
  silver model of ‘Silver Lambkin,’ offered by the hon. secretary for
  competition amongst its members; it is also open to members of the
  National Cat Club, in acknowledgment of the compliment paid by the
  latter to the original in choosing his statuette to surmount their
  challenge cup. The little history of the origin of this special has
  never appeared in print before, and as I was not present at the
  committee meeting referred to, ‘I tell the tale as ’twas told to me.’
  When the challenge cups of the National Cat Club were designed in
  1897, it was decided that the beauty and interest attached to them
  should be enhanced by immortalising on each the most representative
  cat of the long-haired and short-haired varieties. For the latter the
  great ‘Xenophon’ was chosen without hesitation. Then came the more
  difficult task of deciding upon a recipient for the distinction from
  the long-haired ranks, which claim so much of the beauty and wealth of
  winnings of the cat world as to render the singling out of one a
  matter of consideration. To hasten the termination of the discussion
  Mrs. Stennard Robinson sent for a collection of cat photographs which
  had been left to her by the late Miss Portman, the well-known ‘Rara
  Avis’ of the _Lady’s Pictorial_. Amongst these the hon. secretary of
  the N.C.C. pointed out one—with no name attached—as the most beautiful
  photograph of the lot. This was recognised by most of the committee as
  being ‘Silver Lambkin,’ so the honour fell to him.

[Illustration:

  MRS. WELLBYE’S SILVER “VERONICA.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “By some error at the makers’ the long-haired cat was placed on both
  challenge cups, and it was determined by the club that the superfluous
  model which had to be removed and replaced by ‘Xenophon’ should be
  mounted as a letter-weight and given as a challenge prize for kittens,
  to be won three times before becoming the property of the winner.
  After some keen competition, covering about half a dozen shows, Mrs.
  Martin won it outright in 1899, when it was replaced by the present
  exactly similar model.

  “The endeavour of the Chinchilla Cat Club, of which all the leading
  breeders and most successful exhibitors are members, is to continue
  the work that has been done to improve chinchillas, and to produce a
  new variety the colour of the palest shade of the fur (dyed) known as
  ‘blue fox,’ or a very light shade of pigeon blue. Without doubt such a
  result can be obtained by careful selection and—‘the little more.’
  Darwin’s words on the subject of selection are attractive to all
  owners of live stock. He says: ‘Improvement is by no means due to
  crossing different breeds. All the best breeders are strongly opposed
  to this practice, except sometimes amongst closely allied sub-breeds.
  And when a cross has been made, the closest selection is far more
  indispensable even than in ordinary cases. If selection consisted
  merely in separating some very distinct variety and breeding from it,
  the principle would be so obvious as to be hardly worth notice; but
  the importance consists in the great effect produced by the
  accumulation in one direction during successive generations of
  differences absolutely unappreciable by an uneducated eye. Not one man
  in a thousand has the accuracy of eye and judgment sufficient to
  become an eminent breeder.... Few would readily believe in the natural
  capacity and years of practice requisite to become even a skilful
  pigeon fancier.’

  “The Chinchilla Cat Club is also prepared to encourage cats of new
  colours, which should now be not so very difficult to produce,
  considering the points that have been brought out in those varieties
  that were well known, the latter showing that it is possible to breed
  to a standard if judgment is used in the endeavour to do so. Some of
  us remember the time when a blue cat, either long or short-haired (now
  the largest classes), was a _rara avis_ when Mrs. Lee’s ‘Meo’ was the
  only Siamese at the Crystal Palace show, smokes an equal oddity, blue
  eyes in a white cat a comparatively unnoticed point, and
  cream-coloured cats entirely unknown.

  “The colour of the chinchilla has been bred in various ways. In bygone
  days, when chinchilla cats were flukes or freaks and few and far
  between, methods which would now be considered somewhat eccentric were
  resorted to by the first breeders of the colour. The useful
  tortoiseshell, from which black, red, cream, or tabby cats can be got,
  was pressed into the service, and, paired with a silver or light blue
  tabby not too clearly marked, would occasionally, amid the
  multi-coloured kittens for which tortoiseshells are proverbial, throw
  a medium chinchilla or light silver tabby, which with careful
  selection might, a generation or two later, develop into something
  approaching a good chinchilla.

  “But it is, perhaps, more difficult to foretell with cats than any
  other animal what the result of pairing will be with anything like
  certainty. This particularly applies to the ordinary English cat, as
  it is impossible to guess at the mixture of different-coloured
  creatures which have preceded it, and any of which may influence the
  progeny of its descendants. A fancier who would produce any particular
  specimen must, amongst other gifts, be equipped with the patience of
  biblical celebrities and prepared to wait seven years, as one
  enthusiast actually did before arriving at the fulfilment of his
  desires in the shape of a well-marked tabby kitten.

[Illustration:

  SOUTHERN CATTERY, SHOWING ENTRANCE TO INFIRMARY AND INDOOR CATTERY.
]

[Illustration:

  MRS. WALKER VISITING HER PETS.

  TWO VIEWS OF WOODHEYS CATTERY.
]

  “With pedigree cats, of course, the chances of unexpected traits
  reappearing in their progeny are considerably lessened, and, given
  desirable connections on both sides of some years’ standing, the
  personal attributes of a coming litter may be predicted more or less
  successfully. One of the loveliest of smokes—the correct black, with
  white under-coat, without the shadow of a stripe—was from a brown
  tabby queen, from brown tabby parents, and a chinchilla bred from a
  chinchilla dam and smoke sire. Again, a brown tabby with white paws,
  whose appearance did not suggest the bluest of blood, mated with the
  same chinchilla sire, produced in a litter three chinchillas and two
  faintly marked silver tabbies, which would nowadays have been styled
  ‘shaded silvers’ by followers of the dubious hue. Needless to say,
  these instances are not given to encourage the idea of breeding
  chinchillas from brown tabbies, but as illustrations that just as the
  results of pairing a cat with one of nondescript pedigree cannot be
  guessed, so in an animal carefully bred for generations so indelibly
  have the characteristics of the breed or variety been stamped upon it
  by past ancestors that it is practically impossible for them to become
  obliterated or submerged.

[Illustration:

  “SILVER BLOSSOM.”

  OWNED BY MRS. WALKER.
  (_Photo: Findlow & Co., High Wycombe._)
]

  “Thus the type once fixed survives, though it be by the aid of the
  most incongruous connection, such as a brown tabby. Had the latter
  been the patrician bred from progenitors of her colours, and the
  chinchilla been the one of doubtful lineage, the result must, of
  course, have been reversed, and the kittens, in all probability, would
  have followed the brown tabby strain. If neither parent cat when of
  distinct varieties can boast a particularly dominant strain, the
  offspring naturally partakes of the peculiarities of both.

  “Colour, in chinchillas, is the most important point. It should be of
  palest silver, lavender tint, and lighter—in fact, practically
  white—at the roots. There should be no dark blotches or stripes or
  brown tint on the back or about the nose. A rusty hue is, however,
  sometimes caused by the action of the sun or wind. As regards bars or
  stripes on head, these should be as few and light in colour as
  possible, with a view to breeding them out altogether in the future.

  “The coat should be long and thick, of fine, soft texture, much
  thicker and longer round the neck, forming a decided frill and mane,
  the latter reaching well down the fore legs. It should also be longer
  on the hinder part of the thighs, forming _culotte_, and very bushy on
  the tail, which should be short and wide. The legs should be slightly
  feathered, with tufts of hair between the toes. There should also be
  tufts in the ears, which should be very small and set low.

  “The head should be wide at the forehead and short in the muzzle, well
  filled up below the eyes, giving it a round appearance. The eyes large
  and luminous, in colour emerald green with black lids. Green and
  yellow mixture is permissible, but not so picturesque as the green;
  yellow in the eyes is not desirable. In shape the chinchilla should
  have a level back, and be only slightly long in the couplings. The
  legs should be short, with round paws, the latter well padded. When in
  full coat the hair should nearly reach the ground and the frill
  envelop the back of the head, making a very fascinating whole.”

  The following is the standard of points as drawn up by the Chinchilla
  Cat Club. It is also used in America as a basis for criticism:—

  1. Colour of Coat.—Palest silver, lavender tint preferred, nearly
       white at roots. No dark stripes, blotches, or brown tint.
       Darker tips to the long-hairs give the coat an appearance of
       being lightly peppered with a darker shade. The whole
       appearance of the cat to be very pale                          30
  2. Coat.—Long and thick                                             20
  3. Texture of Coat.—Fine and soft                                   10
  4. Tufts of hair inside and round the ears and between the toes     10
  5. Head.—Broad and round; forehead wide, ears small and set low,
       nose short                                                     25
  6. Shape.—Back level, not too short; legs short, paws round; brush
       short, wide, and carried low                                   20
  7. Eyes.—Large, luminous, and green in colour (if green mixed with
       yellow, 5 points only allowed)                                 10

  To breeders of silver Persian cats an article by Mrs. Neild will be
  valuable and instructive. Mrs. Neild has made, so to speak, a
  speciality of silvers, and owns two noted silver studs—the
  “Absent-minded Beggar” and “Lord Hampton.” There are always some good
  silver queens, and very frequently some choice kits, disporting
  themselves in the well-arranged catteries at Hart Hill, Bowdon, where
  Mrs. Neild has a kennel of Borzois and a cattery of silvers.

  This is what Mrs. Neild says regarding the breeding and rearing of
  silver Persian cats:—

  “Perhaps of the many varieties Persian cats—and, indeed, they are a
  goodly number as they now appear on our show catalogues and
  schedules—the silvers may claim their owners to be the most sporting
  of cat breeders. Certainly, to breed successfully it is essential that
  one should possess the not too common virtues of unlimited patience
  and perseverance. Also experience is necessary.

  “A common occurrence among even old hands is to assign a kitten—one of
  a new litter under inspection, as being of ‘little good except as a
  pet’—‘to be sold at a small sum to a good home,’ and a few weeks later
  discover this same kitten to be the pick of the litter. In short, the
  old, old story of the ugly duckling incessantly repeats itself in our
  catteries, certainly in those devoted to silver cats. Therefore I
  suspect fanciers who have succeeded (all honour to the few!) and those
  who mean to succeed in breeding silver Persian cats of possessing a
  larger stock of patience and of having acquired a larger experience
  than their brothers and sisters whose love has turned towards the
  blue, black, or white pussies.

[Illustration:

  “SILVER BLOSSOM’S” TWO BUDS.

  (_Photo: Mrs. G. H. Walker._)
]

  “With these last three one may be tolerably sure—always taking for
  granted some knowledge—of fairly pure coat colour, and at a very early
  age the best kittens of the litter may be picked out—those having
  greatest breadth of skull, smallest ears, etc. But the silver litters
  are a veritable surprise packet, and remain so for an irritatingly
  long period. Personally, I have found that those kittens which, when
  born, have very pale—almost white—unbarred faces and fore legs are
  ultimately those which grow palest. I take no notice of the colour of
  the coat on the back, sides, hind legs, or tail, even if striped, as
  frequently happens, for all these markings generally vanish _if_—as I
  before said—the face and fore legs are unbarred. I must, however, own
  to one kitten who was born jet black. She was by Mrs. Champion’s ‘Lord
  Argent’ and a shaded silver queen of my own breeding. When a month old
  I dubbed her a very bad smoke; at three months she was coatless—a most
  indecent little person, having shed her coat more completely than I
  had ever seen in cat or kitten. When, after a provokingly long period,
  she again consented to appear clothed, her dress was of palest silver,
  unadorned by any markings except a very faint smudge on her forehead
  and—which, alas, spoilt her for show—a darker tinge on her broken
  tail. How is it that to our _best_ some accident _always_ happens? So,
  as I could not exhibit her, I sold her to a delightful home in the
  North of England, and her enthusiastic owner wrote to me a few weeks
  since that her big babies by ‘Lord Hampton’ were as pale as the
  mother, who herself grew steadily of a fainter silver.

[Illustration:

  “WILD TOM.”

  SILVER, BRED BY MRS. G. H. WALKER.
  (_Photo: Mrs. G. H. Walker._)
]

  “Unfortunately, silvers more than any other breed of cats lack bone,
  caused, of course, by the unavoidable in-breeding practised when this
  variety of cat was first introduced and so enthusiastically welcomed,
  and when but one or two fanciers owned a cat of such shade. Another
  article on this subject, by a lady who may really claim to have
  established this breed, will explain to the reader more than it is in
  my power or province to declare.

  “To go back to the subject of our small silvers, in-bred to delicacy.
  We should now remember how many good sires, absolutely unrelated and
  within easy reach, are placed at our disposal. Therefore, surely there
  can be no possible excuse if in a comparatively short time we do not
  manage to own silvers big in bone and limb, and owning—ah! happy
  accompaniment—greater constitutional vigour.

  “We are, I believe, too apt, if owning a pale queen, to mate her with
  the palest known stud, disregarding other very important
  considerations in the all-absorbing wish to breed the wonderful ‘dirty
  white’ king or queen of silvers. Sometimes this atom (verily so) of
  perfection does make its appearance, and is enthusiastically greeted.
  But what of the mite itself? A tiny, sickly scrap of a kitten,
  constantly ailing, refusing to grow or to weigh, except at a rate of
  less than half the average blue kitten of its own age. But
  extraordinary care keeps the mite alive until one day some chance
  draught or a maid’s carelessness ends our careful nursing, and the
  poor owner of that ‘lovely dirty white kit’ at last realises that this
  other good-bye means it may be wiser to mate that same pale queen to
  the strongest, hardiest, biggest-boned stud possible to be found among
  our silver studs, even if he is rather barred.

  “Now mark. From the result of this mating, keep the best of the female
  kittens and marry her—if possible, not before she is eighteen (at any
  rate, fifteen) months old—to a stud unrelated, sturdy, of undoubtedly
  splendid health, for preference paler than herself, and boasting grand
  head and the essential tiny ears and short nose. Then you may dream
  your dreams with a chance of their resulting in a golden reality.

  “If breeders would but spend rather more thought when they select
  husbands for their pussies, they would be indeed repaid. I am not
  speaking, of course, to the fortunate few who have won their laurels,
  and of whom I would I might learn; although I rather suspect their
  secret of success is but the result of continual study, coupled with
  extreme care. Would not an enormous increase of size and weight soon
  become evident in the occupants of our catteries if, when a queen was
  about to be mated, her owner would first carefully study the list of
  points provided by the Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society
  (previously quoted in this work), jotting down those good qualities to
  which she believes her queen may lay claim, and then selecting that
  sire possessing the points most wanting in her own cat—of course,
  never forgetting relationship? The old rule about in-breeding is ‘once
  in, twice out,’ as all old fanciers know; but where silver Persian
  cats are in question, I would most strongly urge that this adage be
  disregarded, and, as a rule, avoid in-breeding entirely until a
  stronger race of silver cats is established, cats with frames equal to
  those big blue beauties we see at our shows. I think that in a
  comparatively short time—of course, always avoiding tabby blood,
  breeding _chiefly_ for bone—our silver cats may be very different to
  those of to-day, those who own too fairylike limbs to be beautiful.

  “A word about our famous sires—and, by the way, we may congratulate
  ourselves on having within reach so many beauties. Often I have
  letters asking for advice as to which stud such and such a queen shall
  visit; and, in addition to the above suggestions, I would remind the
  owner that length of journey should be taken into consideration, and
  the fact that if the chosen sire is extremely popular it may be that a
  better result may be gained if the queen is sent to one not so much in
  request, especially if the owner of the stud cat has not been warned
  before of the visit of your pussie. However, most owners of stud cats
  are extremely careful in limiting the number of visitors, and few
  object to keeping Sir Thomas free for a week beforehand if given due
  notice.

  “Do let me urge all whom it may concern to keep Madame in close
  confinement for several days after her return home. Indeed, in the
  interest of the owner of both stud and queen this is of vast
  importance, and many a disappointment is due to this seemingly small
  neglect. Puss does not always return as one would wish, however great
  the care given her whilst away on her holiday, and may take her
  matrimonial affairs into her own paws with results most unsatisfactory
  to everyone but herself. When the kits arrive, do not—if you have
  reason to expect valuable kittens as a result of the mating—leave more
  than two or three with the mother (I am, of course, speaking of silver
  kittens) for reasons I shall directly state. By far the best plan is
  to procure (some time before the birth of both litters) a good big
  English cat as foster mother, one known to have brought up a previous
  litter—_not_ an old cat. The usual method of substituting her foster
  for her own babies is to take away the mother cat for a few minutes—of
  course, out of sight—and, removing one of her own kittens, rub the
  little silver baby with the hay of the nest and against the other
  kittens so that the strange smell—sense of all others so wonderfully
  developed in animals—may not raise suspicion in the foster mother.
  Then the next day remove one or two more.

  “May I, at this point, plead that the little kittens taken from their
  mother for your benefit should not be drowned? If they must be sent
  along the silent road to the Quiet City, let it be done mercifully and
  by chloroform. Such wee things may rest easily in a big biscuit box,
  the lids of which usually close tightly, and about 1 oz. of chloroform
  poured on a piece of flannel or sponge laid on a small saucer by their
  side will send them painlessly to sleep.

  “The reason I strongly advise that the English foster should nurse the
  _best_ of the litter is but an echo of the old cry, ‘Want of bone.’
  Fed by the sturdy British puss, the delicate tiny balls of silver
  fluff will gain greater strength, and be mothered for a longer period
  than would be possible with their real parent.

[Illustration:

  “FUR AND FEATHER.”

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke_)
]

  “It is necessary to remember that, although the foster mother needs
  extra food when nursing—just as in the case of the silver mother—more
  caution must be exercised when beginning the more liberal diet, for
  very probably, if this is forgotten, a liver attack—which will also
  affect the precious kits—will be the result of her unusually liberal
  fare. Remember, also, to inquire of the owner of your foster as to how
  she has been fed. With this knowledge, common sense and careful
  watching of cat and kittens will quickly show if it would be better to
  increase or diminish her meals either in quantity or quality. It is of
  enormous value to bespeak the foster mother, if possible, four or five
  weeks before the birth of the kittens, for then it will not hurt to
  give her what is almost certain to be necessary—_i.e._ a worm powder.

  “I always allow my mother pussies as much milk as they like (although,
  as a rule, my cats drink water), but it should be boiled, and one
  tablespoonful of lime-water added to each half-pint. When I once urged
  this care of the foster mother to a friend who owned two kittens she
  was extremely anxious to rear, I was laughed to scorn, and assured
  that such fussiness about a strong English cat was more than foolish.
  Yet I would remind breeders who are inclined to agree with the above
  opinion that on the perfect health of your head nurse rests the future
  of your much-prized litter. On her depends their growth, their first
  chance of throwing off their natural delicacy. Mr. House, in one of
  his articles lately published in _Fur and Feather_, advises that
  kittens should be kept with and fed by their mothers as long as
  sixteen weeks. In my humble opinion this is too great a strain on any
  Persian cat, but there may be great wisdom in keeping the kits with
  the mother or foster for as long as it is possible without overtaxing
  the cat. The same authority speaks of a relay of foster mothers. I
  confess this puzzles me, for I should imagine that the food supplied
  by the second mother would be too weak in quality (as Nature provides
  it shall be of different quality to suit the age of all and every kind
  of baby) for the big kits after that of the first foster, and I should
  have also imagined the second foster would refuse to nurse kits so
  much bigger than those she had just left.

  “When my kits are four weeks old I give them raw lean beef—scraped,
  not chopped—beginning with half a teaspoonful daily, then the same
  quantity twice daily, then three times a day; and at the same time
  teach them to lap, using a plate, which, being shallower than a
  saucer, causes less choking and fear to the little things.”

  Mrs. G. H. Walker, of Woodheys Park, is the chief supporter of the
  Northern Counties Cat Club, and is a member of the National Cat Club
  Committee. For several years she has been a well-known breeder and
  exhibitor of silver Persians, and has a most excellently planned
  cattery, which I had the pleasure of seeing when on a visit to
  Woodheys Grange. Mrs. Walker kindly had some views taken, specially
  for reproduction in these pages. I consider the arrangements for the
  pussies’ comfort and well-being as complete as it is possible to make
  them. The floors of the outside catteries, which face south, are
  cemented, so that they can be washed over every day. The roofs are
  boarded, and then covered with galvanised iron, so that all the rain
  runs away easily. The spacious apartments are fitted with benches and
  ledges, and trunks of trees and leafy shrubs are planted in the ground
  for the cats’ special amusement and exercise. The kennels—which, for
  the purpose of photographing them have been placed outside—are the
  cosy sleeping dens of the pussies. There is a maid in attendance on
  these fortunate cats, and the man who looks after the kennels of dogs
  also gives a helping hand.

[Illustration:

  “THE SILVER LAMBKINS.”

  BY “RAHMAN” _ex_ “BEAUTY.”
]

  In one of the pictures will be seen a staircase, and this leads to
  three charmingly arranged rooms. All the appliances and utensils
  connected with the animals are kept in one of these apartments.
  Another is set apart for mothers and their families, and a third is
  kept in case of illness for an isolation ward. In one of the loose
  boxes near at hand the cooking for the pussies is carried on, and
  there is a larder specially for the cats’ food. Mrs. Walker devotes
  much of her time to looking after her pets, and great has been her
  sorrow over the untimely death of some of her treasured pussies. After
  one of the large shows, infection crept into her cattery, and worked
  most cruel havoc. Such losses as Mrs. Walker sustained were enough to
  damp the ardour of the most enthusiastic cat lover and fancier; but
  the lady of Woodheys Grange bravely faced the situation, and after a
  period of sad reflection she once again resumed her hobby with renewed
  interest. At the Northern Counties Cat Show at Manchester in 1902 Mrs.
  Walker exhibited a really wonderful silver kitten. I say wonderful,
  for this youngster, bred from the owner’s “Woodheys Fitzroy” and
  “Countess,” was the most unshaded and unmarked specimen of a silver I
  have ever seen. This unique specimen will be watched with interest by
  silver fanciers. May his shadings ever grow less!

  The average number of inmates of this cattery is about thirty, but at
  one period of Mrs. G. H. Walker’s catty career the silver fever ran
  high, and there were sixty-three cats and kits within the precincts of
  the spacious and luxurious catteries of Woodheys Grange.

  Mrs. Martin, of High Wycombe, who has often acted as judge, has been a
  most successful breeder of silvers, and the progeny by “St. Anthony,”
  her noted sire, have distinguished themselves by winning over one
  hundred prizes. “St. Anthony” has retired into private life, but he
  will always be remembered if only by his two children “Silver Dove”
  and “Fascination.” Mrs. Martin says, “I am all in favour of the male
  being older than the queen in breeding silvers; also select a
  good-coated stud cat, short in the legs. Eyes are a worry just now. Of
  course, I like green best, but if a cat is good in all points but
  colour of eye, this should not upset an award. I find that if a kitten
  is born almost self silver, it will develop into an indifferent silver
  tabby later; but if the body is dark, and head and legs light and
  clear, you may hope for a very unmarked specimen in due time.”

  Mrs. Wellbye’s silver cats “Dossie,” “Silver Lotus,” and “Veronica”
  were at one time well-known winners, and for length of coat and beauty
  of eye have seldom been surpassed. Mrs. Wellbye is a most astute judge
  of silvers, and her remarks on this her favourite breed will be read
  with interest:—

  “This handsome variety of the Persian ranks high in the estimation of
  cat lovers; indeed, its ardent admirers consider it the _crème de la
  crème_ of the cat world. And why not? Surely there is nothing to
  compare with a lovely young chinchilla Persian in full coat. Its very
  daintiness and seeming pride in itself is quite charming. One is
  reminded of a pretty child dressed out in its party frock, for puss
  appears to know it is well dressed and desirous to show her charms to
  the best advantage. She dances, pirouettes, and throws herself into
  the most graceful and entrancing attitudes, until we feel in sympathy
  with the Egyptians of old and are willing to fall down and worship our
  adorable pets. We all love beauty, but to those who love cats there is
  something beyond even beauty, for only they who keep and care and
  treat them well know the comfort these little creatures are, and the
  happiness they can bestow by their sweet caressing ways, perhaps more
  especially to those whose hearts are starved of human love, but still
  to all whose sympathies are wide of the varieties of silver cats. I
  will first treat of the chinchilla.

  “The Crystal Palace show of 1895 or 1896 was the first I remember with
  a class for chinchillas; previous to that, I believe, they were not
  recognised as such, but were shown with the silver tabbies. Strictly
  speaking, the name chinchilla is a misnomer as applied to these cats.
  The soft grey coat of the little animal called the chinchilla, whose
  lovely fur is so much prized as an article of ladies’ dress, differs
  diametrically from the cat so-called.

  “The fur of the chinchilla is dark at the roots, and shades quite pale
  grey at the tips. The cat’s fur, on the contrary, is absolutely pale
  grey, almost white at the roots, but tipped with black at the outer
  edges.

  “The points as laid down by the Silver Society are as follow:
  ‘Chinchillas should be as pale and unmarked silver as it is possible
  to breed them.’

  “The aim of the breeder of this variety, therefore, is to obtain a cat
  with none of the markings of the original stock (the silver tabby),
  the dark tippings to be slight and faint.

[Illustration:

  BROWN TABBY AND SILVER PERSIANS.

  (_From a Painting by Miss F. Marks._)
]

  “Breeders have found this ideal most difficult to obtain; although
  some kittens are born pale all over, with no markings, in a few
  weeks—or maybe months—the hope of the family is no more, for the
  lighter the kitten the more delicate. ‘Whom the gods love, die young.’
  Or, again, if the cherished one lives over its baby troubles, and
  starts on the change from its first, or kitten coat, to the second
  coat, too often do the markings appear, the shadings get darker, or
  fine black hairs are seen amongst the pale grey. Some of the best
  chinchilla kittens have been born quite dark, and with tiny stripes
  all over. At a month or six weeks these marks have disappeared, and
  later the coat has become an even silver.

  “The breeder must not even then build high hopes. Again change may
  occur. There is no cat which varies so much; it is quite
  chameleon-like in this respect.

  “A few years ago the Cat Club adopted the name of ‘self silver’ as
  applied to the chinchilla—another misnomer, as a self silver should
  have no tippings or shadings, and the silver cat has not been bred
  that had fur the same shade throughout from roots to tips.

  “The slight dark edging to the fur constitutes to most people the
  charm in these silvers. Sometimes it is almost imperceptible to the
  casual observer; or when the cat is in full coat (the fur being from
  three to seven inches long on the tail—sometimes as much as nine
  inches) the tiny fleckings are lost in wavy, tossing, billowy coat.
  But let the coat become damp, however slightly, it will be seen that
  the dark edges are clearly in evidence.

[Illustration:

  “JUPITER DUVALS.”

  OWNED AND BRED BY MISS S. MEESON.
  (_Photo: F. Parsons, Southend-on-Sea._)
]

  “As, however, breeders could not always produce the pale shade of
  silver, the litters, even with the most careful mating, being
  generally assorted in good, bad, and indifferent so far as colour was
  concerned, many fine cats—dark silvers—had no place assigned to them.

  “It was then suggested that a class should be given at the shows to be
  called ‘shaded silver,’ the points according to the Silver Society
  being as follows:—

  “‘Shaded silvers should be defined as pale, clear silver, shaded on
  face, legs, and back, but having as few tabby markings as possible.’

  “The dark or shaded silvers, it was understood, should have pale,
  clear under-coats; but instead of the fleckings of the self silver
  (so-called), the dark edges ran a considerable way into the fur. The
  shaded silver is a handsome cat, but too often much marked on the face
  and barred on the legs, a defect most difficult to overcome. Many cat
  fanciers describe the shaded silver as a ‘spoilt tabby.’

[Illustration:

  THE ELDER MISS BLOSSOM.

  SILVER, OWNED BY MISS HORSMAN.
]

  “The third in the group of silvers is the silver tabby. The points are
  here stated:—

  “‘The colour of a silver tabby should be a pale, clear silver, with
  distinct black markings.’

  “This variety ought in equity to have been mentioned first, as it is
  the original stock, but it has been overshadowed by the superior
  attractions of the chinchilla. (Silver tabby enthusiasts will perhaps
  pardon this eulogy of my favourite breed.) There is not the slightest
  doubt this handsome cat, the silver tabby, has suffered materially
  from the craze for the newer variety, and consequently the type has
  not been kept pure. They have been mated over and over again with cats
  of less markings in the hope of breeding chinchillas, until at the
  present day there are very few silver tabbies true to type.

  “The position of the silver tabby in the feline scale is very
  peculiar. As a Persian it is, of course, necessary that its coat
  should be long and fine, whilst as a tabby it is desirable that the
  markings should show up to advantage. How to reconcile the two is the
  puzzle, for the longer the coat the less the markings are evident, as
  the stripes are merged in the flowing coat, so that we sometimes see
  at the cat shows exhibits woefully out of coat placed in the first
  rank, as the markings are much more distinct. It follows, then, in
  this variety of the silver, a long coat is distinctly a disadvantage
  when competing at shows.

  “Having now obtained three types for silvers, and the Cat Club willing
  to give classes for them at the great shows held in St. Stephen’s
  Hall, Westminster, the outcome was looked forward to with much
  interest. But it was one thing to get four types, and quite another
  matter to get silver breeders to understand the fine distinction;
  consequently, the cats were entered in self silver, shaded silver, and
  silver tabby classes indiscriminately. The result was, of course,
  muddle and confusion, many exhibitors having the mortification of
  finding ‘Wrong Class’ on the cat pens.

  “At a recent show held at Westminster under the auspices of the Cat
  Club, the judge was asked by the Honorary Secretary to go round the
  classes first, and if any exhibit was wrongly placed to re-classify
  before judging. This worked satisfactorily so far as disqualification
  was concerned.

  “At this show, however, the judge was confronted with another
  difficulty, it being found that most of the cats in the classes for
  shaded silver had deviated materially from the standard of points laid
  down by the Silver Society. Instead of the clear, pale under-coat, the
  fur was a dark grey right down to the skin. The majority of these cats
  were quite dark, and, rightly speaking, were not silvers—that is, if
  one bears in mind the metal so named. It is difficult to say in what
  class they could be placed, unless a new class was created, to be
  called ‘clouded or oxydised silver.’ If we go on to these subdivisions
  we shall not know where to stop. Self silver or chinchilla, shaded
  silver, clouded silver, and silver tabby—a truly appalling problem for
  the bewildered judge to decide, for the majority of exhibitors would
  not appreciate the variations.

  “It may come to this eventually, but at the present time the threefold
  classification leads to much confusion, for as nearly—or very
  nearly—all silver cats are more or less tabby marked, so will
  exhibitors be in doubt as to the class to which their cats rightly
  belong.

  “It is a question if the introduction of the shaded class at shows has
  not done more harm than good, for as previously we saw very few of the
  dark silvers—it not being worth breeding the variety when there was no
  class in which to show them—so now the tendency of exhibits, as anyone
  who attends shows can see, is to run to darkness rather than light;
  and breeding for colour, purity of colour, and absence of markings has
  received a set-back, for with some judges colour is nothing, and
  prizes will be showered upon a ‘spoilt tabby’ if it happens to have,
  perhaps, a broader head or a bulkier body—good points, as everyone
  will allow, but points which the common or garden cat may possess; and
  we do not pit our dainty chinchillas against all and sundry.

  “Without wishing in any way to detract from the good qualities which
  the more plebeian branches of the cat tribe undoubtedly possess, it is
  impossible not to award the palm for grace and beauty to the highly
  bred aristocratic chinchilla. Coal and iron are useful, but we give
  our admiration to diamonds and pearls.”

[Illustration:

  “DOLLY DAYDREAM.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  Before closing the chapter on silvers, I will allude to the Cat Club
  show held at St. Stephen’s Hall, Westminster Aquarium, in January,
  1903. On this occasion there was quite a record entry in the male
  silver class, which contained twenty-one cats. The list was headed by
  Mr. J. F. Dewar’s handsome “Father O’Flynn II.” Many well-known
  prize-winners had to be content with a V.H.C. card in this class of
  quantity and quality. The females numbered eighteen, and here again a
  noted winner was awarded the highest honours. Miss Chamberlayne’s “Cap
  and Bells” is very pale and pure in colour, and carries a soft, silky
  coat. In the silver kitten class the sexes were not divided, and Miss
  Ford’s lovely kittens scored first and third. A sweeter face and
  rounder head than that possessed by “Silver Button,” the first
  prize-winner, would be difficult to find, and Miss Ford may be
  congratulated on having bred such a gem. Mr. T. B. Mason judged the
  silver classes at this show, and he doubtless experienced some
  difficulty in testing the colour of the exhibits in the bad light of
  St. Stephen’s Hall, more especially as on the opening day of the show
  a dense fog hung over the city. Another difficulty which must present
  itself to our most capable judges is the awarding of specials offered
  for silvers and shaded silvers. Perhaps the easiest way out of this
  difficulty is to give the shaded silver prizes to the darkest cats;
  but all are shaded, even the palest, and therefore some judges might
  justify themselves if they awarded both sets of specials to the one
  cat. At this show Lady Marcus Beresford offered three special prizes
  in each silver cat class for the palest specimens, one of these in the
  male class being won by her own handsome “Beetle,” a son of the famous
  “Lord Southampton.” The classification for silvers at the specialist
  societies’ show at Bath, which followed close after the Westminster
  show, was the largest that has ever been given, consisting of classes
  for novices and breeders, in addition to the ordinary division and
  subdivision for cats and kittens. The sensible plan of a ring class
  for neuters _only_ was adopted.

  Members of the specialist society for the encouragement of silvers
  must on this occasion have felt proud of the liberal classification
  and of the long list of handsome special prizes offered for their
  favourite breed of long-haired cats.

[Illustration:

  “I WANT TO GO HOME.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




[Illustration:

  “THE MARQUIS OF DINGLEY.”

  SILVER TABBY, OWNED BY MISS ANDERSON LEAKE.
  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]




                             CHAPTER XIII.
                         SILVER TABBY PERSIANS.


  There can be no question that a really good silver tabby will carry
  off the palm even from the most exquisite unmarked silver cat, and in
  this assertion I feel I have the support of all our professional
  judges, for with the “mere man,” it is well known, the pale silvers do
  not stand high in favour. Men call them “wishy-washy,” insipid, and
  wanting in expression, and are generally displeased at this sport in
  the fancy that has spoiled the handsome silver tabbies of years gone
  by.

  No doubt there is just cause for complaint, for the inter-breeding of
  silvers with silver tabbies has undoubtedly done much to destroy the
  clear defined markings which in tabby cats is their chief glory. Now,
  of course, it is easily understood that these tabby markings in a
  long-haired cat cannot be so distinct as those that appear to such
  advantage in the short-haired breeds. “The better the coat the weaker
  the markings,” may be said of Persian silver tabbies, and judges have
  been known to give the highest award to an out-of-coat specimen just
  because the markings are more evident than in a cat in full pelage.
  Harrison Weir states that “Tabby is not a Persian colour,” and goes on
  to say, “Nor have I ever seen an imported cat of that colour.” His
  definition of a silver tabby reads thus:—“Markings: Jet-black lines,
  not too broad, scarcely so wide as the ground colour shown between, so
  as to give a light and brilliant effect. When the black lines are
  broader than the colour space, it is a defect, being then black marked
  with colour, instead of colour with black. The lines must be clear,
  sharp, and well defined, in every way distinct, having no mixture of
  the ground colour. Head and legs marked regularly, the rings on the
  throat and chest being in no way blurred or broken, but clear,
  graceful, and continuous; lips, cushions of feet, and the backs of
  hind legs, and the ear points, black.” And here it will be interesting
  to give the discussion which took place and the list of points drawn
  up at the inaugural meeting of the Silver Society in 1900, and which
  standard is still adhered to in the present Silver and Smoke Persian
  Cat Society:—


                            SILVER TABBIES.


    At the meeting of the Silver Society, discussion arose as to whether
    the markings on silver tabbies should be broad or narrow. Lady
    Marcus Beresford proposed that Miss Leake and Mrs. Herring should be
    asked to express an opinion, both being breeders of prize-winners.
    Miss Leake said she thought there were two distinct types of cats,
    the one with broad markings, the other with narrow stripes, and that
    both were correct silver tabbies, the superior beauty of either
    being a matter of personal opinion. Mrs. Herring agreed, and said
    the markings should be a dense black. Miss Leake considered they
    should be black at the tips, but shading to light at the roots. Mr.
    Abbott objected to the word “dense,” as black was black, and the
    word “distinct” was substituted. Finally the following was
    resolved:—The colour of a silver tabby should be a pale clear
    silver, with distinct black markings, any brown or cream tinge to be
    considered detrimental. The eyes should be orange or green:

                        Head and expression  25
                        Colour and markings  25
                        Colour of eyes        5
                        Coat and condition   20
                        Shape                15
                        Brush                10
                                            ———
                               Total        100

    The adoption of the preceding descriptions and scale of points as a
    whole was carried unanimously.


[Illustration:

  MISS LEAKE’S SUMMER CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

  As regards the eyes of a silver tabby, Harrison Weir says “deep bright
  yellow.” The Silver Society gives an option of “orange or green”; but
  the mandate of present-day fashion and personal bias is in favour of
  green eyes for silver tabbies. From an artistic point of view, there
  is no doubt emerald green is a better contrast to silver than yellow
  or orange.

  The Rev. R. Maynard, whose name has for many years been connected with
  silver tabbies, recently complained in the papers of the tendency to
  breed green eyes in this variety. He writes: “In former days we never
  had anything to do with a cat that had green eyes, and now that so
  much is being done to improve the feline race, why should we try to
  think the green eye right and even desirable?” Another authority says:
  “The fiat has gone forth that silver tabbies are to have green eyes.
  Happily there still remains room for a difference of opinion on the
  subject, for the oldest and most perfect breeds of silver tabbies have
  always been distinguished by their deep hazel eyes.”

[Illustration:

  SILVER TABBY KITTENS OWNED BY H.H. THE PRINCESS VICTORIA OF
    SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  This vexed question of eyes, certainly outside the “self” classes,
  ought not to be one of such vast importance. As Louis Wain aptly
  writes when complaining of this undue proportion of points, “Everyone,
  judges and exhibitors alike, are bitten by the craze for the ‘correct
  coloured eyes.’” It is a fault that judges are prone to commit, and
  truly one point ought not to be allowed to outweigh others, and it is
  just this balancing of merits with a mingling of common sense that
  makes the good all-round judge, whether of self or tabbies, of long-
  or short-haired cats. In judging a class of tabbies, first and
  foremost in the judge’s estimation must rank the markings, and in
  Persian tabbies coat must next be taken into consideration. I have
  always thought that judging long-haired tabby cats in a ring class
  would be specially welcomed both by judges and exhibitors, for it is
  when a good cat of this breed runs or walks the beauty of his markings
  can be seen and admired. Then the dark spine lines will show up to
  advantage, the side markings will stand out, and the bars on the legs
  and the rings round the neck may be clearly discerned. I think it is
  not to be wondered at that fanciers who have bred tabby cats are not
  easily satisfied as regards selfs and silvers. A friend of mine
  declared, “I always miss the stripes which give a tabby cat such a
  sweetly expressive countenance.” Yet in spite of the beauty of the
  silver tabby, there are very few fanciers of this variety, and to
  those wishing to take up Persians I could not recommend a more
  interesting field for speculative breeding. The number of good show
  specimens can be counted on the fingers of one hand. Silver Tabby
  classes at our shows are full of nondescript cats with shaded silver
  bodies and markings only on legs and head.

  When judging the silver tabbies at the Crystal Palace in 1902, I was
  greatly struck with the number of cats and kittens which ought really
  to have been marked “Wrong Class,” for some of these were absolutely
  wanting in any definite marks at all; some had faint grey pencilling
  on the head and legs, but not a sign of the dense mottling on the
  sides. It is, no doubt, disappointing to exhibitors to have their
  specimens labelled “Wrong Class,” or for really lovely kittens to be
  passed over without even a card; but it is only by thus treating
  exhibits so lacking in the essential point of the class for which they
  are entered that fanciers will learn to discern between the genuine
  article and what may be called a spurious one. These pretty
  nondescript silvers, which are neither one thing nor the other, should
  be disposed of as pets; but to enter them at our shows in classes for
  tabbies is only throwing away money and risking the animals. No cat
  has come nearer to the perfect ideal of a silver tabby in our day than
  Lady Pink’s “Shrover II.,” now gathered to his fathers. He possessed
  the wonderfully clear silvery white ground with distinct dark
  markings, and was always the admired of all admirers at our leading
  shows. Lady Pink is not without some worthy descendants of her famous
  “Shrover II.,” and writes to me thus: “I have a smoke male by ‘Shrover
  II.,’ and hope to show him at Westminster. ‘Shrover III.’ is just like
  his father ‘Shrover II.,’ but I shall not exhibit him, as I am too
  afraid of losing him. I have suffered many losses after shows.
  ‘Shrover III.’ is a fine, big fellow, even better marked than his
  father, with long silky, wavy coat, lovely eyes, and a perfect
  temper.”

[Illustration:

  “BEAUTIFUL DUCHESS.”

  OWNED BY MRS. G. H. WALKER.
]

[Illustration:

  WINTER QUARTERS AT DINGLEY HILL.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

  Mrs. Herring has bred some fine silver tabbies, notably “Duchess
  Lestock,” a sensational kitten at the Westminster show of 1900, when
  she was claimed at a high price by Mrs. G. H. Walker, of Woodheys
  Park. Mrs. Herring’s “King Alfred” was the sire of “Shrover II.,” and
  is quite “one of the best.” Miss Anderson Leake is justly celebrated
  as a most enthusiastic and successful breeder of silver tabbies, and
  is our greatest authority on this variety, As far back as 1887 “Topso
  of Dingley” was exhibited by Miss Leake at the Crystal Palace. This
  cat was said to be of Irish descent, but his ancestors were sunk in
  oblivion. Not so, however, his progeny, for the winnings of his son
  “Champion Felix,” owned by Miss F. Moore, of Beckenham, are fresh in
  the minds of those who, like myself, can remember beautiful cats of
  bygone years. In 1889 Miss Leake entered “Topso” and two toms in a
  class for “blue or silver tabbies, with or without white.” “Felix” was
  also in this class, as a winner of the Challenge Cup. Miss A. Leake’s
  “Abdul Zaphir” and the present representatives of the breed “Abdul
  Hamet” and “Marquis of Dingley” are household names amongst silver
  tabby fanciers. Miss Derby Hyde has long been faithful to this breed,
  and “Thames Valley Silver King” and “King Alfred” have often had to
  fight it out together at our shows, sometimes one being favoured by
  the judge and sometimes the other carrying off the honours. Miss Cope
  has recently been bitten with the silver fever, and her tabby kittens
  are always to the fore. Her “Roiall Fluffball” took first and seven
  specials at Westminster in 1901, and her “Silver Tangle” is a
  well-known winner. Mr. Furze, another Midland fancier, is also making
  a speciality of silver tabbies, and the Hon. P. Wodehouse possesses a
  fine silver tabby female in “Silver Saint.” Mrs. Slingsby owns “Don
  Pedro,” a beautiful specimen, and Miss Meeson has bred some good
  silver tabbies as well as silvers. But the ranks need filling, and
  with the assistance of the society now in existence the classification
  at shows will become more liberal, and instead of silvers and browns
  being often placed together at our smaller shows, separate classes are
  guaranteed, for it is certainly most unfair on judge and exhibitor to
  place these two very distinct breeds together. “Comparisons are
  odious,” we are told, and certainly it is hard on the brownies for the
  more brilliant silvers to be placed side by side in competition. As
  regards the mating of silver tabbies, the essential point to try and
  breed for is markings, and it behoves the fancier to endeavour to find
  a sire with bold, distinct tabby markings, and if it is desired to
  strengthen the colour, then a black is not at all a bad cross. There
  are two distinct kinds of tabbies—the blotched and the pencilled
  varieties; and it is a matter of choice which is considered the
  handsomest. But it does not do to mate these two varieties together. A
  well-known authority on breeding silver tabbies writes thus in _Fur
  and Feather_:—“A great deal has been said as to the disadvantage of
  crossing chinchillas with silver tabbies, but we think this applies
  more to the detriment of chinchillas than of tabbies. Provided the
  tabby, on one side, is of a very decided type, the chinchilla, having
  come originally from the same stock, may not prove a bad cross. Miss
  Cope’s ‘Silver Tangle,’ for instance, one of the best-marked silver
  tabby queens, is the child of the chinchilla ‘Silver Chieftain,’ and
  of a queen bred from a silver tabby sire. A good young queen,
  belonging to Mr. Hoddinott, was bred from ‘Lord Argent’ and a tabby
  mother. ‘Champion Felix’ was bred from ‘Topso,’ a heavily marked
  tabby, and ‘Lady Pink,’ a cat that would nowadays have been called a
  light shaded silver with white markings. ‘Climax’ came of the same
  parents, and both have broad dark markings, and transmitted them to
  their offspring. The union of two strongly marked silvers is not
  always a complete success. A brown tabby makes a most excellent cross,
  and some of the purest and best silvers we have seen have been
  obtained in this way. Of course, you must be prepared for a brown
  tabby kitten or two; but you need not fear sandy smudges and yellow
  noses. The colour seems to be concentrated in one or two examples, and
  leaves the silver free. In short, in colour breeding we must be
  content with one or two perfect specimens in a litter, and, retaining
  them, try again for yet further perfection.”

  The cat fancy needs some new sensational cat to appear on its horizon,
  and if only a perfect silver tabby, male or female, could be penned at
  one of our leading shows a great impetus would be given to this
  variety, and a thoroughly good strain might be established. Then we
  should not read such remarks as these from the pen of the reporter:
  “The silver tabbies, we regret to say, were only a shade of days that
  are gone. There is room for an enterprising enthusiast in this breed.
  The beautiful clear silver colour with deep black markings seems to be
  quite a thing of the past. Who will revive them?” And echo answers,
  “Who?”

  From such an authority as Miss Anderson Leake the following article on
  silver tabbies will be of great interest, and the photos of her
  cattery at Dingley Hill, Bradfield, near Reading, have been specially
  taken to illustrate these notes:—

  “Possibly amongst the rarest of our long-haired cats may be classed
  the really well-marked silver tabby. Twenty years ago he existed, and
  was, indeed, more commonly met with than to-day. For at that time
  chinchillas were practically unknown, save for a few scarce specimens,
  and the silver cats of that day were more commonly called ‘grey’
  Persians, and were nearly always tabbies. But with the popularity of
  the pale chinchillas began the downfall of the heavily marked tabby.
  Instead of breeding for the preservation of markings, everyone worked
  their hardest to breed out markings, and real tabby kittens were
  almost unsaleable. Those that were produced were very frequently
  ventured, and sold at a low price for pets. The lightest specimens in
  a litter were preserved for breeding purposes, and rarer and rarer
  became the deeply marked silver tabby. But at last the tide has
  turned, and people are beginning to realise that there is a character,
  a beauty, and a contrast of colouring in a good tabby, which lend to
  them a charm all their own. Added to this, they are exceedingly rare
  and difficult to produce.

  “Competent judges agree that to breed regular, symmetrical, and
  well-coloured markings is no easy task, for _contrast_ is the grand
  point in a silver tabby. His ground coat from tip to tail should be
  pure pale white silver. On this light silver ground-work lie the most
  beautiful even dark mottlings, dark to the point of blackness. These
  markings are most difficult to describe. A dark stripe runs the whole
  length of the spine. Then comes a light stripe on either side, then
  two more dark stripes, but these are broken just behind the shoulder
  by a transverse bar of light silver, and widen on the shoulder into
  considerable sized patches. The markings on the sides are not stripes,
  but patches, elliptical in shape, generally three in number, and
  partially encircled by dark stripes. The shoulder is particularly
  heavily barred and striped, as are also the hind quarters. The legs
  are barred throughout their length, the face should be dark, with dark
  tufts, and the back part of the hind legs from the knee downwards is
  black, as in a Southdown sheep.

  “The head is most beautifully pencilled, the cheeks possess double or
  treble swirls, the eyes are outlined by dark rims; on the forehead the
  lines form a complete triangle, which is repeated at the nape of the
  neck. The chest is encircled with a perfect dark ring, called the
  ‘Lord Mayor’s chain,’ but this is concealed when the large light frill
  is in full beauty, as is also the neck triangle. The whiskers often
  contain all the different shades of colour found in the coat. The ear
  tufts should be long and light. The tail is generally ringed from
  trunk to tip, but this is not noticeable after kittenhood, owing to
  the great length of the hair. Also the hair to the root is much darker
  in colour on the tail than on the body.

[Illustration:

  IN THE STUDIO.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]

[Illustration:

  MISS COPE’S “STARLET.”
]

  “The correct colour for the eyes of a silver tabby is neither green,
  orange, nor yellow, but hazel—a deep nut-brown. This shade of eye is
  very difficult to obtain, and it fades with age; but once seen, its
  beauty and suitability to the colouring of the cat will never be
  denied. Many of the most noted prize-winners have not possessed this
  coveted hazel eye. The nose is by preference dark, but this, so far,
  has not been considered as a point.

  “Not only evenness and regularity of markings go to the making of a
  good tabby, but sharpness and depth of colour in the dark parts, and
  clearness of colour in the light parts. A great deal has been said of
  late regarding the depth of the black markings; but it is quite as
  necessary to insist on the purity of the silver tone. No suspicion of
  brown must be tolerated, neither any blue nor grey tone.

  “There is no question that, as a tabby, a long-haired cat is
  handicapped by his length of coat. There are some people who would rob
  him of his crowning glory in order that his beautiful striping may the
  better appear. But surely it were better for them to confine
  themselves to short-haired cats if they cannot appreciate the marvel
  of long-haired tabby markings. For marvellous they truly are, when we
  consider that the dark marks are only formed by tips to the hair of
  some quarter of an inch in length. When the coat is quite short these
  tips are massed together, and the blackness is, so to speak,
  concentrated. When the hair is at its full length—of from two to four
  inches—it can be readily understood that the long floating locks mix
  and mingle with the paler coat, and some distinctness of marking is
  lost. The massive frill and the long light shoulder tufts give the cat
  a very pale frontage; and if he be placed in a show pen side by side
  with a cat whose coat is just coming, whose marks show up, in all
  probability he will take a second place. No stroking, blowing of the
  coat, or other device will show off a tabby cat. He must be made to
  get up and walk. Then the long coat falls apart, the spine lines
  reveal themselves, the side patches fall into place, and bars,
  stripes, swirls, and rings all are to be seen. Even then you will not
  see them all at once, but as he moves and turns one by one the points
  will show themselves. As a show cat, a tabby is not a success, for his
  period of perfect beauty is exceedingly short. When he proposes to
  moult he changes colour, and if you are unwise enough to exhibit him
  at this stage ominous whispers of ‘Brown tabby blood’ will pass from
  mouth to mouth. For a thorough good rusty brown shade, commend me to a
  moulting silver tabby. Then a little later he completely loses his
  side markings, and you must wait until the new coat makes its
  appearance before you can venture him in the show pen. In the first
  beauty of that new coat, when the hair is about an inch long, he is a
  dream of colour contrast, and somehow suggests such ineffable
  cleanliness!

  “How to breed silver tabbies is a moot point. One thing is certain,
  that if we expect whole litters of well-marked kittens we shall be
  grievously disappointed. Personally, we have had the best results from
  pairing two marked cats slightly related and of good silver pedigrees.
  A smoke of silver origin is another good cross, but the sire should
  always be a tabby. The blacker the kittens are at birth the better.
  There is no sign of light under-coat, but generally narrow pencillings
  of silver are to be seen, and face and paws are fairly light. The
  kittens which at birth show contrast of dark and light rarely turn out
  good tabbies. The markings, as a rule, become too faint. At a month
  old the light markings should widen and develop, and at three months
  old the full beauty will be seen. Before the change to cat coat, many
  of the kittens become more shaded than marked, and up to the sixth or
  eighth month there is always a possibility of their proving
  disappointing. If, however, after this age the markings return,
  harden, and develop, they will endure for ever, except during periods
  of moulting. In extreme old age both the purity of colouring and
  distinctness of markings are lost. Exposure to the sun considerably
  injures the colour of the silver tabby cats, giving them a brown
  tinge. We believe exhibitors of magpies never allow their birds to
  enjoy the rays of the sun for a similar reason, but it is a question
  whether it is not wiser to study the beneficial effects of a sun-bath
  on the health of our cats rather than the slight detriment to their
  coats caused by its enjoyment. I have said nothing about size and
  shape. The silver tabby should be a large cat, with good bones, and
  very heavily coated. The old-fashioned cats were very long, low on the
  legs, and a trifle narrow in head. Nowadays we have remedied this
  defect, and the modern cats are decidedly more cobby than their
  progenitors. The ears should be set wide apart, and be small and not
  too sharply pointed. If only fanciers will now devote themselves to
  the production of such cats as I have tried to describe, we shall soon
  see the silver tabby classes at our shows filled with typical animals,
  instead of, as is too often the case, with spoilt silvers, too heavily
  marked to be called chinchillas, too unevenly or lightly marked to be
  correct tabbies.”

  I have mentioned Miss Cope as a breeder of silver tabbies. Her remarks
  on her favourite breed are as follows:—

  “There is no doubt that until quite recently interest in this
  fascinating breed had, to a great extent, died out, owing to the craze
  for chinchilla breeding. But I hope their day is coming again. There
  is a marked improvement already shown in the silver tabby classes at
  the best shows.

[Illustration:

  A PAIR OF SILVER TABBIES.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “Mr. St. George Mivart, in his celebrated book, asks, ‘What is a cat?’
  But even so simple a question as that appears from his statement to be
  more easily asked than answered. The same may be said of the question,
  ‘What is a silver tabby?’ I will endeavour to answer the question by
  giving my own idea of what may be considered to be a perfect type of a
  silver tabby. The chief point of a silver tabby should be clearness
  and distinctness of markings; the sharper they are the better. My
  ideal cat would have the two spine stripes clear and well defined from
  shoulder to base of tail, set off by the ‘epaulet’ behind each front
  leg. On each side of the body should appear what may be called the
  horseshoe; both sides should match exactly. The hind quarters well
  barred. The fore legs should also be barred, each in symmetrical
  correspondence with the other. The double cheek swirls, the markings
  on the forehead, which may be easily imagined to take the shape of a
  lyre, the shaded eyebrows and whiskers, and dark outlines to the eyes,
  all these give a character to the face not found except among tabbies.
  More or less conspicuous will be the dark lines across the chest,
  known as the ‘Mayor’s Chain.’ Occasionally some more favoured animal
  is found to have two such lines. The beauty of all these markings is
  thrown up by the ground colour of the coat, which should be a clear
  bright silver. The whole effect, if one may so describe it, is like a
  piece of elaborately wrought black lace on lustrous silvery silk. The
  colour of the eyes is somewhat a vexed question. Some fanciers prefer
  green. Personally, I think nothing is more lovely than the hazel eye,
  enhanced by dark rims. Happily, latitude is allowed in this direction
  in the standard drawn up by the Silver Society, which decrees the
  colour shall be the green or orange. But with all these, my ideal
  silver tabby must have perfect shape of body, so far as it is possible
  to obtain it, as well as luxuriance of coat. The long, thin-bodied,
  snipy-headed, spindle-legged cat is an abomination. The ideal cat must
  be cobby, with short, thick legs, the head broad and massive, ears
  small, well tufted and set wide apart, the nose short and wide at the
  tip, the tail short and wide at the extreme end—I consider a pointed
  tail very undesirable. The coat of the ideal silver tabby should be
  long and thick, and the texture as silky as possible.

[Illustration:

  MISS DERBY HYDE’S “THAMES VALLEY SILVER KING.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “Having described my ideal silver tabby, the next question is how to
  get it. When I succumbed to the fascination of the long-haired
  beauties some years ago, I resolved to breed only from the very best
  stock obtainable, and I have unflinchingly adhered to this rule. I
  would like to impress upon anyone starting this delightful hobby that
  it is absolutely a waste of time and money to attempt breeding from
  any but the best. The observance of this principle will save many
  disappointments, much heart-burning, and not a little money. Having
  made up one’s mind which breed one admires most, it is far better to
  keep to that particular variety, and win success worth having, than to
  dabble in a variety of breeds with only a moderate amount of success.
  To a rigid observance of these principles I owe any honours in the
  show pen which have been awarded to me. It is of little use taking up
  the breeding of long-haired silver tabbies unless one is possessed of
  unlimited patience and perseverance. It is sometimes very
  disappointing to find the kitten one fondly hoped would prove a coming
  champion merging into a shaded silver—exquisite in colour and as far
  as head, shape, and coat are concerned, but none the less not a silver
  tabby. Here comes in the study of pedigree. It by no means follows
  that the mating of two tabby parents will result in a litter of pure
  tabby kittens, unless both sire and dam are of pure silver tabby
  lineage. Hence purity of pedigree on both sides is of great
  importance.

  “If there is a trace of chinchilla blood in the ancestry it is certain
  to manifest itself at odd times in the progeny. Nevertheless, do not
  despise your shaded silver, if it be a queen, providing all other
  points are perfect. As Miss Leake says—and I quite agree with her—‘You
  no longer have a show specimen, but you have a cat that, crossed with
  a heavily marked cat, will probably provide you with splendid silver
  tabbies.’ This, however, can scarcely be called the true science of
  breeding, as the progeny of two such cats may hark back to some of the
  original characteristics.

  “My own practice is to mate silver tabby with silver tabby invariably,
  and of the purest pedigree I can find. I should never breed from a
  sire that I knew possessed a brown tabby ancestry. I would far rather
  choose a good black sire, and in this way strengthen the markings. Of
  course, one would not expect a mating of this kind to produce a litter
  of champion silver tabbies; but if I secured one well-marked kitten I
  should feel quite repaid. On the general question of breeding, Mr. C.
  A. House, who is no mean authority, and whose suggestions I have often
  followed with advantage, recently said: ‘If I were asked to pick out
  in a certain cattery a pair of silver tabby Persians which would be
  likely to make a good match, I should proceed on lines similar to the
  following:—Shape and size with quality of coat I should expect the dam
  to possess. Marking, colour, length of coat, colour of eye, and
  strength of bone, I should demand in my sire. This is, of course, if I
  were selecting from cats whose ancestry was quite unknown to me. My
  reasons for so doing are because in nine times out of ten the sire
  influences the outward characteristics of the progeny, while in like
  ratio the dam exercises her influence over those points which are more
  hidden. The dam has far more to do with shape than is generally
  supposed, and I would rather breed from a bad-headed male than a
  bad-headed queen. Quality of coat must always be looked for in the
  queen.’

  “With regard to in-breeding I have no hard-and-fast rules to lay down.
  The whole matter, in spite of what one and another may say, is too
  experimental and speculative for anyone to dogmatise. The authority I
  have just quoted remarks on this matter: ‘It sometimes happens that a
  fancier puts together two animals which excel in some particular
  property, yet not one of their progeny is above the standard of
  mediocrity, so far as that property is concerned.’ Experience has
  shown me the importance of studying the weak points of the dam. These
  I try to remedy in selecting the stud cat. But with all my care I
  sometimes find ‘the best laid schemes ... gang aft agley.’

  “For the successful keeping of cats and rearing of healthy kittens, my
  prescription begins and ends with two words—liberty and fresh air. I
  have found cats can stand any amount of cold, providing, of course,
  they have never had artificial heat previously. Two things must be
  carefully guarded against—damp and draught. These are fatal. Kittens
  so reared will be healthier, grow better coats, and will be much
  better able to stand the wear and tear of show life. My own cats live
  in wooden houses, raised at least one foot from the ground, the size
  at least seven and a half feet by five and a half feet. Each house is
  fitted with an inner wire door, as well as the outer wooden one. Along
  the entire length of the upper part of one side is a wire netting
  window, with a broad shelf fitted beneath. This opening has also a
  sliding shutter fitted with glass panels. I am thus able to give
  ventilation at will, or fasten them up securely in bad weather. In one
  corner of the house is a cosy sleeping box: in another corner an
  equally cosy chair. All cats love a chair. Cats kept outside, when
  they are admitted to the house, invariably find out the most
  comfortable corner of the most comfortable chair. In such a house as I
  have described, kittens can be successfully reared; there is ample
  room for them to scamper round should a wet day keep them in. Unless
  it is absolutely raining all my cats have the run of a large garden
  the whole day, and are only shut up at night. I never coddle my
  kittens, but try to bring them up as naturally as possible.

  “I am sometimes asked how it is my kittens attain such good
  proportions. The secret, if secret there be, lies in this—I never
  allow my mother cats to nurse more than two kittens after the first
  week. If a foster cannot be found, I select the two I consider the
  most promising, and the lethal chamber claims the rest. Some may
  consider this foolish. I can only say I would far rather rear two
  thoroughly healthy kittens than five or six little puny things that
  will require weeks of care and attention, and then fail to reach the
  end in view. Baby silver tabbies, I must admit, are not altogether
  things of beauty and of joy. More often than not they are dark and
  uninteresting. The time to decide which is the best-marked kitten is
  while the coat is comparatively short. When compelled to make a
  selection, I usually give the preference to the darker kittens.
  Experience has taught me that the lighter kittens, so attractive in
  themselves, even at that early stage, and whose colouring is so
  exquisite at eight or nine weeks old, are apt to prove deceptive in
  the end, and often develop into shaded silvers.”

  To Miss Cope’s last statements I can add my testimony, but I will also
  mention a curious case coming under my direct notice and regarding my
  own silver stud cat. “Cambyses” is by “Mowgli” (a noted pale silver of
  “Silver Lambkin” strain) and a handsome silver tabby unknown to fame,
  being a house pet. When I became possessed of “Cambyses,” then five
  months old, he was a decided silver tabby, taking after his mother; he
  has since shed all his markings, except faint grey pencillings on head
  and legs, and is one of the lightest silvers at stud. When mated to
  smokes and silvers I have not known or heard of any tabbies in the
  litters; but on one occasion, when crossed with a silver tabby, he had
  some very densely marked tabbies. I have remarked that this beautiful
  breed of Persians has not been taken up by American fanciers in the
  same enthusiastic manner as have blues, orange, and especially
  silvers. In an account given by _Field and Fancy_ of the Beresford Cat
  Club show in New York, January, 1903, I find mention made that over
  125 long-haired cats were entered, and that in the silver classes
  alone there were thirty-five entries, almost as many as were entered
  in the whole long-haired section of the previous year. The smoke male
  class was cancelled, but eight females of this breed put in an
  appearance. No mention is made of silver tabbies. Amongst the winners
  of the challenge cups offered by the Atlantic Cat Club, a silver tabby
  called “Queenie,” owned by Mrs. Wagner, carried off the trophy. Miss
  A. Leake, of silver tabby fame in the English fancy, has exported some
  of her stock, and no doubt our American cousins will not let this
  beautiful breed remain long neglected, but some enthusiastic fancier
  will establish a strain on the other side of the herring pond.

  At the Westminster Cat Club show of 1903, held about the same time as
  the Beresford New York show, the entries in the three classes provided
  for silver tabbies numbered twenty-seven, which is an increase on
  previous years, but with two or three exceptions quality was lacking.
  No new names appeared in the catalogues, and Miss Anderson Lecke and
  Miss Cope carried off the highest honours.

  The winner in the female class was “Roiall Fluffball,” whose portrait
  appears below, and who is the best-marked silver tabby that is now
  before the public. Miss Cope must be proud of having bred so fine a
  specimen by Miss Anderson Lecke’s “Abdul Hamel of Dingley,” whose
  picture appropriately forms the heading of this chapter on silver
  tabbies.

[Illustration:

  “ROIALL FLUFFBALL.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS COPE.

  (_Photo: E. S. Baker & Son, Birmingham._)
]




[Illustration:

  MRS. STEAD’S SMOKE LITTER BY “RANJI.”

  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Baker Street._)
]




                              CHAPTER XIV.
                            SMOKE PERSIANS.


[Illustration:

  “JO” and “TINY” (SMOKES).

  (_Photo: Gross, Brooklyn, N.Y._)
]

  It is only within recent years that smoke Persian cats have really
  come into notice at all, and even now these lovely cats may be said to
  be sadly neglected in the fancy. It was not till the year 1893 that
  they were considered sufficiently popular to deserve a class to
  themselves. They were formerly relegated to the “any other colour”
  class, and very often at smaller shows this is where we find the
  smokes penned. A really good smoke is a thing of beauty, and it seems
  certain that as the fancy expands and the Silver and Smoke Cat Society
  looks after their interests, a good time will be in store for breeders
  of this handsome variety.

  Smokes may therefore be called a new breed, and it is a very
  distinctive one, made up, as it were, of the three self colours—black,
  white, and blue. It is a shaded cat without markings, the fur being
  pure white underneath and gradually assuming almost a black tone on
  the outer coat. The face, paws, and back down to the tip of the tail
  are the darkest parts, shading to a dark grey down the sides and on
  the under part of the tail. A very great beauty in smokes is the light
  frill and ear tufts, which lend an air of much distinction to this
  breed. The great failings in many smokes is the appearance of tabby
  markings; these especially mar the beauty of head and face, and take
  away from their value in the show pen. The tail should be quite free
  from any rims of light and dark, and should have the upper part an
  even dark colour, and underneath a cinder grey. Some smokes are so
  dense in the surface coat as to be really black cats with white
  under-coats, having none of the modulated grades of dark and light
  grey. These cats are often minus the light ear tufts and ruff, and
  therefore cannot be regarded as correct smokes. Then, again, there are
  light smokes which might almost be called silver smokes—very beautiful
  cats to look at, but far removed from the ideal smoke.

  Perhaps at some future time there may be a special classification for
  these cats, which are now without an abiding place at our shows. It is
  most important that the coat of a smoke should be long and of the true
  Persian flakiness, otherwise the chief beauty of the contrast between
  the light under-coat and dark outer coat is not seen to full
  advantage.

  I think I may say without fear of contradiction that, of all
  long-haired breeds, smokes present the most altered and absolutely
  dishevelled appearance when out of coat. The glory of the light frill
  disappears, and multitudes of lines and streaks can be plainly
  discerned. Then a very rusty brown tinge appears on the back, and the
  rich, glossy black surface coat vanishes. I owned a lovely smoke cat
  once that at certain times of the year—and, I may say, for most part
  of the year—was nothing better than a bad black, his only claim to the
  title of smoke being the general appearance of a dark cat that had
  spent his life in an ashpit. But when “Pepper” was in full feather, he
  was a joy to behold.

  It is curious that when the kittens are first born they appear almost
  a dead black, with no trace of a white under-coat. This appears
  gradually as the kittens grow, and at three weeks old the lighter coat
  becomes visible. Their faces and paws should be intensely black when
  born, as the tendency in smokes is to get lighter and not darker. If a
  kitten is born with the appearance of a smoke it will generally turn
  into what I have termed a silver smoke later on. As with black
  kittens, so with smokes: they are often very rusty in appearance, but
  this will disappear with their kitten coat. This also applies to tabby
  markings, though, of course, if there is any tabby blood in the strain
  the markings may be retained. For this reason it is most undesirable
  to mate smokes with tabbies; neither is it advisable to select a blue
  as a cross. The blue tinge destroys the purity of the white
  under-coat, which is one of the glories of a perfect smoke. It is a
  case of “like to like” in breeding smokes, and, failing this, choose a
  good black sire for your queen with amber eyes. This is especially
  advantageous if your queen should be light in colour, and throw light
  kittens; but if she is already too dark, mate with a chinchilla,
  avoiding, if possible, a green-eyed one.

  Above all things shun, as you would Sin, tabbies of any colour, and
  let your choice fall on a heavily coated sire. I have been told by
  smoke fanciers that it is much more difficult to breed a good smoke
  female than a male, and that the latter sex predominates in litters.

  I will here give the officially approved table showing the proportion
  of marks which should be awarded for points of smokes. This is as
  drawn up by the Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society, which has Mrs.
  H. V. James, our principal breeder of smokes, as Honorary Secretary:—

[Illustration:

  MISS BARTLETT’S TWO SMOKE KITTENS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]


                                SMOKES.


    Smoke cats should be black, shading to smoke (grey), with as light
    an under-coat as possible; light frill and ear tufts; eyes to be
    orange.

    Value of points:—

                        Head and expression   20
                        Colour of eye         15
                        Colour of under-coat  10
                        Absence of markings   15
                        Coat and condition    20
                        Tail                  10
                        Shape                 10
                                             ———
                               Total         100


  I think there are no fanciers or breeders of smokes who feel that any
  option should be given as to the colour of eyes in this breed, for, as
  in the black cats, the eyes should be amber or light golden. However,
  I must confess that brilliant green eyes are to be preferred to the
  pale yellow, which too often spoil the beauty of many of the smokes
  now exhibited. I should never place an indifferent smoke with orange
  eyes over a good specimen with eyes of emerald green. In the early
  days of the fancy, smokes were entered in the “any other variety”
  class, and were sometimes called Smoke Blues or Smoke Chinchillas.

  In 1891 Miss Manley (now Mrs. Strick) exhibited a fine smoke called
  “Bayadere.” Amongst the names of our oldest smoke breeders who still
  continue to breed I may mention Mrs. Cartwright, of Upwood. In 1895
  this lady showed smokes at Cruft’s show bred from her “Timkins.” The
  Upwood cats are very pure in colour, having the dense outer coat very
  white at the roots. At one time the Lindfield smokes held their own
  everywhere, Miss Molony winning first at the Crystal Palace in 1893
  with “Lindfield Bogie.” Mrs. Bluhm, better known as a silver breeder,
  also owned about this time a famous smoke female called “Smuttie.”

  Mrs. Robert Little has for years combined the breeding of smokes with
  blacks. In 1897 “Namouska,” a smoke female, won first at the Crystal
  Palace, and her descendants continue their career as first-class
  smokes. In more recent times the following are noted winners: Lady
  Marcus Beresford’s “Cossey,” Mrs. H. V. James’s “Backwell Jogram,”
  Mrs. Sinkins’ “Teufel,” Mrs. Stead’s “Ranji,” Mrs. Stillwell’s
  “Victoria,” Miss Snell’s “Dusky Girl,” Mrs. Collingwood’s “Minouche,”
  Rev. P. L. Cosway’s “Maritana,” Mrs. Neild’s “Silver Soot,” Mrs.
  Hamilton’s “Bulger,” Miss Rose’s “Judge.” Perhaps the most consistent
  and successful breeder of smokes now in the fancy is Mrs. H. V. James,
  who started in 1893, and has been faithful to this breed ever since. I
  have had the pleasure of visiting Mrs. James’s smoke cattery, and I
  felt that the lovely old-fashioned garden surrounding the Grange at
  Backwell was truly an ideal place for successfully rearing live stock
  of any kind, and all the pussies were pictures of robust health. I am
  glad to be able to insert the following valuable article on smoke
  Persians from the pen of Mrs. James, who is certainly our best
  authority on this breed.

  “Before entering upon the distinctive points of smokes, I will give a
  short account of my smoke cattery, and how I first took up this breed.
  It is curious to look back and see what mere chances govern our
  actions. I have all my life been devoted to Persian cats of one colour
  or another, but never intended to go in for any special breed.
  However, in 1893 I purchased a blue kitten, which, on its arrival,
  appeared far from well. The man who sold it offered, if it died, to
  replace it. In a few days I was in a position to accept this offer,
  for the kitten succumbed, and another—which was also supposed to be a
  blue—was sent to replace it. As time went on this kitten darkened,
  and, much to my disgust, turned to a deep cinder colour. In 1894 there
  was a grand West of England Cat Show held at Bristol, and, to please
  an old servant who had taken great care of the kitten, I entered
  ‘Jubilee.’ I was not much up in cat showing then, but ‘smoke’ seemed
  to answer the description of the kitten better than any other colour;
  so into the smoke class he went, and, to my surprise, carried
  everything before him. This started my career as an exhibitor. I
  showed ‘Jubilee’ again at Cruft’s and Brighton the next year, where he
  again carried off firsts, and was described as the best smoke cat seen
  since the days of the famous ‘Mildew.’

[Illustration:

  MRS. JAMES’S CAT HOUSES AT BACKWELL.

  (_Photo: F. Holmes, Clifton, Bristol._)
]

  “At the Palace in 1894, I bought a smoke female kitten from Miss Bray
  as a mate for ‘Jubilee.’ This mating proved successful, and I had
  several grand litters of smokes, most of which, I am sorry to say,
  went to swell the ranks of neuter pets, being given as presents to my
  friends. In time I learnt wisdom, however, and kept my smokes myself.
  ‘Jubilee’s’ career as a show cat was unfortunately cut short after his
  Brighton win in 1894. He escaped one night, and in a fight with
  another cat had his ears so torn that I was unable to exhibit him
  again. A year later, when I was away from home, he was let out one
  day, and never returned, having, I expect, been trapped in the woods.
  At that period my smokes nearly died out, as I had only one litter a
  few weeks old by ‘Jubilee.’ Of the two smokes one was promised, and
  the other I kept, and he is still alive as ‘Champion Backwell Jogram.’
  So I think I may consider I have had my share of luck, though, like
  most breeders, I have had my bad times, and have lost sometimes as
  many as twelve cats and kittens in a few days from distemper, and once
  or twice a very promising female has strayed into the woods and been
  seen no more. I hope, however, that for some years, at least,
  ‘Jubilee’s’ descendants will continue to flourish, as there are a
  number of ‘Jogram’s’ kittens scattered over England, and several have
  left these shores for America.

  “In mating my smoke queens I have several times tried a black sire,
  and have always been successful in getting good smokes from this
  cross. ‘Jubilee II.’ is an example, being by ‘Johnnie Fawe,’ Dr.
  Roper’s famous black Persian. I have only once—years ago—tried a blue
  cross, but the result was a mixed litter of blacks and blues. I have
  found that all the blue queens mated with ‘Jogram’ have had chiefly
  blacks. Smokes may be considered a very hardy breed, perhaps from the
  fact that there has been little in-breeding so far. ‘Jogram’ lives in
  an unheated wooden house all the year round, and has never even had a
  cold. Kittens will also stand the same treatment.

[Illustration:

  MRS. A. M. STEAD’S SMOKE PERSIAN “CH. RANJI.”

  (_Photo: E. N. Collins, S. Norwood._)
]

  “And now I will endeavour to give my ideas as to the points which go
  to make up a perfect smoke. A good smoke is perhaps one of the most
  beautiful of the many beautiful breeds of long-haired cats, a bad
  smoke one of the plainest. The novice—for whom this article is
  principally written—may therefore be glad to have a clear definition
  of a smoke to start with.

  “The definition drawn up by the Silver Society when it first started
  reads as follows: ‘A smoke cat must be black, shading to smoke (grey),
  with as light an under-coat as possible, and black points, light frill
  and ear tufts; eyes to be orange.’ But the word ‘black,’ having
  sometimes led novices to suppose that a black cat possessed of a white
  under-coat is a smoke, it would be perhaps safer to say ‘a smoke is a
  deep cinder-coloured cat shading to grey, with a white under-coat,’
  etc. In order to distinguish the difference between black and the true
  cinder colour of the smoke, it is an excellent plan to keep a sound
  black cat in a smoke cattery.

  “Smokes are, comparatively speaking, one of the newer breeds of
  long-haired cats, and arose from the crossing of blues, blacks, and
  silvers, and appeared as a freak in litters of blues or silvers, and,
  being beautiful, were kept by their owners. No serious attempt,
  however, was made to breed them until quite recently. If beauty and a
  hardy constitution count for much, they should be more popular even
  than they are at present; but no doubt the extreme difficulties of
  breeding a good, unmarked shaded cat deter many breeders from taking
  them up. With a whole-coloured cat it is fairly plain sailing when a
  strain, sound in shape and bone, has been established; but with a
  shaded cat it is quite another matter. Litter after litter of kittens
  appear, grand in shape, strong in limbs, apparently perfect in
  shading. In a few months the kittens moult, and the shading becomes
  perhaps a hopeless jumble of light and dark. Where it should be dark
  it has turned light, and _vice versâ_. Still worse, the shading
  disappears, and the markings—the bugbear of all smoke breeders—appear,
  showing traces of the far-away silver tabby ancestors. These markings
  have perhaps been lying dormant for a generation, and appear as a
  reminder of the silver tabby origin of the smoke.

  “To all smoke breeders who wish to succeed I would say, ‘Never part
  with a well-shaped smoke until at least a year old, lest you find you
  have, in rejecting the apparently ugly duckling and keeping the gem,
  thrown away the substance for the shadow.’ On the subject of mating,
  there is much to be said. I am afraid many owners of smoke queens mate
  with any coloured cat which takes their fancy in the hopes of getting
  something in the litter besides smokes.

  “I have sometimes heard owners say, ‘Oh! I mate my smoke queen with
  all sorts of colours. She always has one or two good smokes in each
  litter.’ That may be true, but if a smoke strain is to be built up,
  you are making a fatal mistake. The kitten thus bred goes to a new
  home and is expected to produce smokes as good as herself. She is
  mated with a smoke male, and when the litter arrives there are perhaps
  no smokes, she having thrown back to her sire, so as a breeder she is
  useless. Smoke to smoke must be the rule, except in special
  cases—when, for instance, the queen is on the light side; then a cross
  with a black may be found to be necessary. Or the queen may be too
  dark and given to breeding black kittens. Then the choice should fall
  on a silver as free as possible from silver tabby relations. On no
  account must a tabby of any colour be chosen or a sire with any white.
  A blue should also be avoided, as the under-coat is liable to take the
  blue shade and become blurred instead of _white_ at the roots.

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION BACKWELL JOGRAM.”
]

  “Orange eyes are much prized in smokes, and I believe, from my own
  experience in breeding smokes for the last ten years, that it is from
  the mothers that the kittens get their eye colour. If the queen has
  pale green eyes you may mate her with all the orange-eyed sires in the
  kingdom, and the eyes will still be pale. But if the queen has deep
  orange eyes, the kittens will inherit them also, even should the sire
  have only pale eyes.

  “Thanks to careful mating by some of our smoke breeders, smokes are
  not the flukes they once were, and a smoke queen, well mated, may now
  be relied upon to produce whole litters of smoke kittens. As a rule,
  the kittens at birth are quite black, and remain so for a week or so;
  and my experience has been that if a kitten shows any trace of grey at
  birth, it will grow up too light. There are, however, a few well-known
  queens who throw almost silver kittens, which remain so for weeks, and
  then shed this kitten coat for a darker one; so no hard-and-fast rule
  can be laid down as to what a smoke kitten should look like when born.
  Try in-breeding for coat to avoid the sleek or woolly-coated smoke,
  and aim at getting a cat with a coat of the true Persian flakiness
  described by Mr. Harrison Weir in his book on Persian cats, otherwise
  the chief beauty—the light under- and dark outer coat—is not seen to
  advantage as the cat moves. One point to be remembered in this breed
  is that the new coat growing is dark just at the roots. These marks,
  when the smoke is changing coat, have often been mistaken for tabby
  markings, so for this reason it is most unwise ever to show a smoke
  when out of coat. Wait until your cat is in full coat before accusing
  it of having tabby markings.

  “There is a fashion in smokes, as in everything else; and at present
  in England the very dark smokes are the rage, but in America the light
  ones are more sought after. That grand cat ‘Watership Cæsar,’ who was
  considered too light for English taste, was last year bought by the
  late Mrs. Thurston and taken to America, where he carried off all the
  smoke honours, also taking the prize for the best cat in the show. The
  same happened to Lady Marcus Beresford’s ‘Cossey,’ a lovely cat of the
  lighter type. The tide may turn, however, even in England, where the
  slightly lighter smokes may share the honours with their darker
  brothers. It is better, however, to be on the safe side and breed for
  the darker smoke, as the lighter are apt to lose the smoke
  characteristics and overstep the line which divides them from a shaded
  silver.”

  Mrs. Sinkins, to whom I have alluded as a smoke breeder, owns a
  splendid stud cat called “Teufel” that has made a name for himself as
  a first prize-winner. This cat is as nearly a perfect specimen as it
  is possible to find. Mrs. Sinkins has written a few notes on smokes.

  “I must consider myself honoured in being asked to write about smoke
  Persians in ‘The Book of the Cat,’ as I am, comparatively speaking, a
  beginner in the cat fancy, only having kept Persians for three years
  or so. I began by buying a well-bred queen in kitten, and she
  presented me with two chinchillas and a perfect smoke female, which I
  named ‘Teufella,’ and showed at Westminster in 1899. She carried all
  before her, winning everything in her class, and was claimed at once
  at catalogue price. From a silver half-sister of hers I then bred
  ‘Teufel,’ whose picture is in this issue, and who is a great pet,
  being extremely sweet-tempered and affectionate. His chief
  characteristics are his _absolutely unmarked_ black face and the
  lovely white under-coat, so desirable in a perfect smoke, and for
  which he received a special this spring (1902) at Westminster. I hope
  some of his descendants will take after him in these respects and make
  smokes increasingly popular.

  “In my opinion, it is a fatal mistake to mate smokes with blues, as
  they then lose this white under-coat. I think one obtains it best by
  mating a _smoke-bred_ smoke cat with either a _silver-bred_ smoke or
  else with a silver cat, as unmarked as possible, who possesses a smoke
  ancestor. Some day I should like to try mating a black with a pale
  silver, just as an experiment.

  “As to eye colour, there can be no two opinions. The deeper the
  orange, the better.

  “I do not find smokes at all delicate, no more so than the common or
  garden cat. All my queens have entire freedom, one in particular being
  a first-rate ratter and mouser, even catching moles sometimes. And
  they live out of doors in unheated houses all the year round, even in
  the most severe winter.

  “It seems hard that all Persians should have to pass through an ‘ugly’
  period—luckily a short one—when they change their coats, looking
  ragged and certainly not their best. Smokes and blacks then show the
  brown tinge even worse than chinchillas, as it gives them the
  poverty-stricken appearance of rusty moulting—though I must say
  ‘Teufel’ has so far been the exception, taking all honours at one show
  when in full moult.

  “However, their good time fully compensates for the shabby period, and
  a typical smoke, with his large orange eyes set in his black face,
  with light ear tufts and frill, his white under-coat showing with
  every movement, is a thing of beauty hard to beat, and I feel sure the
  smoke variety has a great future before it.”

[Illustration:

  MRS. SINKINS’ SMOKE PERSIAN “TEUFEL.”
]

  Mrs. Stead, the owner of “Champion Ranji” and “Rhoda,” a winning smoke
  female, has kindly given me her opinion on smokes:—

  “My ideal of perfect smoke cats is that they should be black, shading
  to smoke grey, with as light an under-coat as possible, light frill
  and ear tufts, eyes orange. This is the standard up to which I try to
  breed. I find the kittens go through several stages before they
  approach this perfection. For instance, a kitten I had in the spring
  of 1902 lightened considerably, and developed markings on the face,
  but at eight months old he was nearly up to the standard. A litter of
  six I have recently bred were entirely unmarked at birth, being, in
  fact, quite black. Five are now medium-coloured smokes, and one a very
  dark one, with beautiful light under-coat. I strongly advise all
  breeders not to despair of colouring until their kittens are fully
  grown. Permanent markings are, of course, very detrimental, and there
  is always great anxiety as to the final colour of the eyes. If,
  however, both parents are good in this respect, the result is
  generally satisfactory.”

  The following article on smoke cats in America is taken from _Field
  and Fancy_ of October, 1902:—

  “Smokes, with us, will probably rank with the silvers, and are
  destined to always hold a measure of popularity, though we have not
  such a very strong lot; in fact, we may say that good smokes are never
  so numerous anywhere as to become a nuisance, and we may fairly
  congratulate ourselves at this stage of the game upon what we have had
  and bred.

  “Opinions differ as to what is a smoke, and at times we have to be
  rather lenient in the judging of these cats, for they are apt to be
  off colour—too light or too streaky. No one has yet, in America, taken
  up the colour solely to breed smokes and nothing else, which seems a
  pity, for they can be bred and kept with blacks, and each sets off the
  other, and when visitors come to the cattery the contrast is made more
  apparent.

  “Those not conversant with the colour are apt to think anything smoky
  is a smoke exhibition cat, and no doubt, when good, those cats with
  dark faces and paws and light bodies are very handsome, but more often
  than not they are streaky and are smoke tabbies. After mature
  consideration and after seeing a good many, we, as well as other
  breeders, still think that unless the ‘Southdown’ cats, as some have
  called them, are very good we had better stick to the old definition
  of a smoke, and demand them dark enough.

  “A really dark, rich smoke without marks is, without doubt, one of the
  richest in colouring of all our long-hairs, and the stars are few. One
  may go away from the original definition of a smoke, but when brought
  face to face with a good one it forces one to confess that this is the
  genuine article, and, when in grand condition, a thing of beauty and a
  joy for ever.”

[Illustration:

  “LUCY CLAIRE.”

  OWNED BY MRS. CLINTON LOCKE.
]

[Illustration:

  SMOKE AND ORANGE PERSIANS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]




[Illustration:

  MRS. SINGLETON’S “ORANGE GIRL.”

  (_Photo: J. G. Christopher, Crewkerne._)
]




                              CHAPTER XV.
                            ORANGE PERSIANS.


  In the short-haired varieties, these cats are sometimes called red
  tabbies; but I do not think the term gives such a true idea of the
  correct tone of colour, which should be just that of a ripe orange
  when in perfection. As I write I have in my mind’s eye the mass of
  bright colour presented by a pile of oranges in a greengrocer’s shop,
  and this is the tone that is to be desired in our orange cats. There
  is a dash of red in the ideal orange cat, suggestive, perhaps, of the
  blood-oranges with which at Christmastide we are familiar. Anyhow, an
  orange cat should be as far removed as possible both from sandy or
  yellow or, as I have heard them called, lemon-coloured cats.

  I have left out the term “tabby” from the heading of this chapter, and
  I think advisedly; for in the Persian varieties the markings are
  gradually but surely vanishing, and orange cats may be said to stand
  in the same relation to orange tabbies as shaded silvers do to silver
  tabbies. I mean that most of the orange Persians now exhibited have
  shaded bodies, with tabby marking on head, face, and paws. The body
  markings, never very strong in Persian tabbies, are even less distinct
  in the orange than in the silver varieties. It may therefore be said
  that in judging this breed as they are represented in the show pen
  to-day, colour is taken into consideration first, and tabby markings
  are of less account. As regards other distinctive features of this
  breed, I may say that it is the exception, and not the rule, to find
  good round heads and short noses. The longest faces I have ever seen
  in any felines have been those possessed by orange Persian and
  short-haired cats. I have really sometimes felt quite sorry for a
  magnificent puss of this colour whose nose was so self-assertive that
  every other point, however excellent, seemed to be lost sight of, and
  that nose with the accentuated terminus stood out with distressing
  prominence. Until the year 1894 the classification at the Crystal
  Palace was “brown or red tabby, with or without white,” and the
  descriptions given in the catalogue by some owners on entering their
  cats read “brown and red,” “red-marked tabby,” “spotted red tabby,”
  “sandy Persian.” In 1895 orange and cream cats were placed together in
  one class.

[Illustration:

  “PUCK,” SON OF MRS. VIDAL’S “ELLWAYDA.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. MOXON.

  (_Photo: E. D. Percival, Ilfracombe._)
]

  A specialist society for orange, cream, fawn, and tortoiseshell cats
  was founded in 1900, and although the number of members is small, yet
  they have proved a strong body of staunch supporters of these breeds,
  and a really astonishing amount of good work has been done by these
  few enthusiasts. The classification at the large shows has been
  greatly supplemented, and, whereas before the formation of the society
  the sexes were never separated, now this energetic little club asks
  for, obtains, and often guarantees extra classes. The result,
  therefore, to breeders of orange and cream cats is much more
  satisfactory, and males and females have their respective classes; and
  right well have they been filled. It was in 1900 that classes for
  creams were introduced at shows. At the Richmond show in 1902 there
  were thirteen entries in male and thirteen in female orange and cream
  classes, the sexes, but not the colours, being divided. This was
  really a splendid testimony to the efforts of a specialist society of
  less than two years’ standing. It is such a short time ago that
  orange, cream, and tortoiseshell cats were relegated to the “any other
  colour” class, even at our largest shows; now it is often remarked by
  reporters in the cat papers that the well-filled cream and orange
  classes were the chief attractions of the show.

[Illustration:

  _Photo_]      [_Vidal._

  “SWAGGER.”

  BRED BY MRS. VIDAL.
]

  I will here give a copy of the circular issued by the honorary
  secretary inviting members to join, and the points for orange cats, as
  drawn up by the specialist society, which were decided upon at the
  inaugural meeting:—


            ORANGE, CREAM, FAWN, AND TORTOISESHELL SOCIETY.


                           LONG AND SHORT HAIRED.

    As societies have been lately formed to promote the interests of one
    or more colours in the cat world, it has been thought by a few
    fanciers of orange, cream, fawn, and tortoiseshell cats that there
    is an opening for a society for the purpose of encouraging the
    breeding of these colours. The objects of such a society would be:—

    (1) To secure better classification for these varieties at the
    different shows.

    (2) To encourage fanciers to breed and show these colours by
    offering special prizes, etc.

    (3) To improve the type of cat bred.

    (4) To secure recognition for all shades of orange, cream, and fawn;
    and, inasmuch as many fanciers disagree as to the merits of the
    different tints for eyes, to encourage the breeding and showing of
    specimens with green, orange, hazel, and blue eyes.

    Miss Mildred Beal, Romaldkirk Rectory, Darlington, has undertaken to
    act as hon. sec. to the society, and will be glad to hear from any
    fanciers who may wish to support it.

    _November, 1900._


                      ORANGE SELF OR TABBY POINTS.

    _Colour and marking._—Colour to be as bright as possible, and either
    self or markings to be as distinct as can be got. 25.

    _Coat._—To be silky, very long, and fluffy. 25.

    _Size and Shape._—To be large, not coarse, but massive, with plenty
    of bone and substance; short legs. 20.

    _Head._—To be round and broad, with short nose, ears small and well
    opened. 15.

    _Eyes._—To be large and full, and bright orange or hazel. 5.

    _Condition._—10.


  It will be noticed that the heading of these points is “orange self or
  tabby”; but, as I have pointed out, the cats exhibited as orange
  Persians are neither self-coloured nor can they be called tabby. So it
  remains to be seen which type of cat will in due course be the
  established one. I incline towards a self-coloured orange in the
  Persian breeds, and a very handsome cat this would be—of just one tone
  of bright even colour, perhaps slightly lighter on the flanks and
  stomach, under the tail, and with a frill of paler tone. In fact, very
  much the type of a smoke cat, in two shades of brilliant orange. At
  the same time, if real orange tabbies can be bred with the distinct
  body markings these should be encouraged.

  At the Cat Club shows it has been customary to give the classification
  for orange cats _marked_ or _unmarked_, so that then the judge may not
  have to take tabby markings into consideration, but give his awards
  according to colour and other points of excellence. It is the same
  when a class is given for sable or brown tabby, silver or shaded
  silver. In such classes it would be unfair to consider either the
  tabby markings in the one or the amount of shadings in the other. Of
  course, it is possible that in time orange cats may be bred to such
  perfection that two distinct classes will be given, namely “orange”
  (selfs) and “orange tabby.” In former years blues (selfs) and blue
  tabbies were included in one class, but gradually blue tabbies have
  been disappearing from our midst. If, therefore, orange tabbies—I
  mean, of course, long-haired cats—should likewise become extinct, our
  browns and silvers would be the sole representatives of tabbies in the
  long-haired varieties.

[Illustration:

  “BENJAMIN OF THE DURHAMS.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. D’ARCY HILDYARD.

  (_Photo: Burgess, Market Lavington._)
]

  As regards the eyes in orange Persians, the standard given in the
  foregoing list of the specialist society is “bright orange or hazel.”
  I should prefer the terms “golden bronze or hazel,” as there is a
  special shade of gold with a dash of bronze or brown which seems to
  tone best with the bright coats of these cats. Certainly the pale
  yellow or greenish-yellow eye is not desirable—better a bright green
  eye. I often wonder if ever fanciers will be fortunate enough to breed
  an orange Persian with bright blue eyes, such as are seen in whites
  and Siamese. I have heard of a short-haired orange cat with blue eyes,
  and sometimes I have been told by a fancier of the Persian tribe that
  they had bred an orange, and its eyes had not turned from the deep
  kitten blue at four months, so they were fondly hoping they were going
  to astonish the cat world; but their hopes were dashed to the ground,
  for surely and sadly a change came o’er the colour of that cat’s eyes,
  and it was a case of the blue that failed! I once noticed an
  advertisement in one of our cat papers which announced, “For sale, a
  unique orange Persian male with perfect deep blue eyes”; but I also
  remarked that the age of this unique specimen was not given, and I did
  not think it was worth while to write and inquire.

  The texture of coat in this breed ought to be particularly soft and
  silky, and is often of great length and thickness. The kittens when
  born are usually dull in colour, and gradually brighten as they grow
  older. As is well known to cat fanciers, orange females are rarer than
  orange males, so their market value is higher. There is, therefore,
  always a flutter of excitement on the arrival of a litter, and too
  often fate has decreed that all are males!

  Orange cats make a splendid foil for other varieties. This is
  especially the case as regards blues and blacks; the contrast in
  colour enhances the beauty of each. I know one lady who, having an eye
  to the artistic, keeps a blue and an orange neuter, and a lovely pair
  they make. I think the largest cat I ever saw was an orange neuter
  that simply filled the show pen with a mass of bright colour—but he
  had a white shirt front and white gloves!

  As regards mating orange cats, they make a good cross with blacks and
  tortoiseshells; and if a brown tabby lacks the admired tawny or golden
  tint, then an orange may assist to brighten and improve the general
  tone, and do away, perchance, with that drabbiness which is so
  undesirable in a brown tabby.

[Illustration:

  “TORRINGTON SUNNYSIDES.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. G. W. VIDAL.

  (_Photo: G. W. Vidal._)
]

  I do not think orange cats have ever been very popular, and I have
  remarked at shows that a certain number of people refuse to give
  anything but a passing contemptuous glance at the classes which
  contain what they call “those yellow cats.”

  A very common defect among orange Persian cats is the white or very
  light chin. Sometimes there is the still more damaging blemish of a
  white spot on the throat, spreading, perhaps, further down the chest.
  It is very rare to find an orange that has really a dark under-lip,
  and chin level in tone with the body colour. The white lip is a
  bugbear to breeders and exhibitors, for Nature repeats itself, and
  judges make notes of the defect; and in these up-to-date catty days of
  specialist clubs and standards of points a cat full of quality failing
  in one particular is too often a white elephant, if desired for
  anything more than a pet. I have observed that orange cats will
  sometimes develop a light or nearly white chin in their old age. I
  never consider a white spot or tuft of white hairs such a blemish to a
  cat if these are on the stomach, as compared with the same defect on
  the throat. Such a spot would not be so likely to be handed down to
  successive generations; and, of course, a blemish that has to be
  sought for in an obscure part of the body is not such an eyesore in a
  self or tabby cat. I have often observed orange cats with very light
  hair underneath which has almost approached white; but such defects
  are sometimes only temporary, whereas a white spot on the throat or a
  white chin remains once and for ever.

  In the early days of the fancy, orange cats were decidedly more tabby
  marked than they are in the present day. A noted one of this type was
  “Cyrus the Elamite,” born in 1889, and bred by Mrs. Kinchant, an
  enthusiastic fancier at that and later periods. In 1893 and 1894 Mr.
  Heap exhibited a handsome orange, “Prince Charlie,” at the Crystal
  Palace. He also owned another, called “Prince Lyne,” of the same
  breed, the celebrated tortoiseshell “Queen Elizabeth” being the mother
  of both these cats. “Puff” was exhibited by Mrs. Spackman in 1894;
  this orange cat was not much marked, and “Lifeguard” was bred from
  him. It was about this date that unmarked orange Persians became more
  fashionable. Among females, “Lifeguard’s” sister, “Goldylocks,” owned
  by Mrs. Marriott, was one of the very best queens ever shown. Mrs.
  Foote, who is still well known in the fancy, had several beautiful
  orange females, notably “Marigold,” “Buttercup,” and “Cowslip.” With
  these cats Mrs. Foote tried to breed unmarked creams and oranges,
  “Ripon,” a noted cream, being the sire. She built up several storeys
  of her catty castle, but then sold them to Lady Marcus Beresford.
  “Trilby,” litter sister to “Zoroaster,” a famous cream, was one of the
  brightest and deepest coloured orange females—or, indeed, orange
  cats—that has ever been seen.

[Illustration:

  “LIFEGUARD.”

  FORMERLY THE PROPERTY OF LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  Coming down to the present day, I may remark that the number of orange
  cats placed at stud is very limited. A great loss to the ranks of male
  orange Persians was “Lifeguard,” formerly the property of Lady Marcus
  Beresford. This cat was almost unmarked, of a beautiful bright shade,
  and had an unusually round head and short face, with long silky coat.
  He was purchased by Miss Cartmell, who is well known as an
  enthusiastic breeder of orange Persians, but who never exhibits. This
  lady has been very successful in breeding numerous fine female orange
  cats, and many a winner has been born to blush unseen in the Barham
  Cattery, near Canterbury.

  Another noted winner and stud cat is “Torrington Sunnysides,” of whom
  a portrait is given. This cat is the property of Mrs. G. H. Vidal, and
  has done a lot of winning. His colour is exceptionally good, and he
  has sired several prize kittens, some of which have been sent out to
  America and gained distinction over the water. “Torrington Sunnysides”
  has a most luxurious house in the spacious garden surrounding Mrs.
  Vidal’s residence at Sydenham. The photograph is by Mr. G. W. Vidal,
  who dislikes taking orange cats, because the tone is so difficult to
  reproduce in photography. Mrs. Davies, of Caterham, has owned some
  good orange cats. Her male “Hamish” was a grand specimen, but was only
  twice exhibited, when he gained highest honours. He was then purchased
  by Mrs. Vidal, and sent out to Mr. Storey in Chicago. A son of
  “Torrington Sunnysides” has also found a home in a Chicago cattery.
  “Red Knight” was sent by the writer to Mrs. Colburn, and in an article
  in the American _Field and Fancy_ mention is thus made of him:— “‘Red
  Knight,’ an orange male, with deepest orange eyes, was imported from
  England. He is a very good type, and has sired some beautiful kittens,
  notably two by Miss Adams’ ‘Daffodil,’ very fine specimens of pure
  orange, with cobby bodies, wide heads, tiny ears set far apart, and
  beautiful coats. They have been fed on ‘Force,’ and Miss Adams is
  going to call the male ‘Sunny Jim.’ Another son, seven months old, of
  the same parentage, is the largest cat ever seen for his age, and if
  he continues growing will certainly be enormous.”

[Illustration:

  ONE OF MRS. NEATE’S OUT-DOOR CATTERIES AT WERNHAM.
]

  One of Mrs. Vidal’s orange kittens, “Puck” by name, is now owned by
  Mrs. Moxon, of Ilfracombe, from whom I have obtained a photograph for
  reproduction.

  A few notes on orange Persian cats by Mrs. Vidal will be interesting
  to my readers:—

  “It is difficult to imagine a more gorgeous colour than a really good
  orange lying full length in the sun. There is, however, rather a
  prejudice against them, chiefly because some people persist in calling
  them ‘sandy’ or ‘red,’ both of which names are quite misleading. I
  have several times had people say to me when visiting my cattery, ‘I
  have always thought I did not like sandy cats, but I have never before
  seen a cat of such a lovely colour as the one you have just shown me.’
  Six years ago, when I first took up cat rearing, it was rare to see
  any orange cats at the shows, but now they and the creams form one of
  the most beautiful classes, and they have a specialist society of
  their own and an energetic secretary in Miss Mildred Beal.

[Illustration:

  CURIOSITY.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

  “There are two classes of oranges, one which has the ordinary tabby
  markings, more or less distinct, and the other which is ‘flecked’ all
  over the back in small patches, and which is usually not nearly so
  bright in colour as the so-called ‘tabby’ markings. The correct thing
  is to breed a totally unmarked orange; and, although many people claim
  this for their pets, it is very rarely seen. The absence of markings
  usually means absence of the rich orange colour so much admired. Any
  white on chin or bib is, of course, a blemish, and for breeding or
  show purposes such an animal is perfectly useless.

  “An orange stud cat is a very useful animal to have in a cattery, for
  crossing with him will improve many colours, viz. tortoiseshell,
  brown, grey, and sable tabbies; while if he is mated to a blue queen
  the kittens, if orange, are beautiful in colour—brighter, I think,
  than if two orange cats are mated together. In mating with other
  colours it is a toss-up what colour will predominate, but the only way
  to ensure _all_ orange kittens is to mate with orange queens, when,
  according to my experience with my stud cat (‘Torrington Sunnysides’),
  the results are _all_ orange. Mated with tortoiseshells the orange
  kittens are very good; but mated with blacks the strongest colour
  carries the day, and the kittens are mostly black or tortoiseshell,
  seldom orange. Silvers, chinchillas, and smokes should, of course,
  never be mated with oranges, as the result would be a horrible
  mixture! Orange queens were at one time very rare, and even now are
  not plentiful, being delicate and difficult to rear.

[Illustration:

  ANOTHER VIEW OF MRS. NEATE’S CAT HOUSES.
]

  “The time at which the kittens change the colour of their eyes from
  the baby blue to orange varies a great deal in individual animals,
  from seven to twelve weeks. When the eyes are very deep blue, they
  change to bright rich orange or hazel; but if of a pale blue, they
  change very quickly to a poor yellow, and never get the rich dark
  orange which the deeper blue get. Therefore rejoice when you see your
  kittens with deep blue eyes. Some of our kittens have had the most
  lovely deep blue eyes, and great has been our sorrow as we found the
  inevitable change coming on. If I could only manage to get some
  kittens with the permanent blue eyes that the best white cats have, I
  should indeed be proud; but thinking of the kittens with terrible
  white chins and under-coats, which would crop up in every litter and
  would have to be drowned, quite deters me from sending my orange
  queens to white studs with blue eyes! All who have been accustomed to
  frequent the show pens will remember Miss M. Beal’s splendid old
  orange queen ‘Jael,’ who up to the last, although nearly fourteen
  years old, always took first prize, and was a very good specimen of
  what an orange queen should be—of a bright rich orange, without any
  suspicion of light under her chin or chest (the usual weak point), and
  having the splendid head, short nose, and good cobby shape which all
  breeders strive for. Short-haired orange cats are often seen about our
  towns and villages, and are always called ‘sandy,’ but are not, I
  think, held in much account. They are distinct from the so-called ‘red
  tabby,’ which is a recognised colour in our shows.”

[Illustration:

  MRS. NEATE’S CAT HOUSES.
]

  Among the prize-winning females of the present day I must not forget
  to notice Mrs. Singleton’s “Orange Girl,” bred from Miss Beal’s noted
  strain. This cat has had many honours showered upon her during a very
  short career, and as there must always be a scarcity of queens in this
  breed, this fine specimen is a valuable possession.

  So long as there are two cat clubs and two registers there will be a
  confused multiplicity of names, and so yet another orange male called
  “Puck” inhabits the cat world. This handsome fellow is owned by the
  Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, to whom I had the pleasure of awarding
  first prize and many specials at the Botanic show held in June, 1902.
  His vivid colouring and well-shaped limbs and splendid eyes will
  always make him a conspicuous specimen in the show pen. Alas! his
  photograph does him but scant justice. Quite a surprise packet
  appeared at the Crystal Palace show of 1902 by the appearance of a
  very handsome young male in “William of Orange” exhibited by Mrs.
  Stillwell, and bred from Dr. Roper’s noted black “Johnnie Fawe” and
  tortoiseshell queen “Dainty Diana.” This cat was awarded first and
  many specials, and was claimed by Lord Decies at catalogue price. As
  “William” was not a year old when he won his laurels, it may readily
  be believed that he has a distinguished career before him, and may add
  another to the long list of winners owned and exhibited by Lady
  Decies. No orange male cat is better known in the fancy than that
  splendid fellow “The King’s Own,” belonging to Mrs. Neate. He has had
  a most successful career, and may be considered as nearly
  self-coloured an orange as any yet exhibited.

  Mrs. Neate is a devoted admirer of this breed and also a great cat
  lover, and has recently started an arrangement for boarding cats, and
  truly I know of no place better adapted for successful cat keeping
  than the home of Mrs. Francis Neate, at Wernham, near Marlborough;
  situated as it is in the very heart of the country, a mile from any
  other house, her cats can enjoy their liberty with perfect safety.

  A large range of brick-built and slated outhouses has been converted
  into catteries and comfortably fitted. All have wooden floors, wire
  doors, and large runs attached. A number of portable houses and runs
  are dotted about the kitchen garden and meadows. An empty cottage
  serves as an isolation hospital, or place of quarantine for cats
  returning from shows.

  A herd of pure-bred goats supply the inmates of the cattery with milk,
  and rabbits, which abound, form their staple food when in season. The
  largest of the outhouses is fitted with a Tortoise stove, carefully
  guarded. The pride of Mrs. Neate’s cattery is, of course, the famous
  orange stud “The King’s Own.” He is the sire of the two winning orange
  queens “Mehitabel of the Durhams” and “Glory of Prittlewell.”

  Fitting mates for him are “Wernham Titmouse”
  (tortoiseshell-and-white), “Evening Primrose” (a cream daughter of
  “Champion Midshipmite” and “Hazeline”), also “Mimosa” (an orange bred
  by Miss Cartmell from “Richmond Bough” and “Mistletoe”): these occupy
  the house adjoining the stables.

  “Champion Bundle” and “Betsy Jane,” a lovely little blue with glorious
  orange eyes, are the only blues of the establishment. Latterly Mrs.
  Neate has reduced her own stock of breeding queens, and makes a
  speciality of receiving cats during the holidays. Judging by the
  number of cat fanciers who sent their pets to Mrs. Neate during the
  summer of 1902, it is certain that a great want has been most
  efficiently supplied. Not only does Mrs. Neate give personal
  supervision to her catty boarders and visitors, but they have splendid
  caretakers on the premises. These custodians are Mrs. Neate’s big St.
  Bernard and a chow-chow, who jealously guard the Wernham cattery.
  These dogs are on the very best terms with the feline inmates, and the
  strange pussies very soon appear to settle down to an amicable
  cat-and-dog life. The accompanying photographs, as will be seen, were
  taken in the depth of winter. These brick-built houses, slate roofed
  and with wooden floor, are splendidly adapted for keeping the cats
  snug and warm during the cold weather. One of the buildings
  illustrated is 25 feet by 15 feet, and has three windows. This house
  is provided with large table, shelves, and chairs, and cosy sleeping
  boxes. An outside wire run, of the same length and width as the
  building, is erected for an exercise ground in summer weather.

  Mrs. Neate has kindly supplied me with a few notes on orange Persian
  cats:—

  “It was in 1897, at Boscombe show, that I claimed the winner in a
  class of twenty-six kittens, my now well-known orange Persian stud
  ‘The King’s Own.’ The same year, at the Crystal Palace, I purchased a
  lovely orange female kitten sired by Mrs. Pettit’s ‘Champion King of
  Pearls’ and the tortoiseshell-and-white ‘Dainty Doris.’ From her I
  fondly hoped to establish a breed of blue-eyed oranges, which feature
  would be charming in the variety; but alas! she came home to sicken
  and die, as so many another valuable kitten has done, and I have never
  since been able to obtain an orange of either sex sired by a blue-eyed
  white.

  “It is most difficult to breed oranges without white lips and chins;
  the pink nose, too, is a feature in the breed that I do not like.

  “I have found crossing an orange male with a cream female the surest
  way to breed sound-coloured specimens of both sexes and varieties,
  _e.g._ ‘Mehitabel of the Durhams’ (a really rich-coloured unmarked
  orange queen, and quite free from the objectionable light shading on
  lips and chin); she was bred by Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard from her cream
  female ‘Josephine of the Durhams’ and ‘The King’s Own.’ Again, from a
  blue male and a tortoiseshell queen you are more certain of breeding
  good oranges (though seldom of the female sex) than from mating
  tortoiseshell and orange together; in the latter case more often than
  not black kittens predominate in the litter, and there is rarely, if
  ever, an orange female amongst them.

  “Mrs. Vidal’s famous orange stud ‘Torrington Sunnysides’ was a son of
  my light blue ‘Champion Bundle’ and a tortoiseshell dam ‘Torrington
  Owlet,’ herself of an orange strain. Mrs. Walford Gosnall’s ‘Rufus’
  (whose name discloses his colour) was also the result of this union.
  ‘Red Ensign,’ the orange kitten who won first and three specials at
  Westminster in 1902, was bred by me from ‘Champion Bundle’ and
  ‘Mimosa,’ an orange queen of cream breeding, and with his litter
  brother ‘Scarlet Lancer’ took first and silver medal for the best pair
  of kittens. The latter is now the property of Miss Cartmell, and has
  grown into a fine cat. Unfortunately for the cat fancy generally, ‘Red
  Ensign’ was claimed at the show, and is now a house pet.

  “The best orange kittens I have bred were from my ‘Wernham Titmouse,’
  a tortoiseshell-and-white who owns an orange dam, and ‘The King’s
  Own’; the whole litter were females, and redder than any oranges I
  have seen. These never lived to see a show, and their death was one of
  the greatest disappointments I have experienced in my career. The
  demand for good orange and cream females is greater than the supply;
  in fact, these colours are decidedly ‘booming,’ and better
  classification is given for them at our principal shows.

  “At the Crystal Palace show of 1898 there were only four entries in
  the open class for orange and cream males, and four of the same
  varieties in the female class, compared to the ten entries in orange
  and cream male classes and the same number in the female classes at
  the Cat Club’s show, held at Westminster, 1902. These facts speak for
  themselves of the increased interest now taken in these varieties.

  “Unlike some of the warmer tinted of us humans, orange cats of both
  sexes are particularly sweet-tempered, showing great attachment to
  their owners. They are of strong constitution and attain to great
  size, being at present free from the in-breeding that is practised
  amongst many other varieties of our show cats. A small piece of
  sulphate of iron in the drinking water will enrich the colour of
  orange and tortoiseshells, besides being an excellent tonic,
  especially during the moulting season.

  “Orange Persian cats do not, as a rule, make good photographs, as they
  lack expression compared to the short-haired tabby varieties of this
  colour.”

  The Misses Beal, of Romaldkirk, near Darlington, have long been
  associated with orange and cream cats. “Jael” was quite unique as an
  orange female, and at fifteen years of age could yet win in her class
  by reason of her grand colour, perfectly shaped head, short face, and
  tiny, well-set ears. Such a cat stands out in any breed, and such a
  cat may never again be bred. “Jael” died in 1902, after a long and
  successful career.

[Illustration:

  MUSING.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]

  Miss Beal’s male orange “Minotaur” is one of the most beautiful cats
  of this breed now exhibited, and has quite the best round head and
  face, with sweetest expression. These are qualities too often lacking
  in orange cats.

  Miss Beal’s name is, perhaps, more closely associated in the cat world
  with cream cats, and in my next chapter on this breed she has kindly
  supplied some notes.

  Another fancier of both orange and cream cats is Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard,
  and to her I am indebted for the following notes on orange Persian
  cats:—

  “Until comparatively lately I confined myself entirely to the breeding
  of creams, and my efforts were attended with considerable success,
  both in multiplying the number of cats of that colour—I bred thirteen
  one year—and in filling the classes given for cream females. I was
  particularly lucky in breeding many creams of the gentler sex.

  “The birth of the Orange and Tortoiseshell Society fired me with
  ambition to start breeding oranges. I was much fascinated with the
  colour, though I hate their being penned beside the creams at shows,
  as they completely take all colour out of the lighter animals and give
  them a washed-out appearance. I started by crossing my cream queen
  ‘Josephine of the Durhams’ with Mrs. Neate’s famous ‘The King’s Own.’
  This proved a most satisfactory cross, the results being three
  rich-coloured unmarked orange kittens, one male and two females. I
  sold one female to Miss Scratton, of Prittlewell Priory, and it has, I
  hear, grown into a very handsome cat; the other two I kept, and they
  won all before them at Manchester Kitten Show, 1901, and were shown at
  Slough after, where the male was claimed. The remaining one,
  ‘Mehitabel of the Durhams,’ I kept, and she won me many prizes last
  winter, and being mated this year to ‘Champion Romaldkirk Admiral’ has
  presented me with a litter of two creams and an orange. Certainly
  creams and oranges cross well, and often I think produce a brighter
  and deeper tone of colour than is obtained from other shades. I have
  lately purchased an orange tom, and by crossing him with ‘Hazeline,’
  one of my cream queens, have got a splendid litter of seven pure
  oranges. This, I think, proves that the cream and orange cross is
  good, and that they breed very true. Oranges bred by crossing other
  colours seem to me rather spasmodic, if I may use the term. When
  breeders try crossing an orange and a tortoiseshell they very often
  get blacks and blues as well as oranges; on the other hand, from a
  blue and a tortoiseshell cross sometimes an orange is obtained. But
  they do not seem able to count exactly on the results.

  “Reliability is what I claim from the cream and orange cross. I
  emphatically believe in mating creams to creams if you wish to get a
  good pale colour and few markings, and oranges and creams crossed have
  certainly produced good specimens of both colours for me. I speak from
  my own experience.

  “I hope to do great things by trying a cross between my orange tom
  ‘Benjamin’ and ‘Mehitabel.’ Miss Winifred Beal’s ‘Minotaur’ was the
  result of a cross between a cream and a tortoiseshell. Her well-known
  ‘Garnet’ is the daughter of a cream and a blue. At present there is,
  to my mind, no orange female on the show bench to compare with the
  late ‘Jael,’ owned by Miss Mildred Beal, whose brilliant colour and
  perfect head with its tiny ears made her hold her own at all the shows
  up to within two months of her death at quite a venerable age; but I
  hope in the future, as oranges become more popular and breeders work
  hard at producing good specimens, we may see her like again. I was
  much taken at Richmond show with Mrs. Singleton’s ‘Orange Girl,’ and
  also with the kitten of that colour exhibited by the same lady at
  Manchester. Every year, I think, shows that the general world is
  becoming more alive to the beauties of orange and cream cats, as
  proved both by the large increase in entries of these colours at the
  principal shows and the great demand for kittens when any are offered
  for sale. Undoubtedly breeders owning creams should stick to them, if
  they wish to produce good oranges—see the many splendid specimens
  sired by ‘Midshipmite’ and ‘Admiral.’

  “It is a hard matter to say decisively what tint orange kittens should
  be when born. I have known them enter the world a bad cream, and
  gradually grow redder till they develop into the brilliant colour we
  all look to see in a cat of orange hue. Personally, I prefer them born
  a dark shade; they usually lighten and brighten a little, but on the
  whole I think that is the more satisfactory of the two. It is
  distinctly discouraging to see a washed-out looking kitten when you
  are expecting a bright orange one.

  “Fanciers differ about the eyes which are supposed to be correct in
  this breed. Hazel eyes are universally acknowledged to be the right
  thing. Personally, I admire green, or rather _eau-de-nil_ eyes, as
  giving more contrast to the colour of the coat, but you do not often
  see them. I have always wished to breed a cream with blue eyes—I do
  not mean the baby blue, but the colour that Siamese have—and only the
  other day I sold a kitten three months old with brilliant blue eyes of
  this tint, and shall be anxious to know whether they change in time or
  not.

  “I think the time is approaching when the orange and cream cats are
  going to be among the most attractive classes at our bigger shows.
  Already the classes are much better filled than when I first joined
  the fancy, and you always find an admiring crowd in front of their
  pens. I wish, though, that a nice sprinkling of blues could always be
  placed between the two colours at shows. The close company of the
  oranges is so excessively unbecoming to the creams, while when you see
  the three colours together they are especially lovely. To see cream
  and orange cats at their best they should be at large in the country
  and running about on the green grass.”

[Illustration:

  OUT IN THE COLD.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  In 1902 an Orange and Cream Cat Club was started by a few enthusiastic
  breeders of these varieties over in America. The Misses Beal, Mrs.
  Vidal, and Miss Frances Simpson were elected as honorary members. The
  following is an extract from _Field and Fancy_, the American weekly
  paper:—


    ORANGE CATS.

    There is very little doubt that this is a colour that has from the
    beginning of the fancy in America been very popular, and has had a
    very strong hold upon the American love for colour. But, of course,
    as is generally the case with the popular ones, the supply has never
    been too plentiful, and probably never will be as regards the
    queens, for they only appear once in a while, according to what
    seems to be one of Nature’s rules, that the queens should be
    tortoiseshells.

    The Orange and Cream Club is probably destined to do a great deal
    for the variety, which is one of the colours from which it takes its
    name. Breeding orange cats opens quite a field, for in attaining
    your end you can at the same time indulge in other colours, for
    undoubtedly a cross with a tortoiseshell will be found necessary to
    keep the colour sufficiently intense, and at other times it may be
    quite as well to throw in a little black. The tendency for the
    queens to be tortoiseshells may possibly be somewhat overcome in
    time, but these inherent traits in colours in animals and birds are
    often so strong that they have a knack of reappearing even after
    several generations. We occasionally see queens of the orange
    colour, and these are usually high quality ones, both in colour and
    type; but the orange queens are not destined to at present make
    heavy classes by themselves. Though the standard calls for orange
    eyes, it is a curious coincidence that the most consistently
    successful cat of recent times has been Miss Beal’s “Jael,” who had
    green eyes; but so good was her colour, so good her type, that she
    generally won when exhibited.

    The struggle carried on in the British Isles for some years to breed
    these cats without marks has been hardly a success, and there have
    not been very many evolved of that colour that were really without
    marks, and it is a great question if in this craze for absence of
    marks they have not been passing by a lot of good cats. As far as we
    personally are concerned in the matter, we see little to be gained
    by the absence of marks in the orange cats. If the colour had been
    very prolific in numbers it might have been a good idea to try and
    split up the classes, but they were never too well filled, and there
    is room still for plenty more, though we cannot complain so much at
    the representation that they have had in America last season, either
    in numbers or quality.


[Illustration:

  HIGHER EDUCATION.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]




                              CHAPTER XVI.
                        CREAM OR FAWN PERSIANS.


  This may be said to be the very latest variety in Persian breeds, and
  one which bids fair to become very fashionable. The term “cream”
  describes exactly what is the desired tint of these cats, but few and
  far between are the specimens which are pale and even enough in colour
  to be correctly described as creams. No doubt, in times past now and
  again a cream cat would be seen exhibited in the “any variety” class,
  but then they might be designated as freaks or flukes. Now, however,
  fanciers of these cats have a system in their matings, and therefore,
  as a result, there is a breed of cats established which until late
  years were not recognised or classified.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CLINTON LOCKE’S CREAM KITTEN.
]

  It is true that the cream Persians seen in the show pens are often
  much darker than is implied by the name, and, indeed, are really
  fawn-coloured. The great thing, however, is to obtain an even tint
  throughout, whether dark or light, and to avoid any patches, streaks,
  or tabby markings. I think the very pale creams are more dainty and
  fascinating than the darker cats, but the lighter the coat the more
  difficult it is to obtain perfect uniformity of colour. Of course,
  there will always be a certain amount of shading in cream cats—that
  is, the spine line will be slightly darker, shading off on the sides
  and under the stomach and tail. I think that creams are making more
  rapid strides towards attaining the “almost unmarked” stage than are
  silvers. Certainly, good creams of to-day are very slightly barred on
  head or legs or tail, and this cannot be said as regards some of our
  best silver cats. This is probably to be accounted for by the cautious
  and wise discrimination used in mating creams by selecting blues or
  tortoiseshells, and thus avoiding tabby-marked cats. It is a
  peculiarity of cream cats that the eyes are generally almond-shaped,
  and are set rather slanting in the head. It is rare and a great treat
  to see bold, round, owl-like eyes in cream cats. These in colour
  should be golden or hazel, the brighter the colour the better. I will
  here give the points of cream or fawn cats, as drawn up by the
  specialist society:—


                             CREAM OR FAWN.


    _Colour._—To be as pure as possible without marking or shading,
    either paler or darker, dulness and white to be particularly
    avoided. All shades from the palest fawn to be allowable. 25.

    _Coat._—To be very long and fluffy. 25.

    _Size and shape._—To be large—not coarse, but massive, with plenty
    of bone and substance; short legs. 20.

    _Head._—To be round and broad, with short nose, ears small and well
    opened. 15.

    _Eyes._—To be large and full, and bright orange or hazel in colour.
    5.

    _Condition._—10.


[Illustration:

  A CREAMY SMILE.
]

  Much has been done by this energetic specialist society to get a
  better classification for creams at our shows; and perhaps, as time
  goes on and a larger number of fanciers take up these breeds, a
  distinct classification will be given for creams and fawns. It may
  always be a little difficult to draw the line between the two; but
  such a division of colours would, I think, give satisfaction to the
  breeders of both creams and fawns, for at present judges are more
  inclined to give a preference to the palest-coloured cats, perhaps
  because more beautiful and more difficult to breed.

  In the former breeds, more especially blues and silvers, that I have
  described in this work it would have been impossible to name all those
  cats that were noted in the fancy, for the simple reason that their
  name is legion; but it is different in a breed like creams, for, as I
  mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, in times past it was a
  case of only here and there a cream Persian appearing on the scene,
  then vanishing perhaps to America, or else being purchased for a pet
  and retiring from public life. These “sports” in the fancy were not
  seriously taken up, and no one thought of trying to establish a
  strain; so that one can, as it were, put one’s finger on the cats of
  this variety, if not so easily in the present day, certainly in the
  past.

  The first recorded cream Persian in catalogues or stud books is “Cupid
  Bassanio,” born in 1890, bred by Mrs. Kinchant; no pedigree is given.
  He was a big, broadheaded, heavily coated cat, with a good many marks
  and shadings, and was sold to Mrs. Preston Whyte, and passed on to
  Miss Norman. In the same year Mrs. Kinchant exhibited cream kittens at
  Brighton. “Ripon” was another well-known cream of imported parents (a
  blue and an orange). This cat was purchased from Mrs. Foote by Lady
  Marcus Beresford, and eventually disappeared when in the possession of
  Miss Cockburn Dickinson. Mr. McLaren Morrison in 1893 owned a pale cat
  called “Devonshire Cream.” In the following year Miss Taylor bred a
  splendid specimen from “Tawny,” her noted tortoiseshell. This cat,
  called “Fawn,” was an absolutely self-coloured fawn with brown eyes,
  and would do some winning if alive now to compete in our up-to-date
  classes for cream or fawn. It was in 1895 that Miss Beal first
  exhibited some of her creams, upon which at that time she did not set
  much store, more interested as she was in blues; but of her now
  celebrated strain more anon.

[Illustration:

  MRS. F. NORRIS’S CREAM KITTEN.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  One of the best known creams of late years is “Zoroaster,” bred by
  Mrs. Bagster from her tortoiseshell “Pixie.” This was a remarkably
  large pale cat with glorious eyes, but he was a good deal patched in
  colour when I saw him at Mrs. Mackenzie Stewart’s cattery. Mrs.
  Cartwright bred a well-shaped light cream, “Upwood Junket,” by
  “Timkins,” a blue, and a daughter of “Cyrus the Elamite.” Mrs. Davies,
  of Caterham, has often had creams in her possession, notably “Lord
  Cremorne,” quite one of the palest seen in the show pen. Two noted
  creams now placed at stud are Mrs. Norris’s “Kew Ronald” and Mrs.
  Western’s “Matthew of the Durhams.” Both these cats are bred from Miss
  Beal’s famous “Heavenly Twins.” Regarding “Matthew,” a reporter in
  _Our Cats_ thus writes after the Botanic show of 1901:—“Creams are, we
  prophesy, the coming cats. There seems to us great possibilities in
  this variety. ‘Matthew of the Durhams’ is one of the cats we would
  bring forward in support of this view. Eminently aristocratic,
  breathing an air of refinement, this cat might be the petted darling
  of a princess whose cats are all selected by a connoisseur.” Mr.
  Western is justly proud of his purchase, for he claimed this fine cat
  at the Sandy show, 1901, when he was exhibited by Mrs. D’Arcy
  Hildyard. “Matthew” has on four separate occasions taken second to his
  father “Admiral’s” first. He has sired some lovely creams, notably
  “Wynnstay Myrtle,” also owned by Mrs. F. Western. This female is one
  of the best of her breed, and is sure to have some influence over the
  creams of the future. At the Crystal Palace show of 1902, where she
  was awarded first and many specials, she was the admired of all
  admirers. As a rule, cream females have been very much behind the
  males in quantity and quality. Almost the first two were bred by Miss
  Hester Cochrane from “Cyrus the Elamite” and “Brunette.” “Crême d’Or”
  is quite one of the best, and was owned by Mrs. Wellbye, who sold her
  to Mrs. Norris. This cat declined to enter into any matrimonial
  alliance for some time, but at last presented her owner with a family
  by “Darius,” Mrs. Ransome’s noted blue. Two of these cats, “Kew
  Laddie” and “Kew Ronald,” are well known in their different spheres.
  “Kew Laddie” I purchased to send out to Mrs. Clinton Locke, in
  Chicago, and she presented him to the honorary secretary of the
  Beresford Club, Miss Johnstone. This lady exhibited “Laddie” at the
  big Chicago Cat Show, where he won high honours, and in a letter
  received from Miss Johnstone I learn he is growing a grand fellow and,
  in fact, is quite _la crême de la crême_ in catty society over the
  water.

  The picture of a perfect kitten on the opening page of this chapter
  represents a cream female, “Jessica Kew,” bred by Mrs. Clinton Locke
  from “Lockhaven Daffodil,” sired by Miss Johnstone’s “Laddie Kew.”
  Mrs. Clinton Locke is justly proud of this lovely kitten, and writes:
  “Jessica is the finest kitten I have ever seen; all her points are
  perfect. She was five weeks old when this photo was taken. Her
  grandfather was my ‘Victor,’ an orange, her great-grandmother a
  tortoiseshell-and-white.”

[Illustration:

  “KEW RONALD” AND “KEW LADDIE.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  I have mentioned Mr. F. Norris as a breeder of creams and the owner of
  the handsome pair of cats illustrated on this page. He has kindly
  supplied me with the following notes:

  “Cream cats are of a modern colour in Persians, but are now being more
  freely bred and finding numerous supporters.

  “There are, however, very few good ones in the fancy, for size and
  colour are difficult to obtain. The great failing with them is that,
  although they are called cream cats, the best and soundest coloured
  ones are really of a fawn shade. So many show markings, patches, or
  shadings, whereas the colour should be one shade and sound throughout;
  better be a little dark in colour rather than shade from cream to
  white, as is the case with so many specimens exhibited.

[Illustration:

  MISS BEAL AND HER KITTENS.
]

  “For one grand-headed and good-eyed cat you see a dozen snipy,
  long-faced ones with curious slit eyes, instead of a short, snub head,
  with glorious big round golden eyes.

  “In my opinion, to get the short head, good eye, fine body shape, and
  short legs, it is best to mate a cream with a good cobby blue. From my
  experience nothing beats a blue, although you can mate them with a
  red, tortoiseshell, or black. Mating two creams together I do not
  advocate, unless one of them has a distinct out-cross in the first
  generation to totally different blood.

  “All the creams shown are descended from Miss Beal’s two brothers
  ‘Romaldkirk Admiral’ and ‘Romaldkirk Midshipmite,’ and to keep the
  colour, breeders have bred in and into them again; and that is why
  they have lost so much in type and character, which would have been
  improved by using an out-cross.

  “I have heard people say, ‘Cream females will not breed.’ If they only
  studied the question a minute, they would know the reason well enough,
  which is that they have been too much in-bred. If breeders will only
  try the blue cross more, they will, I am sure, be pleased, and we
  shall see a better cat being shown. Breeding from blue you will get
  pure creams and some cream and blue mixed. Keep the blue and cream
  females, and when old enough mate them to a cream, and you will get
  some fine sound-coloured cream kits.

  “It is very curious that there has been nothing yet bred in males to
  beat the twin cats ‘Admiral’ and ‘Midshipmite.’

  “In females the best I have seen is ‘Miriam of the Durhams,’ who has a
  lovely body and coat, but is long in face and has those bad-shaped
  eyes. ‘Crême d’Or’ runs her close, as she has such a good head, with
  perfect eye, but is a wee bit long in the leg.”

  Miss Beal’s females “Calliope” and “Mignonette” were both noted
  prize-winning cream females. Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard has been most
  successful in her endeavours to breed creams from creams, and a letter
  from her in _Our Cats_ of April, 1901, will be interesting to breeders
  of this variety:—

[Illustration:

  MRS. D’ARCY HILDYARD’S CREAM KITTENS.

  (_Photo: E. Yeoman, Barnard Castle._)
]


                          BREEDING OF CREAMS.


    SIR,—Being much interested in the breeding of creams, I should like
    to say a few words on the subject and state my experience. Though
    only a novice, I have up to date succeeded in breeding twenty
    creams—two in 1899, thirteen in 1900, and seven this year. I began
    by mating my mixed blue and cream queen “Senga” to a cream tom
    “D’Arcy,” which I bought from Mr. Hutchinson, of Egglestone. From
    this pair I got four kittens, all females—two cream and two marked
    blues. I kept the creams “Josephine” and “Hazeline,” winners at
    Westminster as kittens, first and second special and medal, 1900.
    Later on in the year I mated them, “Hazeline” to Miss Beal’s
    “Midshipmite,” “Josephine” to her “Admiral.” Both litters were
    entirely cream, “Josephine” producing six kittens, “Hazeline”
    producing five, two of which I have kept. “Matthew” and “Miriam of
    the Durhams” both won as kittens at Manchester, and “Miriam” has
    since taken first and specials at Barnard Castle, Westminster, and
    Reading. “Matthew” is growing into a very handsome cat, and I hope
    to exhibit him at the Botanic. On Saturday last, April 13th,
    “Hazeline” again kittened and produced five creams, having again
    been mated to “Midshipmite.” This I think distinctly proves that
    good creams can be got from a pair of the same colour. On April 14th
    “Senga” also presented me with two more creams, also two marked
    blues, this time the result of a mating with Miss Beale’s
    “Romaldkirk Toza.”

                                                  AGNES D’ARCY HILDYARD.


  Mrs. Barton Collier has two good creams, “Bruin” and “Dolly of
  Brough.” Again these cats are from Miss Beal’s strain, the male being
  a fawn and the female quite one of the palest of creams.

  Miss H. Cochran, who formerly took a great interest in this breed,
  writes:—“I should be inclined to mate a pale cream male or female with
  a white, and the progeny with an unmarked orange, or _vice versâ_. I
  had a litter from ‘Buttercup’ and ‘Zoroaster,’ consisting of two
  oranges, two fawns, and a cream. The fawn and creams were females, but
  all died in their youth. I made other attempts with similar crosses,
  as I had been told it was impossible to breed cream queens, and in the
  first year all the creams were queens, and the males red! My idea was
  to select a male of the required colour, and mate a queen of suitable
  breeding with him, then to mate the resulting queens with their own
  father. I believe this plan would have been a success if I had
  followed it up. My idea is that the natural males are the fawns and
  oranges, and that their complementary queens are the blue
  tortoiseshells and the ordinary tortoiseshells. No harm is ever done
  to a cream or orange strain by crossing with black, and it may do much
  good to the latter by deepening the colour of the oranges, and
  promoting patchiness as opposed to streakiness in the tortoiseshells.”

[Illustration:

  “MIRIAM OF THE DURHAMS.”

  (_Photo: E. Yeoman, Barnard Castle._)
]

  I have made frequent mention of Miss Beal’s noted creams during my
  chapters on orange and cream cats. These two celebrated champions are
  commonly known in the fancy as the “Heavenly Twins,” their registered
  names being “Romaldkirk Admiral” and “Romaldkirk Midshipmite.” They
  are really fawn Persian cats, very sound in colour, well made, big
  boned, and are always exhibited in the pink of condition, and at all
  seasons of the year are in marvellous coat. Certainly, the cold
  climate of the Romaldkirk cattery, which is situated 730 feet above
  the sea level, must, anyhow, suit this variety of Persian cat. I
  suppose the day will come when these welltried and well-seasoned
  veterans will have to retire from public life and make way for some of
  their already noted offspring. In the North, South, East, and West
  these “Heavenly Twins” have reigned supreme, and Miss Beal must almost
  have lost count of the number of prizes won by them, which, I think I
  am safe in saying, would give an exact record of the number of times
  exhibited. In response to my request, Miss Beal has sent me some notes
  regarding her cattery arrangements. She says:—

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION ROMALDKIRK ADMIRAL.”

  (_Photo: G. W. Vidals._)
]

  “Most of the houses are old farm buildings round about our stable
  yard, and I have recently utilised an old granary which is over the
  coachhouse. This is about 40 feet long, and has a room at one end,
  with five windows and good ventilation above. In addition I have three
  big cat houses and a loft, where most of the queens reside. ‘Middy’
  and ‘Admiral’ (the ‘Heavenly Twins’) have small wooden houses, felted
  inside and out, with wired runs and concrete floors.

  “I have the use of two laundries and a tool-house fitted with
  fireplaces, and these I reserve in case of illness.”

  There are no cats exhibited in better coat and condition than those
  that come from the Romaldkirk cattery, and the Misses Beal may be
  justly proud of their splendid specimens of creams, oranges,
  tortoiseshells, and blue Persians. Miss W. Beal has kindly supplied me
  with a short article on cream and fawn Persians:—

  “The cream and fawn Persian was a few years ago looked upon as a
  ‘sport,’ and when cream kittens appeared in an orange strain they were
  considered spoilt oranges, and were either given away, sold for a few
  shillings, or in many cases destroyed as useless. Now, however, it is
  very different; there is a growing demand for cats and kittens of this
  colour, and at the big shows they usually have two classes, _i.e._
  male and female, for them. They were certainly slow in coming into
  general favour, owing, I think, to the following facts: First, that
  the specimens formerly exhibited failed very noticeably in head, being
  very narrow in face and long in nose; secondly, that cream females
  were practically unknown; and, thirdly, that a show, where they are
  generally seen, is emphatically the worst place to see cream Persians
  to advantage, as the journey and being in a town, etc., takes off the
  spotlessness of their coat and dulls their colour, and the dingy grey
  of the pens and the yellow of the straw combine to spoil the effect of
  their colour.

  “The place, without doubt, to see creams to perfection is the country,
  where against a background of vivid green lawn their pure, soft
  colouring is indeed a thing of beauty, and rarely fails to command
  admiration. The colour is rather difficult to describe, and there are
  two distinct tones of colour bred, the one which is generally seen and
  is so far most successful at shows being a cream rather deep in shade,
  almost buff, with a distinct pink tinge about it, which is very
  different from the washed-out orange or sandy colour some people
  imagine it to be. The other tone of cream colour is much paler in
  shade, but, instead of the pink, it inclines to a lemon tinge, and,
  though paler, it is, as a rule, more ‘flaky’ and uneven than the
  darker shades, and it is also very apt to fade into white underneath.

  “Nearly all the best-known creams are bred in the first place from
  orange and blue strains, though creams have appeared as freaks in many
  colours—silvers, tabbies, etc.; but I believe the present strains
  sprang from crossing blue and orange, and you can _generally_ rely on
  getting some creams by crossing a tortoiseshell, cream, orange, or
  blue tortoiseshell queen with a blue sire. But, so far, reversing the
  mating, _i.e._ a blue queen with a cream or orange sire, is not
  successful from the cream breeders’ point of view, though very good
  from that of those breeders who want blues, as the kittens generally
  excel in purity of colour. Cream females are now fairly common, and so
  in a few years there ought to be a well-established strain of
  cream-bred creams; but, as in all other breeding for colour, people
  are apt to get surprises—for instance, one strain of cream females
  mated to a cream sire invariably produces whole litters of creams,
  while another strain, more cream-bred than the first named, mated to
  the same sire produces equal numbers of creams and orange and creams.
  If people wish to start breeding creams, and cannot afford a cream
  female, it is a good plan to buy a well-bred nondescript coloured
  female, either blue and cream, tabby, tortoiseshell, or anything that
  has cream or orange about it, and if it is properly mated there are
  nearly sure to be one or two creams: thus a cream strain can be
  gradually built up.

  “There are several things to be remembered in trying to breed good
  creams. One point to be aimed at is to keep the colour as _level_ as
  possible, whether it be of a dark or light shade, and to keep it pure,
  not tinged with blue or dull. Among other faults to be bred out are
  the light lip and chin, which are very common defects, and the long
  head, which is still seen sometimes, though creams have improved
  vastly in this respect in the last few years. Creams have been taken
  up greatly in America as well as oranges, and there they seem to be
  formidable rivals in popularity to the silvers, which have so far over
  here outdone them in that respect.

  “One great point in favour of creams is their hardiness, for they do
  not possess the delicate constitutions which seem to belong to most of
  the other very pale varieties of Persians. With other coloured
  cats—blues, silvers, etc.—creams make a splendid contrast, and with
  oranges add greatly to the effect of a group. They also cross well
  with several colours—blue, black, tortoiseshell, etc.—for breeding;
  and many breeders think the result of the growing fancy for these
  colours, _i.e._ cream and orange—for, though so different, they are
  hard to deal with separately—will be that they will be better catered
  for at shows as to classes, and more extensively bred than they are at
  present.”

[Illustration:

  MRS. F. WESTERN’S “MATTHEW OF THE DURHAMS.”

  (_Photo: E. Yeoman, Barnard Castle._)
]




[Illustration:

  “TOPSY OF MEREVALE.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. BIGNELL.

  (_Photo: O. Hardee, Chislehurst._)
]




                             CHAPTER XVII.
                        TORTOISESHELL PERSIANS.


  Many years ago, when I first took up the cat fancy, I used to think
  tortoiseshells ugly and commonplace, and I am afraid even now I have
  not that admiration for the breed which I feel a really good specimen
  of this variety ought to inspire. To begin with, it is seldom that a
  true type of long-haired tortoiseshell is seen or exhibited, and
  perhaps this may account for the breed being so much neglected. They
  are not taking-looking cats, and make a poor show in the pen. I have
  often remarked, however, that this is a favourite breed with the
  sterner sex, and that our professional men judges will almost
  invariably pick out a tortoiseshell when judging an “any other colour”
  class, and give it some mark of distinction. This may be accounted for
  by the fact that, of all varieties, a really good tortoiseshell is
  most difficult to breed, and therefore any specimen approaching
  perfection should be encouraged. There are splashed and sable
  tortoiseshells and tortoiseshell tabbies, all handsome cats of their
  kind, but not the genuine article. Real tortoiseshells may be called
  tricolour cats, for they should bear three colours, like a
  tortoiseshell comb, on their bodies, namely black, red, and yellow, in
  distinct patches or blotches, solid in colour and well broken up, with
  no trace of stripes, bars, or tabby markings. A brindling effect is to
  be avoided, and a white spot on chin is a great blemish. It is most
  undesirable that the black should predominate, in which case the
  specimen will lack brilliancy. The three colours should, if possible,
  be pretty evenly distributed over the body, legs, and tail, and should
  not run into each other. The red and yellow may preponderate over the
  black with good effect.

  A blaze, so-called, up the face is considered correct, and this should
  be of the red or yellow, and in a straight line from the nose upwards.
  This is a very distinctive feature in the breed, and one that judges
  will look for in a good show specimen. It is incorrect for the tail to
  be in any way ringed with the colours. The texture of the coat is
  often coarser and more hairy in this breed, and it is not usually so
  long and flowing as in other varieties of Persian cats. There is no
  difference of opinion as to the correct colour for the eyes of
  tortoiseshells. They should be a bright golden or orange, and these
  seem in perfect harmony with the colouring of the coat. Tortoiseshells
  never attain any great size, and may be called a small breed of
  Persian cats. I give the list of points as drawn up by the specialist
  society:—


                             TORTOISESHELL.


    _Colour and marking._—The three colours—black, orange, and yellow—to
    be well broken and as bright and well defined as possible; free from
    tabby markings, no white. 30.

    _Coat._—To be silky, very long, and fluffy. 20.

    _Size and shape._—To be large—not coarse, but massive, with plenty
    of bone and substance; short legs. 25.

    _Head._—To be round and broad, with short nose, ears small and well
    opened. 15.

    _Eyes._—To be large and full, and bright orange or hazel in colour.
    5.

    _Condition._—10.


  They are quite one of the most interesting from which to breed, and
  experiments can be tried successfully in crossing a tortoiseshell
  queen with black, cream, orange, and blue cats. The litters will often
  be a study in variety. I have known one family to consist of a black,
  a white, a cream, an orange, and a blue! The owner of such a litter
  would have something to suit all comers. A really good tortoiseshell
  queen may, therefore, be considered a valuable property. And what of a
  tortoiseshell tom? A mine of wealth would such a possession be to any
  fancier. Among short-haired cats a tortoiseshell tom is a rare animal,
  but I do not think a long-haired specimen has ever been seen or heard
  of. Several experiments have been tried, but it remains for some
  skilful and scientific breeder to solve the problem of the manner and
  means to be employed to produce males of this breed. The
  classification at our smaller shows for tortoiseshells is generally of
  a meagre and discouraging description. There are so few specimens that
  executives of shows fight shy of giving a class for even tortoiseshell
  _and_ tortoiseshell-and-white together. So tortoiseshells are mixed up
  in the “any other colour” class, and therefore this breed can seldom,
  if ever, be really judged on its own merits, or comparisons made
  between the different specimens that are exhibited. At our largest
  shows there are classes provided, which, however, are poorly filled.

  Tortoiseshells may be said to have had no past. There are no
  celebrities in feline history save and except “Queen Elizabeth,” and
  not only was she the finest of her breed, but she also made her name
  famous by severely injuring Mr. W. R. Hawkins, who was examining her
  when making his awards; and I have good reason—or rather bad
  reason—for recollecting her, on account of her fixing her teeth into
  my hand when I was removing her from her basket to pen her at the
  Westminster show in 1899. It seems that she had a great objection to
  travelling, and resented making an exhibition of herself in public!
  She was a grand specimen, however, and, besides always carrying off
  highest honours herself, she was the mother of many prize-winning
  orange and tortoiseshell cats, amongst others “Prince Charlie,”
  “Prince Lyne,” and “Mattie.” I have failed to obtain a photograph of
  this celebrated cat; and, even had I succeeded, a tortoiseshell makes
  a terribly poor picture when reproduced in photography, for the reason
  that the yellow comes out only fairly light, the orange appearing as
  dark as the black patches.

[Illustration:

  MISS H. COCHRAN’S TORTOISESHELL “BRUNETTE.”
]

  Miss H. Cochran had a dear old pet puss called “Brunette,” a dark
  tortoiseshell, and from her were bred some of the first cream females
  ever exhibited. The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison has a good
  tortoiseshell, “Curiosity” by name. The best three specimens now
  before the public are Dr. Roper’s “Dainty Diana,” Miss M. Beal’s
  “Pansy,” Miss Kate Sangster’s “Royal Yum Yum,” and Mrs. Bignell’s
  “Topsy of Merevale.” As regards the last-named, Mrs. Bignell has
  kindly supplied me with particulars of “Topsy’s” litters when mated
  with different-coloured cats. “Topsy’s” first litter in 1896, when
  mated to the “Duke of Kent” (a blue), was two creams and two smokes.
  When mated to “Johnnie Fawe” (a black) her kittens were all of the
  father’s dusky hue. Again, when crossed with another blue male her
  litter consisted of two orange males and a tortoiseshell female, and
  again to the same cat one black male and two orange males. “Topsy” is
  a noted prize-winner, and one of her smoke children, “Lucy Claire,”
  went out to Chicago, and is considered the finest smoke specimen in
  the American fancy. Dr. Roper’s “Dainty Diana” is one of the
  best-known tortoiseshells, and her colouring as good as any exhibited;
  she is the mother of many winners. Miss Kate Sangster, who is a great
  admirer of this breed, writes: “My ‘Champion Royal Yum Yum’ was bred
  from a black and a tortoiseshell, and her grandsire was a cream. She
  is over seven years old, and has had twenty-two kittens, namely, five
  cream, five blue, five orange, four black, and three tortoiseshell.”

[Illustration:

  “TOPSY.”

  OWNED BY MISS SARGENT.

  (_Photo: J. P. Bennett, West Norwood._)
]

  Miss Mildred Beal, who with her sister is so well known in connection
  with cream and orange cats, is also the owner of some fine
  tortoiseshells. “Wallflower” (well so named) is the mother of a noted
  prize-winning cream called “Sunlocks.” “Pansy,” Miss M. Beal’s special
  pet, is a well-known tortoiseshell. “Snapdragon,” another
  prize-winner, was exported to America, where quite a number of the
  Romaldkirk cats have found their home. We need a few more enthusiastic
  admirers of tortoiseshells like Miss M. Beal to take up this rather
  despised breed and follow in her footsteps. Some notes by the owner of
  “Pansy” will be of interest:—

  “Even fanciers who will go into raptures over the blue, orange, cream,
  or silver members of the establishment have no admiration to spare for
  a tortoiseshell, however striking its record of prizes may be; and yet
  to those who breed and understand them there is something very
  fascinating about these quaint creatures, though the taste for them is
  certainly an acquired one.

  “Among non-catty people great ignorance prevails as to what colour a
  tortoiseshell cat really is. Many people, if asked to describe a
  tortoiseshell cat, would say that it was a sort of sandy colour all
  over; others imagine that the ‘chintz’ cat, as it is called in the
  North—white with black and red patches—has a right to the name. So let
  it be said at once that three colours, namely, orange, yellow, and
  black, and these only, enter into the composition of the true
  tortoiseshell. There must be no white, neither should there be any
  trace of tabby markings, though this is very difficult to attain. The
  three colours should be patched or ‘broken’ all over the cat, and the
  more distinct each separate colour is in these patches the better.
  Brilliancy of colour is another point which breeders have to consider;
  many tortoiseshells have far too large a proportion of black in their
  colouring, which gives them a dingy and uninteresting appearance, and
  is sure to go against them in the show pen. The eyes should be orange,
  and in other points, such as shape, head, and texture of coat, the
  standard is the same as for the other varieties of long-haired cats.

[Illustration:

  TORTOISESHELL AND TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE PERSIANS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

  “One curious fact in connection with long-haired tortoiseshells, which
  is well known to fanciers, may be mentioned, namely, the non-existence
  of the male sex. Among short-haired tortoiseshells toms are
  exceedingly rare, though one or two do exist; but an adult long-haired
  male appears to be absolutely unheard of. The writer knows of one male
  kitten born some years ago, but it was either born dead or died in
  very early infancy. Darwin’s theory that the orange tom and
  tortoiseshell queen were originally the male and female of the same
  variety is borne out by the fact that until recently orange females
  were also rare. Of late years a good many of these have been bred and
  reared, and therefore, if the Darwinian theory be correct, it seems
  hard to believe that the tortoiseshell tom must be regarded as
  unattainable. If the difficulty has been successfully overcome in the
  one case, why not in the other? Breeding with this object in view is
  very slow work, for some tortoiseshell queens will produce litter
  after litter without a single kitten of their own colour, and a family
  consisting entirely of tortoiseshells would be as welcome as it is
  rare. But it would be a pity to despair of breeding the long looked
  for tom; if he ever does make his appearance, he will be hailed with
  sufficient interest to gratify any quantity of feline vanity.

  “At present, breeders hardly seem to recognise the great value of a
  tortoiseshell queen for breeding almost any variety of self-coloured
  cat. If the queen is mated to an orange, a cream, or a blue tom, she
  will be very likely to produce at least one or two really good
  specimens of the same colour as the sire, and sometimes a far larger
  proportion of the litter will ‘favour’ him. Much, of course, depends
  upon how the queen herself is bred, and this no doubt accounts for
  disappointment in some cases.

  “Tortoiseshells compare very favourably with the other varieties of
  long-haired cats in the matter of intelligence. The writer knows one
  which enjoys the well-earned reputation of being the cleverest thief
  in the cattery. Nothing is safe from her nimble paws; she has often
  been known to remove the lid from the saucepan in which the meat for
  the cattery supper had been placed, and make off with the contents;
  and if the cook’s back should be turned for only half a minute, woe to
  tomorrow’s dinner or to anything else tempting which may chance to be
  within reach!

  “Though tortoiseshells may be distinguished for brains, some of them
  certainly fail considerably in temper. They seem to find it most
  difficult to keep the peace with the other members of the cattery. I
  sincerely hope this breed will receive more attention from fanciers in
  the future.

[Illustration:

  MISS KATE SANGSTER’S “ROYAL YUM YUM.”

  (_Photo: W. V. Amey, Landport._)
]




                             CHAPTER XVIII.
                   TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE PERSIANS.


  These cats, both long- and short-haired, have always had a great
  fascination for me. One of my first Persian pets was a
  tortoiseshell-and-white, with a gorgeous coat, stand-out frill, and
  wide-spreading tail. She was so stately and dignified that we called
  her “The Lady Mayoress.” In those days cats were of no account, and
  shows were non-existent. My pretty pet roamed at will and made her own
  matrimonial arrangements: the kittens were consequently mostly
  consigned to the bucket.

  With my present knowledge of the feline race, I realise that “The Lady
  Mayoress” was a grand specimen of what a tortoiseshell-and-white
  should be. She was not a white-and-tortoiseshell, as so many now seen
  in the show pen might be called. In these cases the white
  predominates, and in reality the four colours should be about equally
  distributed. The patches of black, red, and yellow should cover the
  back, head, and tail, leaving the chest and paws and part of the hind
  quarters white. There should be patches of the three colours on each
  side of the face, with a white blaze up the nose.

[Illustration:

  “PEGGY PRIMROSE.” OWNED BY MISS TERRILL.

  (_Photo: W. Baker, Birmingham._)
]

  As in the tortoiseshells, so in this breed it is better for the
  brighter colours rather than the black to predominate. I believe an
  old-fashioned name for this breed was chintz cats. I think they might
  also be called patchwork cats! There is a great deal in the manner in
  which the colours are distributed on either side of the head, for
  expression in a cat goes a long way, and if the patches are badly
  placed and unevenly distributed the effect may be displeasing, and
  perhaps grotesque.

  Harrison Weir, in writing of this breed, says: “In a good
  tortoiseshell-and-white there should be more white on the chest,
  belly, and hind legs than is allowable in the black-and-white cat.
  This I deem necessary for artistic beauty when the colour is laid on
  in patches, although it should be even, clear, and distinct in its
  outline; the larger space of white adds brilliancy to the red, yellow,
  and black colouring. The face is one of the parts which should have
  some uniformity of colour, and yet not so, but a mere balancing of
  colour; that is to say, there should be a relief in black, with the
  yellow and red on each side, and so in the body and tail. The nose
  should be white, the eyes orange, and the whole colouring rich and
  varied, without the least ‘tabbiness,’ either brown or grey, or an
  approach to it, such being highly detrimental to its beauty.”

  This is another of the breeds of long-haired cats that may be said to
  have no history in the fancy, and I doubt if tortoiseshell-and-whites
  will ever be taken up seriously. There will always remain the
  difficulty of obtaining good mates for the queens, as males in this
  variety are almost as rare as in the tortoiseshells. It would
  seem that the corresponding males to tortoiseshells and
  tortoiseshell-and-whites are orange and fawns. I do not remember ever
  having seen or heard of a long-haired tortoiseshell-and-white tom cat;
  and as regards notable females, these have never at any time been
  numerous, and few really good specimens have been exhibited.

[Illustration:

  MISS YEOMAN’S TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE “MARY II.”

  (_Photo: D. Pym, Streatham._)
]

  The most perfect type was Lady Marcus Beresford’s “Cora,” an imported
  cat of great size and beautiful shape. Her colouring and markings were
  lovely, and her round snub face and short nose lent great charm to
  this unique specimen. It was a grievous loss to her owner and the
  fancy when poor “Cora” suddenly developed dropsy, and succumbed to
  this rather unusual complaint amongst cats. Mrs. Davies possessed a
  fine tortoiseshell-and-white named “Chumly,” and Mrs. Bampfylde’s
  “Susan” was a good type. Many of the cats exhibited have either too
  much or too little white, and often there is a grave suspicion of
  tabby amongst the black and orange.

  Coming down to the present-day cats, I may mention Mr. Furze’s “Beauty
  of Birmingham” and “Peggy Primrose,” both of which he disposed of
  after shows where they were exhibited. There is no doubt these cats
  are very taking in the show pen, where darker feline beauties are at a
  considerable disadvantage.

  I have had a difficulty in obtaining any good photographs illustrative
  of these cats, for, as with tortoiseshells, the colouring cannot be
  successfully portrayed by any gradations in tone, so that the orange
  and black both appear dark on a white ground, and thus the
  individuality of the breed is lost. It is different in painting, when
  it may be generally noticed that artists choose to depict these
  broken-coloured cats in preference to the self-coloured ones. In
  Madame Ronner’s lovely pictures, of which several adorn these pages,
  it will be remarked that almost all the fascinating fluffy kittens are
  patched in colour.

  As I have remarked, one of the reasons why these cats have not been
  seriously taken up by fanciers is the difficulty experienced in
  selecting suitable mates that will be likely to perpetuate the breed.
  In fact, this is not possible with any degree of certainty.
  Tortoiseshell-and-whites may be crossed with black or orange cats, and
  it is a toss-up what the progeny may be. Creams are sometimes bred by
  mating with blues, but there is always the danger of white spots and
  white toes. I once mated a pretty tortoiseshell-and-white with my
  silver “Cambyses,” and the result was a good pale silver and an almost
  unmarked cream. Considering all things, I cannot prophesy any future
  for this breed in the fancy; in fact, I think there is every chance of
  these really pretty pussies disappearing from our midst. At the
  Westminster show of 1903 there was only one solitary entry in the
  tortoiseshell-and-white class! This was Miss Yeoman’s “Mary II.,”
  whose portrait appears on the foregoing page.

[Illustration:

  AT HOME.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]




[Illustration:

  MISS SIMPSON’S BROWN TABBY “PERSIMMON.”
]




                              CHAPTER XIX.
                         BROWN TABBY PERSIANS.


  My first prize-winning kitten was a brown tabby, exhibited many years
  ago at the Crystal Palace. He became my stud cat “Rajah,” called after
  an Indian prince who was visiting us at that time. “Rajah” was wholly
  and devotedly attached to the lady of his choice, namely, my blue
  Persian “Mater.” These two names occur in the pedigree of many a
  prize-winner of the present day, and very numerous were the lovely
  litters I reared from this eminently respectable pair of Persians. I
  never knew either “Rajah” or “Mater” troubled with a day’s illness,
  and if one of their kittens had died such an event would have caused
  as much astonishment as grief. But I must return to my tabbies.

  I cannot explain it, but certain it is that of all the feline race
  (blues not excepted) the warmest corner in my heart has always been
  kept for the brown tabbies. There is something so comfortable and
  homely about these dear brownies—they seem to have more intelligent
  and expressive countenances than any other cats, and I am firmly of
  opinion that no Persian cats are so healthy and strong as brown
  tabbies. They are a hardy race, and as such I have frequently
  recommended novices in the fancy to start with a good brown queen, and
  with ordinary care they may reasonably expect to rear litter after
  litter without the difficulties and disasters that one hears of in
  connection with the bringing up of Persian kittens in general.

  I know there is a kind of idea that brown tabbies are a common sort of
  cat, and this breed is often spoken of in a most disparaging way.
  Then, again, the ignorant in the cat world have an extraordinary
  notion that tabbies are always females! Perhaps because we sometimes
  hear a meddlesome or gossiping woman called a “tabby”—and I had a dear
  old friend who always bade me beware of “tabby bipeds” among catty
  communities!

  The word “tabby” is supposed to have had its origin in a certain
  street in Bagdad called “Atab,” which was chiefly inhabited by weavers
  of a particular kind of material called “Atabi.” This is what Harrison
  Weir says on the subject:—“The word ‘tabby’ was derived from a kind of
  taffeta, or ribbed silk, which when calendered, or what is now termed
  ‘watered,’ is by that process covered with wavy lines. This stuff in
  bygone times was often called ‘tabby,’ hence the cat with lines or
  markings on its fur was called a tabby cat. Certain it is that the
  word ‘tabby’ only referred to the marking or stripes, not to the
  absolute colour, for in ‘Wit and Drollery’ is the following:—

                        Her petticoat of satin,
                        Her gown of crimson tabby.

  Be that as it may, I think there is little doubt that the foregoing
  was the origin of the term. Yet it was also called the brindled cat,
  or the tiger cat, and with some the grey cat—‘graymalkin.’” We are
  told also by the same authority that tabby cats in Norfolk and Suffolk
  were called cyprus cats, cyprus being a reddish-yellow colour, so that
  the term may have applied to orange as well as brown tabbies. The term
  “tiger cat” is, I believe, often used in America, and it well
  describes the true type of a brown tabby. The ground-work should be of
  a bright tawny shade, with a dash of burnt sienna, the markings a dark
  seal brown—almost black. As regards the colour of eyes in brown
  tabbies, I prefer the golden or orange; but some of the finest cats in
  this variety have possessed the green eye, and some fanciers are
  disposed to prefer this colour, which I think should be the speciality
  of the silvers. Anyhow, a good brilliant green is preferable to a
  washed-out undecided yellow.

[Illustration:

  MISS MELLOR’S BROWN TABBY “LADY SHOLTO.”

  (_Photo: N. N. Statham, Matlock Bridge._)
]

  There are two distinct types of brown tabbies—the splashed or heavily
  marked, and the barred or ticked. I think the former the handsomer
  breed, with the well defined and evenly balanced side markings, the
  dark spine line (not too wide), the clear rings round the chest
  (commonly called the “Lord Mayor’s chain”), the paws ringed in
  graduated bars to the foot. On the head and face the markings should
  be very clear and distinct, the narrow dark head lines running
  symmetrically till they join the broad spine line. The ruff should be
  of the light shade, and ears of the same tone lend great distinction
  to this cat. As in the other tabby breeds, the browns are terribly
  addicted to white chins; in fact, I think it is certainly rarer to
  find a brown tabby without this blemish than an orange, more pains
  having been taken to eradicate the evil in orange tabbies. There is no
  denying the fact that brown tabbies are a very neglected breed, and at
  present the only one, except tortoiseshell-and-white, that is not
  taken up by a specialist society. This is a crying shame, and it
  remains for some ardent admirer of the dear brown tabbies to form a
  club, and to try to breed really good specimens of the golden-brown
  order; not the drab or grey animals that are so frequently seen at our
  shows, and which are very far removed from the genuine article.

  I do not think that any breed can produce such fascinating kittens.
  They have such remarkably intelligent expressions, and, as a rule, the
  sturdy cobby shape and broad heads of brown tabbies are very
  conspicuous. This breed should distinctly be massive in build, with
  plenty of bone and muscle; in fact, with brown tabbies the larger the
  better, if well proportioned. With the sterner sex brown tabbies are
  decided favourites, and I cannot help noticing that the very few
  fanciers who have taken up this breed amongst the gentler sex are what
  might be termed strong-minded.

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION CRYSTAL.”

  OWNED BY C. H. JONES, PALMYRA, N.Y.
]

  I have also remarked that when once fanciers start breeding brown
  tabbies they continue, and this cannot be truly said of other
  breeds—silvers, for instance; but I would fain see a steady increase
  to the ranks of breeders of brown tabby Persians, and more
  encouragement given at shows. I know that as matters now stand
  fanciers complain they cannot get any market for their tabby kittens,
  and that classification is poor at shows and prizes scarce. It is all
  too true, but surely it is a “long lane that has no turning,” and as
  every dog has its day, so perhaps in the future, whether near or
  distant, this beautiful breed will gain all the admiration and
  attention that it deserves. There is a distinct kind of brown tabby,
  so-called, which may better be described as sable. These cats have not
  the regular tabby markings, but the two colours are blended one with
  another, the lighter sable tone predominating. At the Crystal Palace
  Cat Show of 1902 the class was for brown tabby _or_ sable. I was
  judging, and, considering the mixed entries, I felt that markings must
  not be of the first importance, and so awarded first and second to
  Miss Whitney’s beautiful sable females, the third going to a
  well-marked though out of condition brown tabby. These sable-marked
  cats are rare, but still more beautiful would be a cat entirely of the
  one tawny colour—a self sable, without markings. “The most suitable
  factors to obtain this colour,” so writes Mrs. Balding, “would
  probably be tortoiseshell-and-sable tabby, as free from marking and as
  red in ground colour as possible. A cross of orange, bright coloured
  and as nearly as obtainable from unmarked ancestors, would be useful.
  Some nine years ago I purchased a dimly marked bright sable coloured
  cat, ‘Molly,’ shown by Mrs. Davies at the Crystal Palace, with a view
  to producing a self-coloured sable cat; but ‘Molly’ unfortunately
  died, and I abandoned the idea.” The nearest approach to a self sable
  I have ever come across was a cat I obtained for the Viscountess
  Esher, which had, alas! been neutered. He was almost unmarked, and of
  the colour of Canadian sable, with golden eyes—a most uncommon
  specimen.

  Another species is the spotted tabby, but I have never seen a true
  specimen in Persians. Some brown tabbies are ticked or spotted on the
  sides, but they have the spine line and markings on neck, head, and
  tail.

  Very few and far between have been good brown tabbies in the history
  of the fancy. Amongst the males two names may be said to stand out
  conspicuously—Miss Southam’s “Birkdale Ruffle” and my own “Persimmon.”
  Both these cats, of quite different types, have gone to their rest.

  As regards the famous Birkdale strain, the following account, kindly
  supplied to me by Miss Southam, will be of interest:—

  “There is no doubt that, until quite recently, our old friend the
  tabby has been deliberately placed in the background, and regarded in
  the show world with an indifference which has proved an unmistakable
  stumbling block to the improvement of this particular breed.

[Illustration:

  A ROOM IN BRAYFORT CATTERY.

  (_Photo: W. Lawrence, Dublin._)
]

  “Nor is this very much to be wondered at, when we take into
  consideration the hideous combination of the drab, colourless browns,
  dowdy greys, and indistinct markings which had hitherto constituted
  the chief charms of the typical tabby. Instead, it would appear that
  the commonplace and unattractive grey was openly encouraged, rather
  than otherwise; for, although the silver tabby was provided with a
  classification of his own, only one class was relegated to “brown and
  grey tabbies,” either colour being considered equally worthy of
  carrying off premier honours!

  “It was at this period, when the nondescript tabby was reigning
  supreme, that Champion ‘Birkdale Ruffie’ made his _début_ in the show
  world, my sister, Miss Emily Southam, being the first to bring the
  sable tabby into prominence. Whether, however, it was that the public
  was not sufficiently up-to-date to appreciate the sudden departure
  from the usual sombre colours with which it had hitherto been
  satisfied to a brilliant sable, or whether he was particularly
  unfortunate in his choice of judges, it is difficult to say; at any
  rate, it was not until four years after his first appearance in the
  show pen that he met with the justice that his many beautiful points
  so richly deserved. In fact, after exhibiting him at several shows,
  where he was deliberately passed over for other and most inferior
  cats, he being in the pink of condition, my sister was so annoyed at
  the treatment he received that she simply burnt the schedules which
  poured in upon her and kept him at home, determined he should not be
  further insulted by such flagrant injustice!

  “It was at the West of England Cat Show in 1894 that ‘Birkdale Ruffie’
  scored his first real success—I believe under Mr. Gresham—winning two
  first prizes in the open and novice classes and two specials. Here at
  last his beautiful sable colouring, his dense black markings, and
  wonderfully expressive face were appreciated.

  “The year 1896 was the occasion of his sensational win at the Crystal
  Palace show. He simply swept the board, carrying everything before
  him—first prize, championship, several specials, and the special given
  by the King (then Prince of Wales)—for the best rough-coated cat in
  the show, the prize being a handsomely framed portrait of the King
  with his autograph attached. Mrs. Vallance was judge. Again, in 1897,
  he was shown with great success at the Crystal Palace, winning first
  prize, championship, and special.

[Illustration:

  MISS WHITNEY AND HER NEUTER BROWN TABBY.

  (_Photo: W. Lawrence, Dublin._)
]

  “This was the occasion of ‘Birkdale Ruffie’s’ last appearance before
  the public, as it was during the following month my sister was taken
  dangerously ill, and for this reason his pen at the Brighton show was
  empty. After her death we determined to subject him no more to the
  trials and discomforts of the show pen, so ‘Ruffie,’ who was now seven
  years old and a great pet, both for his own sake and that of his
  mistress, only too gladly retired into the privacy of home life,
  spending the cold winters by the fireside in his own little snug
  retreat, and in the long summer days lying under his bower of shady
  hops, lazily watching his facsimile, his little son ‘Master Ruffie,’
  growing up more beautiful each day and ready to take up the thread of
  his father’s famous career in the exhibition world.

  “Into the latter ‘Master Ruffie’ made his _début_ without any of the
  numerous anxieties encountered by his celebrated parent. The way was
  paved for him, and when he appeared at the Crystal Palace show in
  1899, in all the full glory of his youth and beauty, it was difficult
  for the judges to realise that it was not their old favourite who was
  now confronting them through the wires!

  “‘Master Ruffie’ has only been shown on two occasions—in 1897 as a
  kitten, and in 1899 at the Crystal Palace, when he returned home with
  his box literally filled with cards, his winnings including three
  first prizes, four specials, and a championship.

  “I am sorry we can manage to get no really good photo of ‘Master
  Ruffie.’ Time after time we have attempted it—in studios, out of
  doors, by means of professionals and amateurs—including many kind
  relatives and friends with their ever-ready little Kodaks! ‘Master
  Ruffie’ steadfastly refuses to face the camera. Again and again the
  button is pressed in vain, and only the glimpse of a vanishing tail
  upon the negative is all we have to show as ‘Ruffie’s’ portrait!

  “But we have only to look at ‘Birkdale Ruffie’s’ picture, and we have
  ‘Master Ruffie’ too! The only difference between them is that the
  latter is a very cobby little fellow, being perhaps shorter in the
  legs, which makes him appear to be a somewhat smaller cat than his
  father. In fact, at the Crystal Palace show he was pronounced by the
  judges to be perfect in every point.

  “‘Birkdale Ruffie’ was noted for the extreme beauty of his expression;
  he had certainly one of the most characteristic faces ever seen in a
  cat, and his son inherits the same. The former was constantly the
  subject of sketches in the illustrated papers, those by Mr. Louis Wain
  being especially lifelike.

  “Some of ‘Master Ruffie’s’ descendants are, I believe, in the
  possession of Miss Witney, and have met with great success in the show
  pen.

  “Our cattery is built on the principle of shepherds’ huts, each house
  having a separate wire run, with shrubs planted, and a thick wall of
  ivy in the background, which gives a picturesque appearance to the
  whole of the little colony. In summer a mass of luxuriant hops makes a
  welcome shade from the hot sun.

  “The houses are warmed by gas stoves, on which the cats love to sit,
  purring contentedly, and with the pretty curtained windows, carpets,
  wickerwork armchairs, and cosily cushioned benches, I think ‘Master
  Ruffie’ and his seven feline playmates have a pretty easy time in this
  tempestuous world!

[Illustration:

  “BRAYFORT FINA.”

  MISS WHITNEY’S “BRAYFORT PRINCESS.”

  (_Photos: W. Lawrence, Dublin._)
]

  “The one bone of contention is that the cats have appropriated the
  sunniest corner of the garden, their houses having the much desired
  southern aspect, which our gardener looks at with longing eyes for his
  beloved peaches and early peas. Happily, he bears the little occupants
  no grudge, and when we go from home takes over the whole of the
  cattery into his charge.”

  Here let me give a few details of my dear departed puss. “Persimmon”
  was a well-known character in the fancy, and had the distinction of
  being a champion in the National Cat Club and the Cat Club. It was in
  1899 when, judging at Brighton, I was greatly taken with a
  wonderful-headed brown tabby that came under my awards. I gave him
  first in his class, and when later I obtained a catalogue and saw his
  price was a very reasonable one, I purchased him, and I may say I
  never made a better bargain, in or out of the cat fancy. “Persimmon”
  (as I afterwards called him, in memory of the Derby winner) was bred
  by Mr. Heslop, of Darlington, that astute and clever cat fancier; and
  his grandsire was “Brown Prince,” a noted Northern prize-winning
  tabby. I have never seen such a wonderful head as that which made
  “Persimmon’s” chief glory.

[Illustration:

  “LONSDALE CHRYSALIS” AND “LONSDALE MOTH.”

  BRED BY MRS. GREGORY.

  (_Photo: W. G. Lewis, Bath._)
]

  His face was very round, and his nose quite a snub, and he was blessed
  with tiny ears and short tail. His shape was perfect, but the markings
  on his back were rather too heavy, and alas! he had a white under-lip.
  But, taking him all round, he was a grand specimen, and a most lovable
  puss. He fretted himself to death when a change of residence from the
  country to London obliged me to board him out.

  “Persimmon” sired some splendid kittens, which whenever shown proved
  themselves worthy of their sire’s long prize-winning record. At the
  Crystal Palace show of 1902 Miss Whitney exhibited two of his
  progeny—a superb neuter “Persimmon Laddie,” who covered himself with
  glory and his cage with cards, and a beautiful kitten that had
  previously won at Manchester and has since been purchased at a high
  figure by a lover of the brownies. At the Specialist Show at Bath in
  January, 1903, “Persimmon Laddie” was again to the fore, and won in
  the open and ring classes. “Persimmon” was a great loss, for good
  brown tabbies are rare. I hope, however, to purchase a fine,
  well-grown son of my dear old “Simmy,” and as “Persimmon II.” I trust
  it may be a case of “like father like son,” and that by-and-by we may
  find quite a long list of brown tabby Persians “at stud” in the
  columns of the catty papers.

  I think I may with truth assert that brown tabbies are more
  appreciated, and that better specimens are produced in the North than
  in the South of England. I have mentioned Mr. Heslop as having owned
  some splendid specimens, and at one time he used to exhibit quite a
  number at our Southern shows. Miss Eggett, of Manchester, has a grand
  tabby of the golden order named “Cleopatra.” Mrs. Whittaker has some
  nice specimens, and Mrs. Mackenzie’s “Cleo” was much admired at the
  Westminster show in 1900, when she took first in her class. Mrs.
  Ricketts has always been partial to the breed, and Mrs. Stead’s
  “Timber” has done some winning. Miss Gray’s “Lady Babbie” was one of
  the finest brown queens that used to visit “Persimmon,” and another
  was Miss Meeson’s “Jolie,” whom I used greatly to admire. Miss Derby
  Hyde exhibits a wonderful copper-coloured brown tabby called
  “Maraquetta,” who, if only possessed of a good head and shorter face,
  would be a splendid specimen. Mrs. Davies formerly owned “Susan,” a
  cat now in the possession of Mrs. G. Wilson, very good in colour and
  markings, but failing in head and face. Mr. Western, of Sandy, has a
  good male in “Wynstay Monarch.” In the West of England Mrs. Hellings
  and Mrs. Gregory are admirers and breeders of brown tabbies.

[Illustration:

  MRS. D’ARCY HILDYARD’S “SULPHURLAND.”

  (_Photo: Boxell & Co., Scarboro’._)
]

  Mrs. Gregory, of Bath, started breeding brown tabbies in 1899. Her
  female (a black) she mated to her stud cat “Azor,” and, curiously
  enough, all the litters have consisted of brown tabbies, the kittens
  numbering sixteen in all. When, however, “Queen Caterpillar” was mated
  to Mrs. Gregory’s blue Persian, her kittens were all black.

  A picture of two pretty brown tabby kittens bred by Mrs. Gregory
  appears in this chapter. I am happy to say that Mrs. Gregory intends
  to continue breeding brown tabbies, and has kept a handsome specimen
  from one of her recent litters to perpetuate the strain. Mrs. Drury,
  of Graffham, is very faithful to the brownies, and in her lovely
  old-fashioned cottage near Petworth she is always surrounded by
  several of her pet pussies. She writes as follows:—

  “When first I received a margarine basket, and out of it came a little
  brown fluffy kitten, I knew no more about Persian cats than the man in
  the moon—in fact, he probably knew more, as he is frequently the only
  witness to their nocturnal gambols. I had heard of such things as
  Persian cats, yet never remember having seen one. However, kind
  friends soon gave me a helping hand, and as time went on and my fluffy
  kitten became a fluffy cat, being passionately fond of animals, I soon
  found out the very fascinating ways of dear ‘Miss Wiggs,’ so named
  because the fur on her head in her kitten days would stand erect, and
  it is the only name she condescended to answer to. She has been—and is
  so still, in spite of all her maternal cares and five years’
  experience—one of the healthiest pussies imaginable, and has never had
  one day’s illness since she came into my possession, though I believe,
  in her babyhood, distemper nearly carried her off; and all her
  children have been equally healthy—in fact, I have never lost one of
  her kittens, which is, I imagine, almost a unique experience.

  “‘Miss Wiggs’ came from a blue father and a silver mother, but has,
  with one exception, always had brown babies, even when mated to a
  silver. The varied beauties of blues, silvers, whites, and blacks have
  never taken such a hold upon me as compared with the fascination of
  the browns, and it is quite a wonder to me more fanciers do not breed
  them. Nothing looks handsomer, to my mind, than a rich brown, tabby
  male with tawny markings, like a young lion, and judging from my
  experience they amply repay any trouble taken by their loving ways and
  robust health. I have a son of ‘Miss Wiggs’ and poor old ‘Persimmon’
  now, who follows me like a little dog, even out in the road, and goes
  for a walk running by my side.

  “Perhaps what would astonish a stranger most on coming to see me is
  the way my catty family lives in peace and contentment with the dogs,
  and very often I find two or three kittens in the dogs’ basket very
  busily occupied cleaning my little bull-terrier. It is a point of
  honour amongst the happy family that they never touch each other’s
  food, and very rarely is this broken, and not infrequently we see
  three, and perhaps four, cats sitting round the dog while he eats his
  dinner, waiting for any leavings, and the same with the dog. Persians
  have the reputation of being bad mousers. ‘Miss Wiggs’ makes quite the
  exception, and on one occasion caught and killed two mice at the same
  time; one she held in her paws and the other in her mouth. Young rats
  also she has many times brought in, to show what a useful little
  person she is, and her children follow in her footsteps.

  “In a great measure I attribute my brownies’ good health to the
  open-air life they lead. From early morning to when darkness
  approaches they have the run of a large garden, even on a wet day.
  They go in and out of the houses as they like; never sleep indoors,
  always in a very dry little outside cattery—in summer on benches, and
  in winter in nice boxes with straw.

  “Perhaps, financially, blues or silvers may be greater successes, but
  brownies have been my first love and will always remain so. I am only
  sorry I cannot show what a lovely head and sweet face dear ‘Miss
  Wiggs’ has, but she absolutely declines to be photographed.

  “In time I hope more fanciers may realise how rich in colour and
  markings a good brown tabby is, and then we may hope to see this
  beautiful breed brought more to the fore at all the leading shows.

  “As ‘Miss Wiggs’ has been the foundress of my cattery, perhaps a short
  description of her would not be amiss. She is a ticked tabby—that is
  to say, she has not the broad, dark stripes with tawny splashes; her
  ground colour is a beautiful golden brown, and down the back and sides
  are pencilled stripes, more like the markings on a silver. Round her
  face, nose, and ears she has most lovely golden brown shades; eyes are
  green—they used to be amber; her head is very broad and well shaped;
  and her expression is very sweet.

[Illustration:

  “PIONEER BOBS.”

  OWNED BY MISS M. WASHBURN, SMITH’S FALLS, ONT.

  (_Photo: E. F. Briggs, Smith’s Falls, Ont._)
]

  “When mated to a silver, as she has been twice, the litters have been
  equally divided—two silvers and two brownies; but both silvers and
  browns in that case had broad dark and light markings, in no way
  resembling the ticking of the mother. But when mated to poor old
  ‘Persimmon’ the kittens have been equally divided, always two
  resembling the maternal side exactly, and two following out
  ‘Persimmon’s’ beautiful splashes. When mated to a brown tabby all the
  kittens were brown. She has never thrown a black; but her daughter,
  whose father was ‘Abdul Zaphir,’ and who I also mated to ‘Persimmon,’
  had two blacks and two very dark tabbies in her litter. ‘Wiggs’ has in
  all her five litters had only two females. Her average is four or five
  kittens; she looks after them entirely herself, and has never been the
  worse for so doing; but I do not allow her more than one family a
  year, and until the kittens can lap she is fed every two hours.”

  The best-marked brown tabby I have ever seen was Lady Marcus
  Beresford’s’ “Bassorah,” who was unfortunately given away and lost.
  Her markings looked like oil painting, they stood out in such distinct
  relief. Another specimen of a different type was imported by Lady
  Marcus Beresford, namely “Kismet.” She was of the ticked order, with
  small pencilled markings, very compact and cobby in shape. Mrs.
  Herring has always possessed good brown tabbies. To begin with,
  “Adolphe,” who used formerly to win everything till his son, “Prince
  Tawny Boy,” stepped into his shoes, to be displaced later by his own
  son, “Prince Adolphe,” and his exquisite daughter, “Floriana,” now in
  America. Another good son of “Adolphe’s” was Mrs. Bonar’s “Lord
  Salisbury.” To go back as far as I can recollect, there was Mr.
  Horrel’s “Nero,” and Mrs. Pearce’s “Juliet” and “Rosebud,” also Miss
  Malony’s “Lindfields Lion” and the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison’s
  “Cetewayo” and “Mazawattee,” this latter a really wonderful cat which
  was imported by Mrs. Davies at the same time as the celebrated
  “Nizam,” and reported to be his brother. Anyway, he resembled him
  greatly in everything but colour.

  For sables we, of course, go to the Birkdale strain. I remember the
  incomparable “Birkdale Ruffie” in his full glory at the Crystal
  Palace—a mass of red-brown fur, of the style of “Persimmon Laddie,”
  but with more distinct markings and a very keen, almost fierce,
  expression; in fact, he looked like a wild animal!

  Then “Master Ruffie” appeared as a kitten, and later as a mild edition
  of his sire. From this celebrated strain Miss Whitney’s lovely sables
  are descended. This enthusiastic fancier has kindly written some notes
  on her favourite breed. Her cats are all pets, and lead a life of
  luxury in their town and country houses on the other side of the Irish
  Channel. Miss Whitney says:—

  “I am pleased to see that brown tabbies are coming to the front again,
  after being such a long time in the background. It now rests with
  fanciers of this charming variety of the feline species to improve
  them in all points. We hear often that they should be a rich tan in
  ground colour, clear and dense in markings, profuse in coat, ruff and
  frill, large round head, small ears, and no white lip. I should
  consider this a perfect specimen; but where is such to be had? I do
  not say it will not be obtained, but up to this I have never seen it.
  Now what we are to endeavour is to breed up to this high standard.
  This will take time, no doubt; but, above all, do not let us give up
  everything for markings, though they are very essential.

  “My idea of a brown tabby is that it must be of a rich tawny ground
  colour. How could a brown tabby be called a brown if it is only a
  greyish drab? I should prefer to do without such perfect markings, but
  to have the more desirable rich colour, and, above all, plenty of
  coat, ruff, and frill; if it has not these latter qualities, it could
  not be called a Persian, which must have an abundance of fine
  soft-textured coat. If we only breed for marking, why not mate to a
  ‘short-hair,’ which is more likely to be perfect in that point? But
  then, where would be our true Persian? Now, as to white lip, I have
  never seen a good brown tabby without it, but I hear that there are
  such, though they fail in colour. I would prefer the well-coated cat
  with good colour and markings and a white lip to one that failed in
  these other points and had no white lip (I do not mean when it extends
  to a white throat). Now if we happen to breed a good kitten without a
  white lip, and should strive to mate her to a really well-marked stud
  cat, even should he fail in colour—perhaps we might get even one
  kitten nearly reaching perfection as the result. It would reward the
  patience, expense, and time; but we need never expect a profusely
  coated cat to show as distinct markings as an inferiorly coated one
  will. I breed nothing but brown tabbies, but cannot say I have yet
  obtained perfection. I have, however, secured coat and colour, and
  expect to attain the other desirable points in the near future, as we
  must all persevere, but always let us breed up to the standard of the
  true Persian.

[Illustration:

  “LORNA DOONE.”

  BRED BY MRS. ELLIS, TORONTO.
]

  “I first became interested in cats by being given a nice brown tabby
  Persian kitten, which I called ‘Ruffle,’ and got very fond of him; but
  as he seemed lonely I thought of getting another kitten as a companion
  for him, so I then purchased a pretty little silver tabby from Miss
  Cochran; but after some time, of all the varieties I saw, none pleased
  me so well as the brown tabbies. This breed I have gone in for
  altogether during the past few years, and I feel sure I shall remain
  faithful to them to the end of my career as a cat fancier. At present
  I have not a cat of any other colour in my cattery.

  “I still have ‘Ruffle,’ who is now a very large neuter, splendidly
  marked, but perhaps not quite up to the standard in other points for
  the English show bench. ‘Brayfort Fina’ is, I may say, a sable tabby,
  being particularly rich in colour all throughout—indeed, more often of
  an auburn tan than brown. She is very profuse in coat, carrying a long
  body-coat and a big ruff and frill. She is a very large cat, with
  plenty of bone, and well made, with a fine-shaped head. She was once
  mistaken for a male by a well-known judge. ‘Fina’ was bred by Miss G.
  Southam, and is by ‘Master Ruffie’ _ex_ ‘Bluette,’ her sire being a
  son of the famous ‘Champion Birkdale Ruffie.’

  “She was already a winner when I purchased her, and has since won many
  times, including second and special at Bristol, 1899, in a mixed sex
  class, being beaten by a male. At Belfast, in 1900—the following
  year—she was beaten out of first by her sister, ‘Brayfort Princess.’
  She then took second at Westminster, 1902; first at Reading, and first
  and championship at the Crystal Palace, 1901 and 1902. Again first at
  the Bath Specialist Show in the same year, where her gorgeous
  colouring was called in question and an unsupported protest was made
  that she was dyed! She is a most successful breeding cat, her produce
  being usually winners. Her sister, ‘Brayfort Princess,’ is also a
  sable tabby, and carries an immense coat, ruff, and frill; it is
  denser than ‘Fina’s,’ and I fancy but for the latter ‘Princess’ would
  have been more heard of as a winner, as, except on one or two
  occasions, she has been usually beaten by ‘Fina.’

[Illustration:

  “BIRKDALE RUFFIE.”

  (_Photo: J. A. Kay, Southport._)
]

  “‘Brayfort Persimmon Laddie’ is by ‘Champion Persimmon’ _ex_ ‘Brayfort
  Fina.’ He made his public appearance at Bristol when he was four
  months old, taking first and special in a tabby kitten class and third
  in novice, against an entry of twenty-five adults; then he won first
  and special in kittens, and second in open to his mother’s first at
  Belfast in 1900; also he took first and special for best long-haired
  neuter at Manchester in 1901; first, Liverpool; and first and two
  specials at the Crystal Palace, 1902. He is too well known to comment
  on. He is a wonderful sable colour, and is superb in coat. ‘Brayfort
  Sable Boy’ is also by the late ‘Champion Persimmon’ _ex_ ‘Fina.’ He
  won first and special at the kitten show in October, 1902, and first
  and two specials at the Crystal Palace show, 1902; his wins speak to
  his merit.

  “I find all my cats very strong and healthy, and even in the coldest
  winter they never have artificial heat. I attribute having never lost
  a pet after a show to taking them away at night. Unless something very
  unforeseen occurred, nothing would induce me to leave a cat of mine in
  a show.

  “I have found mating to a good brown tabby much the most successful. I
  tried mating to an orange, but did not like the results. I always
  mated to the late ‘Champion Persimmon,’ and had never fewer than six
  kittens in a litter—sometimes eight—all strong and healthy. Twice only
  have I lost any, and on these occasions the fault lay with the foster
  mothers.

  “In the spring and summer my cats get a run out in the garden every
  day; the two neuters go on leads, but the females have their liberty;
  indeed, unless I were present ‘Fina’ would not leave the house. Their
  rooms look out on the grass terrace, so they can come in or out as
  they please till their breakfast time, which is at about ten o’clock.
  They are groomed every morning between 8 and 8.30 o’clock, winter and
  summer, and always fed regularly. Their sleeping houses, as in photo,
  are about four feet long, lined round with oilcloth, so they can be
  washed when necessary. In the winter the bedding is hay, and in
  summer, shavings. The houses are sufficiently long to allow for
  sanitary boxes during the breeding time. I find Hall’s washable
  distemper very nice for the cattery walls, and it looks so bright and
  fresh. The floor-covering is linoleum.”

  In America brown tabbies are beginning to find favour, and several
  good specimens have been exported. “Arlington Hercules,” who took
  first at Westminster in 1901, was shipped to Mrs. Sarmiento and Mrs.
  Cutler, and I sent a “Persimmon” kitten out by Mrs. Robert Locke to
  Mrs. Clinton Locke, the president of the Beresford Club. He was passed
  on to her honorary secretary, and in _Field and Fancy_ of December,
  1902, the following notice appears:—“Miss Lucy Johnstone is the
  fortunate owner of ‘Persimmon Squirrel,’ a son of the noted brown
  tabby ‘Persimmon,’ who lately died. Good brown tabbies are very
  scarce, and she should congratulate herself on this possession, as,
  according to all accounts, he is destined to make a good hit.”

  Another American lady, Mrs. Gotwalts, of Pittsburg, wrote to me for a
  brownie, and I sent her one bred by Mrs. Bignell, and the cat has, I
  believe, had some good litters. The most famous brown tabby, however,
  over the herring pond was Mr. E. N. Barker’s wonderful “King Humbert.”
  This cat arrived in America in 1885, and made a considerable stir in
  catty circles. Mr. Barker is said to have refused a thousand dollars
  for him from a New York millionaire. I remember when Mr. Barker was
  over, acting as judge at the Westminster Cat show, he sought, but did
  not find anything to beat his noted brown tabby now gone to its last
  home. Mr. Barker, writing of this breed, says:—

[Illustration:

  “BIRKDALE RUFFIE’S” CATTERY.
]

  “If I were asked suddenly why I admire brown tabby Persians, the
  liking must be partly attributed to face markings and colour, and to
  one who grows accustomed to these they are fascinating and add to the
  general beauty of the cat, and seem natural and as though they ought
  to be there, and one is not so overweighted with a sense of continual
  sameness as may be apparent in a whole colour. I must confess,
  personally speaking, I have become used to bars and stripes. I miss
  them when I contemplate a self-coloured Persian.

  “I once had a good many brown tabby Persians, and people did not fancy
  them, as they said, ‘They are so like ordinary cats’—a great mistake;
  but by gentle persuasion I managed to get one or two adopted. One lady
  some time afterwards candidly confessed, ‘I could not now be satisfied
  with any other kind, I should miss the stripes so much on the face.’
  That is just it; in a tabby you have a little more than your
  neighbours, who go in for self-coloured cats, and, though for the time
  being they are not quite so fashionable, you can chuckle to yourself
  if you own one, and feel quietly superior to fashion and the common
  herd, and hold your tabby still closer to your heart, and purr softly
  to yourself with satisfaction at its possession; for I think one may
  say that for good all-round, everyday, reliable qualities, the brown
  tabby stands pre-eminent.

  “His constitution being good, he is not peevish; he stands cold and
  heat, change of climate and surroundings, better on an average than
  any. Brown tabbies should have the under-coat a good golden hue, the
  markings black, clear, and distinct, rather too many than too few. A
  good-shaped body, lots of bone, a bold head, red nose, golden eyes,
  well marked on the chest, and no light colour on the lips and chin.
  These cats may with advantage be a good size. With care, the under
  colour may be bred to a grand copper colour; a grey hue in brown
  tabbies is most undesirable.”

  “As regards brown tabbies in America, “King Humbert” and his children
  have always held their own. “Humbert” was bred in England, and as he
  is now dead I may be allowed to say that when fit and in good
  condition a better-coloured and smarter show cat never stood in a pen
  or outside, and he loved to show himself off. The best kitten bred
  from him was “Jasper.” He was very short in leg, and quite lost in
  coat, his feet being hardly visible.”

  To the readers of that very excellent American publication _The Cat
  Journal_ the handsome portrait of “Crystal,” the brown tabby, is very
  familiar. The editor, Mr. C. H. Jones, writes thus to me:—“I am
  sending you some pictures as promised. The large photo is ‘Champion
  Crystal,’ son of ‘Humbert,’ a beautiful cat as to type and
  disposition. A peculiar thing about ‘Crystal’s’ kittens is that they
  do not show very long-hair till they are several months old.”

  And now a few remarks as regards the mating of brown tabbies. I have
  tried several experiments, but if I were wishing to breed fine
  specimens I should continue to mate brown tabbies with brown tabbies.
  Such mating frequently results in a black or two, and these are
  generally good ones. The orange cross is sometimes successful in
  introducing a brighter tone, but I confess I have not had very good
  results from these attempts. I have on several occasions mated blues
  to my brown tabby stud, and although blue tabbies have appeared in the
  litters, I have also obtained blues with very grand heads, plenty of
  bone, and massive build. My famous “Beauty Boy,” a well-known winner
  and sire of bygone days, was bred from “Rajah” (a brown) and “Mater”
  (a blue). I have been told by silver breeders that a brown tabby cross
  with chinchillas has often proved advantageous. It might be imagined
  that the silvers would be tinged with brown or streaked, but I have
  been assured this is by no means usual, and that the litters consist
  of good brown tabbies and equally pure silvers.

  A well-known breeder of silvers says:—“Although it may be incorrect to
  cross silvers and browns, it is often most successful. My first tom
  was a brown tabby with a white chin, and being mated with a silver
  queen the kittens were good browns and exquisite silvers, and there
  were lots of winners amongst them. Many of the silvers were very pure
  in colour, with lovely markings. My old ‘Climax,’ whose pedigree was
  pure silver (‘Topso’ and ‘Lady Pink’), was the sire of the noted brown
  tabby ‘Birkdale Ruffie.’”

  Before closing my article, I would remark that the brown tabby and
  sable, though often classed together, must not be confounded. The
  brown tabby is supposed to be the common ancestor of all our cats, and
  hence the tendency to revert to that colour, as in the case of the
  blue Rock pigeon. This being the case, surely we should have brown
  tabby cats more nearly approaching perfection than any other colour.
  They appear in very unexpected places—in a litter of chinchillas or
  blacks, or among our oranges, and sometimes where no brown ancestor
  can be traced. In the brown tabby there seems to be little or no
  inclination to lose the markings, as in other tabbies; rather the
  contrary, for they overdo themselves sometimes, and form into solid
  black patches, thus causing the dark saddle, which is a serious fault
  in this breed. Query: Would generations of in-breeding produce a self
  brown, as with oranges and chinchillas? I rather doubt it, as I think
  the common ancestor would, so to speak, “chip in” and assert himself.

  As regards the sables, I may remark that they are late in maturing and
  do not acquire their marvellous colouring till about the second year.
  Anyway, they rarely make a sensation on their first appearance. As I
  write I am thinking of “Persimmon Laddie,” who seems to have developed
  his glorious copper coat in the course of a year, and when seen at the
  Crystal Palace show of 1902 was as near perfection in the matter of
  colouring as could be desired. I hope that in time this breed of
  Persians may find more admirers, and that with patience and
  perseverance a really good strain of grand-coloured, dark-chinned, and
  above all splendidly marked brown tabby cats may be seen at our shows.

  In America, as will be seen from the following extract from _Field and
  Fancy_, the brownies are making good headway:—

[Illustration:

  BROWN TABBY “GOOZIE.”
]


                       BROWN TABBIES IN AMERICA.


    The brown tabby cat, whose fate seemed to hang in the balance for
    some time, is now, in America, on the road to social prominence, and
    daily we hear of the progress of the breed, so that the classes next
    winter seem to promise greater results than ever. From all over we
    hear of brown tabbies being bred and reared, and, what is more,
    finding homes at remunerative prices. In looking at the reasons for
    the popularity of the browns we do not have far to seek, for when
    once well tried, these cats wheedle their way into your affections
    by the strength and vitality they display, as a rule; and the
    general average being level in their temper, with plenty of common
    sense, as well as bold, lovable cats, are very satisfactory to deal
    with. Besides these attributes, when bred properly, their colour is
    most fascinating, and has a faculty of growing upon one, and weaker
    colours seem tame by comparison.

    So far as we can say, that as regards the brown tabbies, the whites
    and orange, there have been more concentrated efforts to breed good
    ones by design than in any of the colours, though the silver
    breeders are now coming up.

    Taking a general look at our cats of this colour, we have little to
    be ashamed of, and the stock is good enough to make the nucleus of a
    fine lot of show cats, for they inherit their goodness from several
    generations of the colour, which is much to the point.

    Our breeders will find that to breed good tabbies they will have to
    keep to blood lines, select the best-marked ones, and not switch
    about in search of all sorts of blood crosses; for the way to breed
    tabbies is to keep to the colour and get the marks, which too many
    crosses with solid-coloured cats are liable to spoil. After a time
    the purely bred and carefully bred strains will stand out and
    perpetuate themselves, and the chance-breds will go to the wall.

    It has been surmised that the reason why the browns are so hardy is
    that possibly they more nearly approach the natural colour of cats
    in a wild state, and are perhaps not quite so artificial; but the
    number that will be bred of superlative colouring to fill the
    standard from a show point of view will never be too numerous to
    command high prices, and the greater the competition the greater the
    value of the variety, as we see in our dogs. For it is in the
    popular breeds that the prices rule the highest, and the scarce ones
    seldom realise the same figures, because there is not the same keen
    competition to get the best.

    When we look back we can call to mind quite a few good brown tabbies
    in the last seven years, and not very many bad ones, and for uniform
    quality our browns have been the equal of any colour.

    Breeders should be careful to select those with the brown or red
    body colour, and with the stripes as distinct as possible. In our
    own experience with the colour we have found three varieties, and
    these are best described as they appear at birth. No. 1 is the cat
    with a narrow band down the centre of the back, and thin, narrow
    lines radiating therefrom. These marks may be very distinct when the
    cat is young, but are not strong enough for a long-haired cat, and
    the marks are lost when the coat grows. Though these cats are not
    the best of exhibition cats, they are very useful to breed to those
    too heavily marked. No. 2 is the cat that is heavily marked and
    carries too much black, and is often too grey in his body colour,
    but these, by being carefully bred to other colours, may throw the
    desired cat; or No. 3, the cat with the orange body colour and the
    distinct black marks covering about a third of the surface of the
    cat. This latter we hope to see in greater numbers now that an
    organised effort is being made to breed the colour true.

    A great many of our browns are clear of one great fault, which is
    the light chin and throat, and it is to be hoped that this will be
    continued.

    Another fault that wants improving, and which is the prevailing
    fault in one of our prominent strains, is a rather sour green eye,
    and this has been the cause of some of them having to take a back
    seat on occasions. Last year was fortunately a great educator for
    some of our best breeders, and they are now experimenting along the
    right lines, and are aware, when they lose, why it is so. As the
    years roll on those who do learn will not expect to win over better
    cats just because they think they ought.


[Illustration:

  A TRIO OF TABBIES.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]




[Illustration:

  A PICTURESQUE GROUP.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




                              CHAPTER XX.
                      “ANY OTHER COLOUR” PERSIANS.


  In the early days of the fancy all sorts and conditions of cats
  were entered in this class. Blacks, whites, and tabbies were
  considered important enough to have classes assigned to them; then
  the rest were all huddled and muddled together in the “any other
  variety” class. Even in these days it is no easy matter to place
  the awards in a mixed class; but formerly the judge must have felt
  puzzled over the prizes, and probably finally gave the highest
  awards to the breed of cat which he most admired. I do not mean
  anything personal; but, as I write, I recollect a very large class
  in 1887 at the Crystal Palace, two years before a class for blues
  was instituted. Mr. A. A. Clarke was judging, and a female blue,
  “Fanny,” which I had given to Mrs. W. M. Hunt as a birthday
  present, was awarded first. She was a beautiful specimen, and but
  for her green eyes would have been a remarkable cat even in these
  up-to-date days of the fancy. Whereas, therefore, for many years
  this “any other variety” class was the largest in the show, it has
  gradually become beautifully less—and rightly so, for by degrees
  the various breeds have been improved, and the number of specimens
  have increased, and the executives of shows have gone with the
  times and provided separate classes for each breed as occasion
  seemed to arise. So orange and cream cats are no longer relegated
  to what we now call the “any other colour” class, and
  tortoiseshells and tortoiseshell-and-whites are separately dealt
  with; therefore it is only tabby-and-whites, nondescript smokes,
  blue tabbies, and black-and-whites that are received into the fold
  of the somewhat despised “any other colour” class. Blues and
  blacks with white spots used to be entered in this class, but of
  recent years both cat clubs have wisely decided that such cats
  must be entered in their own classes, for a blue is a blue and a
  black a black, and having a blemish does not alter their breed,
  but takes so many points away from them; and, of course, their
  chances of success even with every other quality is small indeed
  when in competition with pure self-coloured cats.

[Illustration:

  A GROTESQUELY MARKED KITTEN.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  I am of opinion that ere long the “any other colour” class, at least
  at our principal shows, will cease to exist, and mismarked cats,
  white-spotted cats, and doubtful smokes will no longer be considered
  worth entering, and fanciers owning such specimens will make up their
  minds to keep their pets at home.

  For instance, Mrs. Boutcher, a silver breeder, owned a magnificent
  cat, a son of “Lord Argent.” He was a superbly shaped and grandly
  coated animal, and was neither a silver nor a smoke—in fact, what
  might be termed a silver smoke. His face was dark, and tail and paws,
  and his body was a pale silver grey, shaded to almost white at the
  roots. His owner entered him in the “any other colour” class one year,
  and he was disqualified by the judge; then he was next located in the
  smoke class, but as a different judge was making the awards he was
  again marked “wrong class.” This noble “Lord Sylvester” was the cause
  of much correspondence in the cat papers, and discussion ran high as
  to what manner of cat he was. One of our ablest judges—now, alas! no
  longer in our midst—wrote thus in _Our Cats_ of December, 1900:—


    SIR,—In your issue of the 24th I notice at the meeting of the Silver
    Society Mr. Boutcher asked the opinion _re_ the decision of myself
    at the Palace as against that of Mr. House at Brighton. In defence
    of my own award, I unhesitatingly say that, in the same
    classification as at the Palace, “Lord Sylvester’s” class was the
    A.O.C., in which I fearlessly awarded him first prize. Of course,
    Mr. House has just as much right to his opinion as I have to mine;
    but, whether right or wrong, _I do know “Lord Sylvester” is not a
    smoke_, both on my own knowledge of colour and of that set forth in
    the standards.—I am, yours truly,

                                                             E. WELBURN.


  Surely this is the common-sense view to take. A year later “Lord
  Sylvester” was purchased by Mrs. Champion, and travelled out with her
  to America, where, no doubt, this splendid animal receives all the
  admiration he deserves, in whatever class he is entered on the other
  side of the herring pond.

  Since writing these lines I have read an article in _Field and Fancy_
  on the New York Cat Show of January, 1903, and the following mention
  is made: “In the ‘any other colour’ ‘Lord Sylvester’ was to the front,
  looking splendid.”

  As regards the advisability of doing away with the “any other colour”
  class, I will quote from a letter written by that well-known fancier
  Mr. W. R. Hawkins:—“Why should one class in a show be given up to the
  bad specimens or mismarked cats of each colour? Surely the intended
  use of the ‘any other colour’ class was that when any definite colour
  had no class of its own it should not be excluded from the show, but
  take refuge in the ‘any other colour’ class; for instance, at the
  Brighton show (1900) we had no class for cream, orange, or
  tortoiseshell. They were, therefore, shown in the ‘any other colour’
  class, and being good cats of definite breeds were a credit to the
  class, and in no way a disgrace. But what do we often see? A blue with
  a white spot or some other freak winning. I say this is absolutely
  wrong, and that a blue with a white spot is in reality a bad blue, and
  should not be encouraged. In the same way, a tabby-and-white is a bad
  tabby, and ought not to go to a show at all, but even if shown has no
  right in the ‘any other colour’ class, according to my ideas.”

  There is one cat that is fast vanishing from our midst. I mean the
  black-and-white Persian, and yet I confess an evenly marked specimen
  is a handsome animal. By black and white I mean the ground should be
  black, dense and glossy; the feet, chest, and nose white, with a blaze
  of white coming to a point up the centre of the face. The eyes of such
  a cat should be orange.

  Another type is the white and black cat, but unless the black patches
  are evenly balanced, especially in the face, the effect is not
  pleasing (see illustration, page 232). Harrison Weir gives particulars
  of some curiously marked cats coming under his notice—“one entirely
  white with black ears; another white with a black tail only; another
  had the two front feet black, all else being white.”

  I cannot say I have any leaning towards tabby-and-white cats, or
  orange-and-white, these being the least attractive of any in the
  fancy. Blue-and-whites are seldom seen, but the photos on pp. 234–5
  represent some sweetly pretty kittens of this variety. Their sire was
  “Yani,” a noted blue owned by Miss E. Goddard, and their mother a
  black-and-white. Blue tabbies, so common fifteen or twenty years ago,
  are no longer to be seen, at least only here and there at shows, and
  they have really no value beyond being pretty pets. A cat that has
  done some winning and has sired some lovely kittens, but must,
  strictly speaking, be considered an “any other colour” cat, is “Blue
  Robin,” formerly the property of Miss H. Cochran, and now in the
  possession of Mr. C. W. Witt. This is a blue cat with a tabby-marked
  head. He was bred from blues and silvers, and his chin, ear tufts, and
  eyebrows are silver, and his nose pink. As will be seen from his
  picture, on page 236, he has a grand head and beautiful expression. I
  am indebted to Miss Hester Cochran for the following notes on “any
  other coloured” cats:—

  “The cats known as ‘A.O.C.’s’ or ‘any other colour,’ because they are
  of a colour for which no class is provided, are hard to write about,
  because they have no history. They are not bred from A.O.C.’s, and
  A.O.C.’s are not bred from them. They are either pedigreeless or, more
  commonly, the result of indiscreet crossing of two definite colours,
  as, for example, when the owner of a white queen wishes to breed a
  litter of blue kittens. More rarely they result from a cross which has
  been resorted to to fix some special point, as when a white and a blue
  with particularly massive heads or wonderful orange eyes have been
  mated with a view to producing a strain noted for their eyes. Years
  ago the classes were interesting, as they introduced all new colours.

[Illustration:

  “LOCKHAVEN COLBURN.”

  A GOOD EXAMPLE OF PERFECT BLACK-AND-WHITE MARKINGS.
  (_Photo: Koehne & Bretzman, Chicago._)
]

  “I remember an A.O.C. class at the Crystal Palace not many years ago
  containing seven entries, all good smokes; soon after smoke classes
  were given, and then chinchillas began to appear in this class. These
  cats being specially provided for, creams were the most noticeable
  A.O.C.’s; but now the blue tabbies and broken-coloured cats—that is,
  some colour and white—usually occupy the A.O.C. class. Notable
  instances of cats with white spots were ‘Cain,’ ‘Nankipoo,’ and
  ‘Kingfisher,’ all grand blues with this blemish.

  “In 1892 Mrs. Pattison’s exquisitely shaped and coated
  orange-and-white ‘Chicot’ (pedigreeless), then shown as tabby with or
  without white, established a record by winning as best in show at the
  Crystal Palace. Other tabby-and-white cats have done well. Miss Malony
  used to show some good ones; the best, ‘Lindfield Sweet William,’ was
  a blue tabby-and-white, very massive and heavily coated, son of the
  smoke ‘Lindfield Bogie.’ Mrs. Pearce, of New Barnet, also used to win
  with tabby-and-white cats, and Mr. Law’s ‘Buffer’ was a celebrity in
  his day, but whether he was a brown tabby or an A.O.C. is doubtful; he
  was later known as ‘Leopold.’ The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison had a
  really good silver tabby with white feet in ‘Kepwick Silver King’; and
  later Miss Snell’s grand-headed ‘Wonderland’ made a small sensation.

  “Another good cat which won in an A.O.C. class is Lady Maitland’s
  ‘Cheeky Blue,’ a lovely blue with a sprinkling of white hairs on her
  body. Blue and smoke tortoiseshells are freaks, and not really
  exhibition cats at all, but are by some people considered useful for
  breeding. Personally, I do not think they are capable of producing
  anything which a definitely coloured cat of proper ancestry cannot
  produce as well or better. When cream queens were unavailable they had
  to be used, but now they are becoming unnecessary. Perhaps the best is
  Miss W. Beal’s ‘R. Fluffie.’ Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard’s ‘Sengo of the
  Durhams’ was another. Miss Taylor’s ‘Tawney’ began life as a blue with
  a few yellow marks, and wound up as a good tortoiseshell, though a
  trifle too red. Mrs. Cunliffe Lee’s ‘Tiger,’ a kind of yellow-brown,
  more ticked than marked, and principally distinguished by his great
  coat, made his mark in the A.O.C. classes.

  “Of blue tabby cats which have won well (mostly bred from blues and
  silver tabbies) there is a long list. They became common through the
  craze for blues, as silver queens were sent to blue toms. Later the
  desire for chinchillas started them afresh, as blue queens were sent
  to chinchilla toms.

[Illustration:

  THE CONQUEST OF THE AIR.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “Mrs. Herring’s ‘Braemar’ was a son of ‘Cœruleus’ by ‘Turko’; ‘Upwood
  Dew’ and ‘Camera’ are from the ‘Timkins’ strain; Miss Jebb’s ‘Julius
  Cæsar,’ Miss Rae’s ‘Romanoff,’ Miss Nicholay’s ‘Sacho,’ and Miss Jay’s
  ‘Holmwood Skittles’ were all celebrated cats. Some of these have
  thrown beautiful kittens, both blues and chinchillas; and as a
  makeshift, when a correctly coloured cat of the required pedigree is
  unavailable, they may, when judiciously mated, be found useful; but
  good breeders will part with all mismarked kittens for pets. The best
  and most definitely coloured A.O.C. I ever saw was Mrs. Davies’ ‘Sin
  Li,’ a deep self-coloured chocolate-brown cat. He was supposed to be
  one of three Swiss mountain cats imported to this country, and he was
  a most handsome and interesting animal. Unfortunately, he died young,
  leaving no progeny. Another interesting A.O.C. cat I have seen was a
  short-haired neuter, red, with black stripes and white paws and chest.
  In the future I hope to see a variety of strange cats in the A.O.C.
  classes, but at present they are very uninteresting. Good suggestions
  for future colours are red, orange, blue, or white with black stripes,
  chestnut-brown self-coloured, and black with white tips to the fur. So
  far as I can see, it should be possible by crossing with various
  foreign breeds to produce in a few years’ time cats of all these
  colours.”

[Illustration:

  SILVER TABBY AND ORANGE-AND-WHITE PERSIANS.

  (_From a Painting by Miss F. Marks._)
]

  One of the finest “any other colour” cats of the present day is now in
  the possession of Miss Moxon, of Ilfracombe. “Cinder” was purchased
  from Mrs. Davies, who has a rare faculty of picking up
  uncommon-looking cats. Miss Moxon writes:—“I am sending you a detailed
  description of ‘Cinder,’ who is a difficult cat to describe, and is
  quite the handsomest cat I have ever seen. By ‘handsome’ I mean
  striking, as she attracts everyone’s attention, and very often
  visitors to our well-filled cattery have not a glance to spare for our
  other specimens.” The following is the description of this very
  uncommon long-haired cat:—

  “‘Tors Side Cinder,’ winner of many prizes, including second Brighton
  A.O.C. kitten class, 1899; first A.O.C. kitten, medal, and two
  specials, Westminster, 1900; first and special for best cat in show,
  Maidstone, etc.

[Illustration:

  GRACE BEFORE MEAT.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “‘Cinder’ was described to me by the lady from whom I bought her in
  1901 as ‘a very peculiar colour—a kind of tortoiseshell creamy smoke.’
  She has a dark seal-brown mask and ears, except for one creamy orange
  (tortoiseshell) splash above left eye, and another under chin. These
  give great expression to her face. Head exceptionally fine,
  considerable breadth of skull, small tufted ears, short broad face,
  very sweet expression. Round orange eyes, for which she has won more
  than one special. Fine outstanding frill of a creamy smoke colour; fur
  on chest very long and feathery, of a creamy, bluish smoke shade, with
  a pale cream knot in centre. Seal spine line, splashed with creamy
  brown, shading gradually lighter to shoulder knots and side puffs,
  which are of a rather darker tint than the frill. Paws and legs of a
  dark seal-brown; waistcoat and knickers of a bluish cream. Splendid
  thick brush—upperside to match spine line, under-side of a bluish
  cream shade. Slightly bluish tint all over, _distinct_ under-coat of
  palest cream shading to soft creamy blue.”

[Illustration:

  “MARCUS SUPERBUS,” A SILVER SMOKE.

  OWNED BY MISS SHAW.
  (_Photo: Moffat, Edinburgh._)
]

  American fanciers have always shown a partiality for broken-coloured
  cats, and orange-and-white and blue-and-white cats have
  classifications given for them at the leading shows. In England there
  is a marked antipathy to these cats, chiefly because they have little
  or no value for breeding, though they undoubtedly make pretty pets. As
  a sign of the times, I may mention that at the Westminster show in
  1903 the three “any other colour” classes for males, females, and
  kittens had to be cancelled, no entries having been made.

  Speculative, but, I must add, persevering fanciers might derive
  interest and amusement from trying to breed out-of-the-common
  specimens. A black-and-white, spotted like a Dalmatian hound, or a cat
  marked with zebra stripes, could doubtless be produced in time by
  careful and judicious selection.

[Illustration:

  “BLUE ROBIN.”

  (_Photo: Witcomb & Son, Salisbury._)
]




                              CHAPTER XXI.
                              NEUTER CATS.


[Illustration:

  MISS KIRKPATRICK’S “CHILI.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  It has been my experience in the past year or two that the demand for
  neuter cats, or, in other words, household pet pussies, is on the
  increase; and I am inclined to believe that if some fanciers made a
  speciality of these cats they might do a thriving trade. As it is,
  owners of male kittens do not care to undertake the trouble and
  responsibility of having them gelded, or doctored, as this process is
  sometimes called, and novices in purchasing are always very anxious
  that the operation should have taken place before they become
  possessed of their pets. A selling class for neuters at our large
  shows would not be at all a bad idea, but the age should be limited to
  eight months, or at most ten months, as it is only natural that
  purchasers should desire pussies before they reach the prime of life,
  so that they may grow up as pets in the home. For reasons that are
  easily understood, it is necessary, if you wish to have a house pet of
  unimpeachable manners, to have your male cat doctored when he arrives
  at years of discretion.

  For my own part I consider between five and eight months the best time
  for a cat to be gelded, but I have often known successful operations
  taking place much later. It is, however, most important that the tom
  should not previously have shown any desire to mate. In all cases a
  cat should be kept on low plain diet for two or three days before
  being neutered, and it is more humane to pay the extra fee for the use
  of an anæsthetic.

[Illustration:

  “KING CY.”

  SILVER NEUTER BELONGING TO MISS AVERY JONES.
  (_Photo: F. Bromhead, Clifton._)
]

  I have been told on good authority that if a female cat is to be made
  neuter she ought to be allowed to have one litter before the operation
  is performed. Neuter cats are essentially for the “one cat” person.
  They undoubtedly make a grand show when exhibited, but those who are
  possessed of these pet pussies are generally very disinclined to let
  them run the risks and discomforts of a show pen. I have advocated
  having neuters shown only in the ring, on the lead. If this course
  were adopted, I think owners would not mind exhibiting their precious
  cats, as they could be sent or taken home after their turn round.
  Certainly neuters are the only cats that ought to be led into the
  ring, and in this way their fine proportions and generally heavy coats
  can be seen and judged to the best advantage. It is too often a
  practice with fanciers to have the worst of the litter kept for a pet
  and made neuter, and therefore we see many blues with light green
  eyes, and cats with the blemish of a white spot, in the classes set
  apart for gelded cats; and if a beautiful, almost perfect, neuter is
  exhibited, fanciers are apt to protest at what they consider is “a
  grave mistake.” From the lips of some noted and over-wrought breeders
  of Persian cats I have heard the exclamation, “I shall go in for
  neuters only!”

[Illustration:

  MISS CHAMBERLAYNE’S “BELVEDERE TIGER.”

  (_Photo: J. Atkins, Upper Norwood._)
]

  This has been called forth, perhaps, by a succession of failing
  litters or by a rampageous stud cat that has fought with the
  neighbour’s tom or has wandered off on amorous thoughts intent,
  perhaps never to return, or on returning to bring disease to the
  cattery. Certainly, for a thoroughly comfortable domestic pet there is
  nothing like a neuter cat. They are more affectionate, and with
  children more docile, not less keen in catching rats and mice, and
  they are proverbially very clean in their habits. One great advantage
  that neuters have over the other long-haired breeds is that they
  retain their lovely coats nearly all the year round. In spite,
  however, of the many points in favour of neuter cats, they are
  nevertheless rather looked down upon in the fancy. Certainly, at our
  shows no cats are more attractive to visitors than the big burly
  neuters, and I would fain see a better classification for these really
  fine animals.

  A specialist society was started in 1901 by an admirer of these cats,
  but either through lack of energy or want of enthusiasm the work was
  not carried on, and the club died a natural death. It remains for some
  other fancier with a love for pet pussies to start a society, for as
  it is the neuters fare badly at our shows, the classes provided never
  numbering more than two, and the special prizes being few and far
  between. Formerly neuters were judged by weight, and I remember some
  specimens exhibited at the Palace that really looked like pigs fatted
  up for market. It was in 1886 that the classification for neuters at
  the Crystal Palace show ran thus: “Gelded cats, not judged by weight,
  but for beauty of form, markings, etc.” Happily, therefore, this state
  of things has been abolished, and though neuters should be big,
  massive cats, yet they need not, and should not, be lumps of inert fat
  and fur. It is true that a big show cat appeals to the non-exhibitor,
  and visitors to our shows are always greatly impressed with huge
  animals over filling their all too small pens. The heaviest and
  biggest neuter I have ever seen was possessed by Mrs. Reay Green. This
  enormous silver turned the scale at 20 lb. I believe the record weight
  at the Crystal Palace was 25 lb. It is a libel to say that neuter cats
  are lazy and uninteresting. I have always possessed a neuter, either a
  blue or a brown tabby, and these beloved pets have ably fulfilled
  their duties as mice-catchers of the establishment. My “Bonnie Boy,”
  who but recently joined the noble army of neuters, is as keen as a
  knife, and will sit for hours watching a likely hole, and never a
  mouse escapes his clever clutches. He kills them instantly, and then
  amuses himself for hours dancing about and throwing his dead prey with
  wild delight into the air. Then, again, he is, I am sorry to say, just
  as destructive with the poor London sparrows, and many a time I have
  had to chastise my pet for stalking the game in our little back
  garden.

  Miss H. Cochran, writing of neuters, says: “There are, without doubt,
  a great number of people who like to keep a cat, especially a Persian,
  for a pet pure and simple—one that will be the admiration of all, and
  of service in ridding the house of mice and rats. They will attain a
  greater size, and in nine cases out of ten retain all the pretty
  habits and antics of their kittenhood. Neuter cats are often very
  troublesome in a large cattery; they fight with each other and with
  the queens, which have a poor chance against their superior size. I
  think they do it for fun.”

  In _Fur and Feather_ “Zaida” thus writes of neuters:—


    Undoubtedly it is a crying mistake for neuter cats to be allowed to
    compete in open classes, but personally I should be delighted to see
    more classes for them at shows, and much greater interest taken in
    them. Sometimes one is tempted to think the ordinary run of cats has
    deteriorated in general beauty, remembering the splendid animals,
    both English and foreign, which we used to see in friends’ houses in
    our childhood; but the real explanation lies in the fact that
    formerly “house” cats were almost entirely kept as pets, and
    handsome kittens were obtained for the purpose. Nowadays anything
    not good enough for breeding from is made a neuter, and fanciers
    undoubtedly look on them with a certain contempt. Why should this be
    more the case with cats than with horses? For a perfect household
    pet the neuter cat holds its own, if only the public would
    universally acknowledge it. But too often every purchaser of a
    kitten starts breeding, and multiplies a race of weedy, ill-kept
    animals, who do little credit to their owner. A cat with kittens is
    undoubtedly a charming sight; but a female cat is more or less of a
    worry, and is, besides, only in coat for a very short time each
    year. Then a tom cat roams, fights, and is often objectionable, but
    the stay-at-home cat is always a thing of beauty, never requires
    periods of seclusion, will mouse and rat with the best, and be a
    credit to any establishment. In short, we should like to see more of
    them, not fewer, and a neuter class for every colour in a show. In
    many a household cats are now disliked through the ill-advised
    action of some member of the family in starting breeding with more
    zeal than knowledge, and without proper convenience. If a lovely
    neuter, or even two or three, reigned in their glory, there would be
    an end to the trouble, to the groans of the other members of the
    family, to the “wasn’t engaged to wait on cats” of the servants.


[Illustration:

  “BENONI.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MISS COTTOR.
  (_Photo: F. Wallace, Dalkeith._)
]

  In the schedule of the Beresford Cat Club show, held at New York,
  January, 1903, the classification for gelded cats reads thus: “Class
  25, neuter, white or black; Class 26, neuter, blue or smoke; Class 27,
  neuter, ‘any other colour’; Class 28, neuter, any colour tabby with
  white.” It will be seen, therefore, that in America a much more
  liberal classification is given for long-haired neuters, and for
  short-haired there are three classes provided. I do not know, nor have
  I heard of, any remarkable American neuters, and no photographs have
  been received by me for reproduction in this work.

  If we go back some years in the fancy, I remember Miss Sangster’s
  “Royal Hector,” a blue of great celebrity; also same owner’s “Royal
  Bogey,” a handsome black with a white star. Miss Boddington’s cobby,
  woolly-coated white “Ba Ba” appeared later in exquisite form, winning
  well till he was eleven years old. At this same period Mrs. Herring’s
  little smoke “Ally Sloper” and Miss Molony’s big, heavily coated black
  “Uncle Quiz” were noted winners.

  Then we come to Mrs. Willman’s “Charlie,” a fine blue of “Beauty Boy”
  strain, and Miss Knight’s “Albion Joey,” one of the finest neuters
  ever exhibited, a huge smoke with the roundest of heads, a trifle
  marked and not good in eye, but a glorious animal.

  A little later came Madame Portier’s “Blue Boy,” and, as I have
  received some notes from the owner of this magnificent cat, I will
  give them:—“I am very proud of my ‘Blue Boy,’ born on St. Patrick’s
  Day, 1895. He has won twenty-eight first prizes and many specials, and
  his championship before he was a year old. I had an offer of £20 for
  him. The greatest honour ‘Blue Boy’ received was a caress from her
  Majesty, then Princess of Wales.

[Illustration:

  MISS ADAMSON’S CHINCHILLA NEUTER.
]

  “I often take my pet out for a walk on a collar, and he is quite
  easily led, and people often stop and ask if it is really a cat. I
  send you his photo for reproduction in ‘The Book of the Cat.’” One of
  “Blue Boy’s” wins was at the Richmond show, 1902, where he was greatly
  admired for the dignified way in which he comported himself on a lead.
  In these up-to-date days, however, “Blue Boy” has to run the gauntlet
  with superior coloured eyes, but in shape, size, and coat he holds his
  own. Miss Kirkpatrick’s “Chili,” now no more, was a beautiful
  creature—a silvery smoke, almost a smoke tabby, with a wonderful
  fleecy coat and grand frill. Mrs. Reay Green has always been the proud
  possessor of superb neuters—“Mosca,” a blue; “Abdul Zephir,” a
  chinchilla; and later “Ajax,” who has done some winning. Viscountess
  Esher also has quite a cattery of neuters. I procured for her a sable,
  almost unmarked and very rich in colour, a white with limpid seagreen
  eyes, and a Siamese with perfect points. Miss Cochran’s “Patpaw” (now
  in the possession of Viscountess Esher), a son of the celebrated
  tortoiseshell “Tawney,” is rather small for a neuter, but full of
  quality, with wonderful orange eyes. “Persimmon Laddie,” owned by Miss
  Whitney, is, perhaps, the most perfect specimen that has been seen in
  the pen of the neuter classes. He is not a brown and not a tabby, but
  a sable; and, having the blood of the “Birkdale Ruffies” and “Champion
  Persimmon” in his veins, it is no wonder he carries all before him. No
  photograph can do him justice.

  Mrs. Boyce’s “Fur” could beat any male chinchilla now on the show
  bench; for in colour, shape, and head he is well-nigh perfect. Mrs.
  Millar’s “Lord Bute” is a monstrous black, and in spite of his green
  eyes is generally in the prize list; but in Mrs. Curtis’s “Baron
  Bonelli” he met more than his match at the Crystal Palace in 1902.
  This black cat (a son of “Johnnie Fawe”) has all the good points of
  “Patpaw,” including his gorgeous eyes, and he is very large. Miss
  Holmes’ “Blue Tut” has won many honours, and Miss Chamberlayne’s
  “Tiger” is a handsomely marked brown tabby. Miss Meeson’s “Fluff
  Duvals,” another brownie, won first at the Crystal Palace and
  Brighton, and after a second at Westminster came home to die! Miss
  Averay Jones has a splendid chinchilla neuter “King Cy,” a possession
  too precious to be risked at any exhibition.

[Illustration:

  “NIGEL THE RAVEN.”

  MRS. MELLER’S SHORT-HAIRED BLACK NEUTER.
]

  So much for the long-haired pet pussies, and we will take a glance at
  past and present short-haired neuters. A lovely coated cat was “Tiger
  of Kepwick,” owned by Mrs. MacLaren Morrison, a brown tabby, as his
  name denotes. Then Mrs. Butler’s orange, which for many years won at
  the Crystal Palace and Brighton. Mr. Lane had a good yellow-eyed
  white, “Leonidas.” Mrs. Herring owned a well-marked brown tabby in
  “Sir Peter Teazle.” Of late years the most remarkable short-haired
  neuters have been Miss Cartwright’s really lovely Siamese “Chote” and
  Lady Alexander’s blues, “Brother Gamp” and “Tom Gamp,” who are rarely,
  if ever, defeated. A richly coloured orange tabby neuter, “Red Eagle,”
  also hailed from the same cattery.

  In judging neuters, I think it is rather a mistake to go too much by
  points. I consider size should be a most important factor, also coat
  and general effect. Of course, in close competition points would come
  into question; but I really think that a large, heavily coated neuter,
  whose colour was a trifle unsound, or whose markings or eyes were
  below par, should not be placed below a small mean-looking cat who,
  however, excelled in these points.

  Louis Wain, writing on a general survey of the Crystal Palace show of
  1900, referring to the neuter class that he judged, says:—“Neuters
  have suffered somewhat through the extended schedule of the ‘whole’
  cats. At one time it was quite a usual thing for exhibitors to have
  their cats neutered to preserve the natural beauties of a fine cat,
  and very often a really handsome cat was neutered because he stood no
  chance in a class of twenty or thirty cats, and yet would take first
  as a neuter in a class of six or eight. The neuter classes have not
  grown as have the other classes. As ‘home’ cats neuters should be
  encouraged, and I feel sure that many are kept at home in fear of the
  dreaded ‘blues,’ which are usually unbeatable.” Mr. Wain also
  complains of the poor classification for neuters at our shows, and on
  this particular occasion he states that the cats were such extremely
  fine animals that they needed classes of their own for him to do
  justice to their merits. Certainly there ought at least to be three
  classes provided for neuters at our large shows, viz.: Neuters,
  self-coloured (blue, black, and white); neuters, tabby, “any colour”;
  and neuters, “any other colour.”

[Illustration:

  MADAME PORTIER’s NEUTER “BLUE BOY.”

  (_Photo: Hana, London._)
]

[Illustration:

  RASCALS.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Henriette Ronner._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXII.
                               MANX CATS.


  These quaint cats are rapidly and surely coming into notice in the
  fancy. As a breed they are intelligent and affectionate, and, I
  believe, splendid sporting cats. They are undoubtedly great favourites
  amongst the sterner sex, perhaps because they are such keen and plucky
  ratters. As a breeder of Persian cats, and having become used to the
  beautiful wide-spreading tails of these cats, I confess there is
  something grotesque and unfinished, to my eyes, in the Manx, and from
  choice I should not care to keep these tailless pussies as pets. They
  do not appeal to me and to my sense of the beautiful. Having,
  therefore, never kept or bred Manx cats, I feel diffident in writing
  about them; but I have carefully studied those exhibited, and have
  also had opportunities of judging of their points whilst visiting
  friends who have fallen victims to the fascinations of these curious
  felines. I know a good Manx when I see one, and to prove this
  assertion I will tell an incident in connection with a prize-winning
  Manx of to-day. A friend of mine living in London took compassion on a
  little stray black kitten who came crying for food. She fed him, and
  repeatedly tried to find poor pussy’s owner, but in vain. I was
  appealed to to know what had better be done, and when I saw the little
  black fellow I strongly recommended my friend to keep it and exhibit
  it at the next large show, as I considered he would go in and win
  easily. She followed my advice in the latter respect, but placed too
  low a figure on “Nig,” as she declared she did not wish to go in for
  Manx. I warned her he would be sold, and sure enough that clever and
  astute judge of cats of uncommon breeds, Mrs. H. C. Brooke, snapped
  him up at catalogue price; and since then he has blossomed forth into
  a champion, and as “King Clinkie” has taken highest honours whenever
  shown. It is only just to state that Mrs. Brooke most generously
  handed over some of her winnings to “King Clinkie’s” former owner.

[Illustration:

  TYPE OF MANX KITTEN.

  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Windsor._)
]

  I will therefore proceed to give my opinion of Manx cats, but with all
  due deference to my fellow fanciers who have had personal experience
  with the breed. I think I have judged every species of cat, long- and
  short-haired, except Manx; but if I were given a class of this breed
  upon which to adjudicate, I should first closely examine their tails,
  or, to be more correct, the place where the tails ought _not_ to be! I
  remember in former times stump-tailed cats, called Manx, used to win
  comfortably at shows, but in our up-to-date times I should make a
  black mark in my judging book against those cats with a stump or an
  appendage, or even a mere excrescence. I do not fear contradiction
  when I state that a Manx cat of the true type should have no particle
  of tail—only a tuft of hair, which ought to be boneless.

  The next point for which I should search would be the length of hind
  quarters, which lends such great individuality to this breed of cat.
  No doubt the lack of tail in itself makes a cat’s hind legs look long,
  but we want more than that; we need a very short back, so that from
  the point of the quarters to the hocks there is a continuous and
  decided outward slope. In fact, the hind legs stand right back from
  the body, like a well-trained hackney’s in the show ring. Coat I
  should next consider, as this differs, or should differ, considerably
  from both the long- and short-haired breeds. It should bear more
  resemblance to the fur of a rabbit, being longer and softer than that
  of our common or garden cats. I think a good-shaped round head as
  desirable in a Manx as in other breeds. As regards colour, the most
  common would seem to be tabbies, either silver, brown, or orange, and
  often there is a mixture of white. Self-coloured Manx seem to be much
  rarer, and Harrison Weir tells us he does not recollect having seen a
  white Manx.

  As regards the colour of eyes in Manx cats, it is the custom to say
  that they do not matter in this breed; but, nevertheless, a cat that
  has the correct colour of eye must necessarily beat an animal that has
  just the opposite to what is set forth in the standard for
  short-haired English cats.

  A lady friend of mine, who was brought up in the Isle of Man, has told
  me that she always understood that Manx cats came from a cross with a
  rabbit, but if this supposition is correct it seems too strange to be
  true that cats and rabbits should only form matrimonial alliances in
  the little island off our coast! It would appear more probable,
  therefore, that a foreign breed of cat was brought to the island, and
  the following article from the pen of Mr. Gambier Bolton gives his
  ideas on the subject:—

[Illustration:

  “GOLFSTICKS.”

  OWNED BY MISS SAMUELS.

  (_Photo: Albert Hester, Clapton, N.E._)
]

  “In the Isle of Man to-day we find a rock named the Spanish Rock,
  which stands close into the shore, and tradition states that here one
  of the vessels of the Spanish Armada went down in the memorable year
  1558, and that among the rescued were some tailless cats which had
  been procured during one of the vessel’s voyages to the Far East. The
  cats first swam to the rock, and then made their way to the shore at
  low tide; and from these have sprung all the so-called Manx cats which
  are now to be found in many parts of Great Britain, Europe, and
  America.

  “The tale seems a bit ‘tall,’ and yet the writer feels so satisfied of
  its truth that he would welcome any change in the name of this
  peculiar variety of the domestic cat to sweep away the idea that they
  sprang from the Isle of Man originally.

  “Any traveller in the Far East—Japan, China, Siam, and the Malay
  region—who is a lover of animals must have noticed how rarely one
  meets with a really long-tailed cat in these regions, for instead one
  meets with the kink-tailed (_i.e._ those with a bend or screw at the
  tip of the tail), the short kink-tailed (_i.e._ those with a screw
  tail like the bull-dogs), the forked-tailed (_i.e._ those having tails
  which start quite straight, but near the tip branch out into two
  forks), and finally the tailless (or miscalled Manx) cats; and the
  naturalist Kæmpfer states definitely that the specimens of this breed
  now so common in parts of Russia all came originally from Japan.
  Again, anyone who breeds these tailless cats, and keeps the breed
  quite pure, must have noticed how they differ in appearance and habits
  from the common short-haired cats. They are, and should be, much
  smaller in size; the coat should be longer and more ‘rabbity’; the
  ‘call’ is much nearer that of the jungle cat of the East than that of
  the ordinary cat; and their habits, like those of the Siamese cats,
  are much more doglike. In all these points they keep closely to what
  the writer firmly believes to be their original type, the domesticated
  cats of the Far East.

  “The photographs illustrating this article give some idea of the
  general appearance of these delightfully quaint little creatures, and
  one notices immediately the great point that all judges look for,
  viz., the high hind quarters, which is so typical of the tailless
  breed of cats, the few hairs, which represent the spot where the tail
  should be, constantly appearing even a few hours after birth, although
  there is not a sign of a caudal appendage beneath them.

  “Kink-tailed, screw-tailed, fork-tailed, and absolutely tailless cats
  have all been exhibited at British shows of recent years, and the
  writer, from a personal knowledge of nearly all breeds, has no
  hesitation in recommending the latter as companions, their quaint and
  doglike ways making them general favourites whenever they are met
  with.

[Illustration:

  SPECIMEN OF A MANX TABBY.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]

  “There are at present six distinct types of Manx, or ‘rumpy,’ cats
  being exhibited at our shows, viz.: The long straight-backed cat, the
  long roach-backed cat, the long straight-backed cat with high hind
  quarters, the short straight-backed cat, the short roach-backed cat,
  the short-backed cat with high hind quarters. The last type is the
  correct one, the first is the worst and commonest type, the others are
  intermediate and should be judged accordingly.

  “Manx cats should always be judged in a good, large, empty pen, and
  never in their own pens, or when held by the judge.

  “_Coat._—Exactly the opposite to the ordinary domesticated
  short-haired cat. A long and open outer coat and a soft, close
  under-coat is the correct thing.”

  At one time, we may presume, the Manx cat was kept pure in the Isle of
  Man; but, alas! the natives, with an eye to the main chance, have been
  led into manufacturing a spurious article, and many more tailless cats
  and kittens than ever were born have been sold to tourists eager to
  carry home some souvenir of the island to their friends on the
  mainland. I have been told that the landing pier is a frequent resort
  of dealers in so-called Manx cats, where the unwary traveller is
  waylaid and sold! On some out-of-the-way farms on the island I believe
  none but tailless cats have been kept for generations, and some
  genuine specimens may thus be picked up, if the tourist gives himself
  the trouble to go off the beaten tracks.

  The following letters which appeared in _Our Cats_, in the issue of
  June 30th, 1900, will be read with interest. They were written by two
  gentlemen of prominent position in the Isle of Man, but as they did
  not wish to be identified as authorities on cats their names were not
  given:—

                               [LETTER I.]


                                           _Castletown, Isle of Man,
                                                       12th July, 1898._

    I received yesterday your letter respecting Manx cats. I fear I am
    unable to aid you much in your inquiries as to the Manx cat, for any
    personal information I can give.

    When I was a boy there was a kind of tradition that the tailless cat
    was brought here by the Spanish Armada. We have a headland called
    “Spanish Head,” where it has been believed that some tailless cats
    escaped and took refuge here, and that from such cats all the
    so-called Manx cats have been derived. During my life I have
    frequently met persons who have travelled in Spain, and I think I
    have always asked from such persons if they had ever met with
    tailless cats there, but I never met anyone who had seen them. I
    never heard any other (traditional) origin of the Manx cat alleged.
    They are very common here, but not so common as cats _with_ tails.
    Both cats with and cats without tails associate together. In my own
    house we have always kept cats, and in almost every litter of
    kittens there are some with and some without tails. I have two
    tailless cats now—one is a kitten of a few weeks old. It has no sign
    of a tail, but is (as designated here) a pure rumpy. The mother is
    one also, but she has a little fur tuft. I have frequently seen
    kittens having a very small “rudimentary tail,” such as one or two
    bones.

    I have seen, I think, Manx cats of most of the colours mentioned by
    you, but the most common are the grey or tabby.

    I have never heard of wild cats found here, and I do not think there
    is any tradition about them.

    A few years ago I had a very fine tom cat (bred in my own house),
    black all over, and with no sign of a tail. I lost it. I presume it
    was stolen by some tripper. Trippers are frequently on the look out
    for Manx cats, and I fear that many tailed kittens are deprived of
    their tails to meet the demand.


                               [LETTER II.]


                                                   _Ramsey,
                                                       17th July, 1898._

    Thank you for letting me see the interesting letters about Manx
    cats. I suppose the Society wants to have a standard by which to
    judge them.... I am sure we should all be interested to hear what
    they have to say on the subject, and we may be able to add some
    general information.

    To take the questions in order I should say that grey tabby (barred,
    not spotted) is the most natural and correct, if one may so speak. I
    think it is certainly most common. I have known tortoiseshell,
    black-and-white, black, white, and perhaps others, which I now
    forget. The eye, so far as I know, is the same as in the common
    English tabby.

    Certainly we have cats with tails—the rumpy being the rare form.
    Perhaps one in a litter, and one or two of them with half-tails.

    As to what they are supposed to be, I have of course heard the
    Spanish Armada story. My own belief is that they have originated in
    _a sport_, _e.g._ as we find in dogs and fowls, and have been
    perpetuated as curiosities, and in modern times on account of their
    commercial value.

    I do not know that there is any type which can be said to be more
    true than another with regard to size and shape of head, etc. The
    height at the hind legs is perhaps more apparent than real, caused
    by the abrupt ending, without the falling tail as in ordinary cats.

    Professor Owen made a preparation, which may be seen at the British
    Museum, showing the bones (if any) of the tail. I think in a perfect
    specimen there should be no bones. Of course, there are all degrees
    of stumps.


  It is only of recent years that any English fanciers have tried to
  breed true Manx cats. Miss Samuel has been very successful in
  establishing a strain which again and again breeds true to type. The
  “Golfsticks” and “Kangaroo,” two noted winners, are owned by her. In
  former days Miss Bugden’s “Gorrie,” Mr. Woodiwiss’s “Manx King,”
  “Pickles,” “Belle,” and “Beauty,” all good cats, accounted for most of
  the prizes. Miss Jay, whose name is more familiarly known in
  connection with blue Persians, has always been partial to Manx cats,
  and used to exhibit at the Crystal Palace. The last time I visited the
  Holmwood cattery I was much struck with the number of tortoiseshell
  Manx cats running about the stable yard. Miss Jay has quite a family
  of these; but, needless to say, they are all of the female sex! Mrs.
  Herring has not been unmindful of this breed, and has exhibited some
  good specimens. Miss Dresser has owned Manx cats for many years and
  shown some good ones. Her “Belle Mahone” and “Moonlight” were nice
  tabbies, free from tail, and “Bonhaki Junior” was a very fine-shaped
  silver tabby-and-white; but, unfortunately, he had a stump which
  always kept him back. Mrs. Mosely has exhibited some good blacks. Lady
  Alexander owned several prize-winning Manx, but these have passed into
  the hands of Miss Hester Cochran. The best of these are “Ballochmyle
  Bell Stump,” a curiously spotted tabby, absolutely tailless. “Bell
  Spitz” and “Strathcona” are also good specimens in Miss Cochran’s
  possession. Mr. Gambier Bolton owned and bred some fine cats. “Manx
  Primrose,” a black, and “D-Tail,” a silver tabby, won respectively
  first and second at the Westminster show in 1902. It is so usual to
  see “Breeder and pedigree unknown” after almost all the entries in the
  Manx classes that these two cats were distinguished by having a
  certified pedigree. It was a grievous loss when “D-Tail” disappeared
  very mysteriously from his home in St. John’s Wood. “Manx Silverwing”
  passed from Mr. Bolton’s possession to that of Mr. Foulstone’s, and
  was later purchased by Mr. A. Ward, the well-known cat specialist. As
  will be seen from the illustration on page 251, this puss is almost a
  spotted tabby.

[Illustration:

  ORANGE MANX.

  OWNED BY MRS. CLINTON LOCKE.
  (_Photo: S. S. Finley, Chicago._)
]

  Lady Marcus Beresford has lately shown a great partiality for Manx. I
  think I am right in stating that the first one that inhabited the
  Bishopsgate cattery was a beautiful white called “Mona,” that I
  procured for her. This fine specimen was brought from the island
  direct, and proved herself a splendid ratter; but, alas! she did not
  live long to enjoy the luxuries of her new home. There are, however,
  no fewer than five Manx now at Bishopsgate—“Jack,” a silver tabby;
  “Patch,” a tortoiseshell; “Satanella,” a black female; and “Stumps,” a
  brown tabby male. The most recent addition is “King Clinkie,” whom I
  have before mentioned as being owned by Mrs. H. C. Brooke. Does he
  ever think of his former struggling existence, now that his ways are
  those of pleasantness and peace? One of the latest of the specialist
  clubs is the Manx Club, formed by Miss Hester Cochran in 1901, with an
  annual subscription of 10s.; this has been reduced to 5s., and the
  members in the beginning of 1903 numbered about twenty. The club has,
  as far as possible, devoted its limited funds to guaranteeing a better
  classification for Manx cats at the principal shows, and when unable
  to afford a guarantee has given special prizes for competition. The
  efforts of this small body of fanciers have been substantially
  rewarded by the great improvement in the quantity and quality of the
  Manx cats exhibited during the last eighteen months. Miss H. Cochran,
  who has given up all other cats for Manx, is the hon. secretary, and
  Lady Alexander hon. treasurer. Committee: Lady Alexander, Miss H.
  Cochran, Mrs. Herring, and Miss White Atkins. No doubt in time the
  officials and members of the Manx Club will be able to add to their
  number.

[Illustration:

  MRS. H. C. BROOKE’S MANX, “KATZENJAMMER.”

  (_Photo: A. R. Pickett, Bexley Heath._)
]

  The following is translated from a paragraph in a German weekly paper
  called _Mutter Erde_, and appeared in _Our Cats_ of March 1st. 1900:—


           THE PROGENY OF A TAILLESS CAT OF THE ISLE OF MAN.


    A cat brought from the Isle of Man (_felis catus anura_) to S.
    Germain en Laye, of which the pedigree is unknown, was mated with
    ordinary long-tailed cats, and among twenty-four kittens the four
    following different kinds appeared:—

       I.— Kittens with ordinary long tails.

      II.— Kittens with short and stump tails.

     III.— Kittens without tails, like the mother.

      IV.— Kittens without the least sign of a tail.

    The comparison between the influence of the sire and that of the dam
    on the young is interesting:—

 1 litter. 1  kitten                    like the mother.
 2    „    6 kittens,        5         like the mother, 1 like the father.
 3    „    5    „            3          „           „   2  „           „
 4    „    3    „            1          „           „   2  „           „
 5    „    4    „            1          „           „   3  „           „
 6    „    5    „            3          „           „   2  „           „

    It will be seen that the influence of the mother predominates.


  Manx cats may be considered shy breeders, and constantly the litter
  will consist of one kitten only! I have been told that they are
  excellent mothers; but, in the words of a Manx fancier, “they only
  care to have one family a year, many queens won’t breed at all, and
  heaps of males are very funny and take no notice of their wives!”
  Another breeder of Manx informs me that these cats seem entirely
  fearless with dogs, and that her canines and felines live together in
  perfect amity. I believe Mr. H. C. Brooke once exhibited a Manx in the
  same pen as a bull-dog at the South London Bull-dog Show of 1893. And
  now, having mentioned Mr. Brooke’s name, I am pleased to say that this
  well-known and successful fancier of Manx, as well as foreign, cats
  has kindly written an article on this variety, which is his pet
  speciality:—

[Illustration:

  “BALLOCHMYLE BELL SPITZ.”

  OWNED BY MISS HESTER COCHRAN.
]

  “On this breed I think I may claim to write with some authority, as I
  have kept it for a number of years, and it has always been my
  favourite breed of cat. I believe I may, without boasting, say that I
  have of late years been of some service to the breed, by constantly
  agitating for the Manx classes to be entrusted to judges who take some
  interest in the variety; for it is a lamentable fact that there are
  numbers of people, good judges of the more popular breeds, who are
  quite willing to adjudicate upon the Manx classes without possessing
  the slightest qualifications, and these usually merely judge the Manx
  as a tailless cat, which is all wrong. During the last few years I am
  glad to say that the National Cat Club, at almost all its shows,
  instead of tacking the Manx classes on to the list of any all-round
  judge, has appointed capable judges; and whilst, of course, no judge
  has ever succeeded in pleasing all concerned (except when there was
  only one entry in the class), the awards at these shows have always
  been reasonable and sound, and free from the absurdities which too
  often sicken fanciers and render the judge ridiculous at other shows.
  When we find an all-round judge openly stating that a Manx is but a
  tailless cat, and that he could manufacture perfect specimens, it is
  high time that that judge’s name, however excellent a judge he may be
  of other breeds, should be inscribed upon the tablets of every Manx
  fancier’s memory, and when he again officiates he should be saved the
  trouble of going over cats which he neither likes nor understands.

  “‘What is a Manx but a tailless cat?’ some may ask. Well, a cat with,
  perhaps, an inch of tail, though in my opinion unfit to win a prize,
  may possibly be really a better Manx, more calculated to do good to
  the breed, than an absolutely tailless cat. It may possess more Manx
  character, and this Manx character is a thing not ‘understanded of the
  people’; and here it is that those judges score who have taken a real
  interest in and studied the breed. A cat may have a couple of joints
  of tail, crooked or straight, and yet be a pure Manx; though, as we
  strive for perfection, I consider that such cats should be relegated
  to the stud, or at most only be placed in the money if the competition
  be very weak, and then never awarded any high prize.

  “If breeders of Manx were more careful, there should be no difficulty
  in obtaining litters without any tail whatever. No cat can be a really
  typical Manx who is long-cast in the body. A short, cobby body is an
  essential in a show Manx. So also is a round, short skull. These
  points are usually noticeable when the kittens are young; as they grow
  older they disappear, frequently to return when the cat has outgrown
  its kittenhood. But the most important Manx property is the great
  length of hind leg, which absolutely marks the typical Manx as a cat
  quite distinct from a tailless cat; with this should be coupled a
  round, guinea-pig-like rump, round as an orange, which, of course, can
  only be obtained when there is absolutely no tail. Even a tuft of
  gristle or hair, as found in many of the best specimens, though in
  itself but a very trifling defect, detracts from this typical ‘rumpy’
  appearance, by giving a more or less angular appearance to the hind
  quarters, unless, that is, it be situated so far back between the
  hip-bones that it in no way projects. As typical specimens showing
  this rumpy formation to perfection, I may mention the late ‘Champion
  and Premier Katzenjammer,’ and ‘Ballochmyle Bell Stump,’ probably two
  of the best ever seen in this respect. Had these two been mated, what
  glorious progeny should have resulted. Now these two cats, whilst
  possessing the round rumpy formation to perfection, did not excel so
  much in length of hind leg, and for superlative excellence in this
  property we must turn to another celebrated couple, the late silver
  tabby ‘Champion and Premier Bonhaki’ and ‘King Clinkie,’ who has just
  passed into the possession of Lady Marcus Beresford, and who at the
  age of about fifteen months has already twice won championship awards.
  Now, these two cats exhibited the great length of hind leg which gave
  them when in motion the desired comical rabbity action; but in
  roundness of rump they lost to the other two, being somewhat more
  angular.

  “To gain absolute perfection we require _roundness of rump_ united to
  _great length of hind leg_. These are the great characteristics of the
  Manx, to which every Manx judge worthy of the name will attach the
  greatest importance. Then come other body properties—shortness of
  back, general cobbiness, roundness of skull, small ears, shortness of
  face; then, last of all, colour. And here it is that the average
  all-round judge goes astray, for in too many cases he attaches too
  much weight to colour, a good instance of which occurred when
  ‘Ballochmyle Bell Stump,’ above referred to, whose colour, though
  quaint, is not very pleasing, was placed below a long-cast cat of a
  taking colour, but in no wise a typical Manx.

  “As I before remarked, colour should be considered last. I think a
  good black is the nicest colour for a Manx, and, of course, the eyes
  should be of the colour sought for in ordinary black cats. A pure
  blue-eyed white is very pretty, and also very scarce. Tabby-and-white
  I personally do not care for. Silver tabbies are uncommon and very
  handsome. Tortoiseshells are also pretty and quaint.

  “The fur of the Manx should be just a little longer and softer than
  that of the ordinary short-haired cat. Now and then we see long-haired
  Manx advertised, but these are, of course, mongrels or abortions, and
  by no means Manx cats.

  “What is the origin of the Manx? That is a question which in all
  probability will never be answered. The theory that it originated from
  a cat (or cats) having lost its tail by accident I do not consider
  worth a moment’s consideration. Such a cat might well have tailless
  progeny, but that would have nothing to do with the abnormal length of
  the hind legs, which in good specimens is patent to the most
  superficial observer, and which makes the gambols of a couple of Manx
  a comical sight calculated to excite laughter in the most mournfully
  disposed person.

[Illustration:

  MANX CAT.

  (_Photo: Gambier Bolton, F.Z.S. [Regd.]._)
]

  “Quaint is the old versified explanation, which I remember hearing
  some years ago. It ran, if I remember rightly, somewhat like this:—

                 Noah, sailing o’er the seas,
                   Ran high and dry on Ararat.
                 His dog then made a spring, and took
                   The tail from off a pussy cat.
                 Puss through the window quick did fly,
                   And bravely through the waters swam,
                 Nor ever stopped, till, high and dry,
                   She landed on the Isle of Man.
                 Thus tailless puss earned Mona’s thanks,
                 And ever after was called Manx.

  “The most feasible explanation, in my opinion, though of course it can
  be but a theory, is that these cats were originally imported from the
  East. Asiatic cats of domestic varieties show remarkable variety in
  the shape of their tails, as witness the kinks often found in the tail
  of the Siamese cat, and the knot tails of other varieties. This
  subject will be referred to again in a subsequent paper.

  “It is also noticeable that many Manx, like the Siamese, are very
  doglike in their habits, showing extreme affection for their owners.
  Poor old ‘Katzenjammer,’ for instance, would follow me to the railway
  station, and many a time on my return from town have I found him
  sitting in the middle of a field waiting for me, and on seeing me he
  would accompany me home just like a dog.

  “To return to the question of the Manx cat’s tail, this should, of
  course, be like snakes in Iceland—absent. What we want is for the
  spinal column to come to an end high up on the back, so that on
  placing the finger where the tail would begin a hollow or depression
  is felt. This is the perfection, but it is not always obtainable in
  even the very best specimens. Next to be desired is when only a little
  tuft of gristle and hair, with at most a suggestion of a twisted and
  withered bone, is present. Then comes a distinct caudal vertebra, if
  twisted or abnormal in shape so much the better; but in my opinion
  more than two joints should not be allowed in show specimens at all,
  though such cats, as I remarked above, may be valuable at stud for
  breeding from. But I see no reason, if Manx breeders would pay more
  attention, and incompetent judges were barred, why absolute
  taillessness should not be attained in ninety-nine kittens out of each
  hundred. I have bred many, but none have had the crooked stumps we
  often see in otherwise good specimens.

  “I do not care for large Manx, which generally look coarse. Here,
  again, the all-rounder often goes astray, and unduly favours a large
  cat.

  “I can heartily recommend the Manx as a pet, and the quaintness of his
  movements are certainly a recommendation. My cats are all house pets,
  so that I can watch them and enjoy their company; the ‘cattery’ cat is
  abhorrent to me. I cannot understand why so few people go in for
  rationally breeding this quaint variety. I had hoped that the recent
  purchase by his Majesty of two couples of the breed might have given
  it a fillip.

  “To illustrate the breed, I may perhaps be accused of egotism in
  giving the portrait of one of our own cats, but as he is dead it is
  less invidious than if living specimens were selected, and as they
  were awarded the very highest prizes by the very greatest authorities
  they may safely be taken as near perfection. The silver tabby
  ‘Champion and Premier Bonhaki’ was bred by Mr. Jungbluth, one of the
  keepers of the monkey house at the Zoo. He made his _début_ at the
  Botanic Gardens as a kitten, when he was much admired by the then
  Princess of Wales, and Mr. Wain awarded him the championship. This
  success he followed up by winning four others under various judges,
  and died at the early age of twenty-seven months. ‘Champion and
  Premier Katzenjammer’ was bred at home; he did not commence his show
  career till late, and then he had to meet ‘Bonhaki,’ after whose
  death, however, he was unbeaten, and had earned his champion title at
  the time of his death from gastritis last year, which robbed me of one
  of the most affectionate ‘pals’ man ever had, and I am not ashamed to
  own that many and bitter were the tears I shed over his grave.

[Illustration:

  BROWN TABBY AND ORANGE TABBY SHORT-HAIRED CATS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

  “In conclusion, I would advise Manx fanciers to do their best to
  accustom their cats to seeing strangers, to being handled, and to the
  show pen; for when a cat is nervous and crouches in a heap it is most
  difficult to see whether the desired shape of hind quarters and
  rabbity action are present. They can best be seen when the cat holds
  itself fearlessly and boldly; and when a judge has a large number of
  classes to get through in a short space of time, in very likely an
  ill-lighted building, he cannot spend half an hour coaxing each cat to
  show its action.”

[Illustration:

  MR. WARD’S MANX “SILVERWING.”

  (_Photo: H. Glacier, Longsight._)
]




[Illustration:

  A LITTER BY “TACHIN.”

  OWNED BY LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.
  (_Photo: J. Fall, Baker Street._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXIII.
                             SIAMESE CATS.


  I have often remarked at our cat shows that strangers in the fancy
  will inquire and ask to be directed to the Siamese class, and many and
  varied are the exclamations of surprise and admiration expressed by
  them on seeing, perhaps for the first time, a row of Siamese cats
  seated in their pens. Nor is it always necessary to direct visitors to
  the Siamese classes, for generally these animals will betray their
  whereabouts by the unique tone of their voice, which is
  distinguishable at a great distance.

  There is certainly a great fascination about this peculiar breed of
  cats, which is yearly becoming more popular and fashionable. But
  fanciers are also learning a lesson in the school of experience, where
  frequently the fees are high, that they dare not trust their valuable
  specimens on the show bench. Siamese cats seem to be more sensitive
  than even the most delicate of long-haired breeds, and if attacked by
  any of the ills that catty flesh is heir to they do not appear to have
  any stamina to bear up against the ravages of the disease. Their
  recuperative powers are almost nil, and they rarely pull through a
  severe illness. I have never kept Siamese myself, but I have had many
  opportunities of observing them in sickness and in health. I have seen
  grown-up specimens go out like the snuffing of a candle with acute
  pneumonia, almost before one has realised they were even ailing. These
  creatures are quite human in the way they look at you with those
  bonnie blue eyes, and when you talk to them they seem to answer in
  their croaking voice. I can well understand what companionable cats
  these may become, and to fanciers of this unique breed other cats must
  appear lacking in interest and wanting in intelligence.

  From time to time there have been discussions in our cat papers on
  Siamese cats in general, and on their kinked or kinkless tails in
  particular. It is certain that those cats known to us as royal Siamese
  are not the only species in Siam, the common cat of the country being
  tabby or black. So many of my friends who are fanciers and breeders of
  Siamese have kindly supplied me with interesting facts concerning this
  variety, that I do not intend to enter into any details, but will
  state that in 1902 a Siamese Cat Club was started by several
  enthusiastic admirers of this breed, and the members have certainly
  done much to improve the classification at shows, by offering prizes
  and guaranteeing classes.

  The following is a list of the officials of the specialist club, with
  a standard of points for royal Siamese cats:—


    _President._—Mrs. Vary Campbell.

    _Vice-Presidents._—The Lady Decies, Mrs. Vyvyan, Miss Sutherland,
    The Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, Mrs. Chapman, and Miss H. Cochran.

    _Committee._—Mrs. Parker Brough, Mrs. Carew Cox, Miss Derby Hyde,
    Mrs. C. B. Robinson, Mrs. A. Spencer, Miss Forestier-Walker, Mr.
    Gambier Bolton, and Mr. C. W. Cooke.

    _Hon. Treasurer._—Mrs. Parker Brough, Springfield, Kettering.

    _Hon. Secretary._—Miss Forestier-Walker.

    _Hon. Auditor._—Conrad W. Cooke.


            STANDARD OF POINTS FOR THE “ROYAL” SIAMESE CAT.

    _Body Colour._—As light and even as possible, cream being most
    desirable, but fawn also admissible, without streaks, bars,
    blotches, or any other body markings.

    _Points_, _i.e._ mask, ears, legs, feet, and tail, dark and clearly
    defined, of the shade known as “seal” brown.

    _Mask._—Complete, _i.e._ connected by tracings with the ears,
    neither separated by a pale ring (as in kittens) nor blurred and
    indistinct, the _desideratum_ being to preserve the “marten face,”
    an impression greatly aided by a good mask.

    _Eyes._—Bright and decided blue.

    _Coat._—Glossy and close lying.

    _Shape._—Body rather long, legs proportionately slight.

    _Head._—Rather long and pointed.


[Illustration:

  THE GARDEN CATTERY AT BISHOPSGATE.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]


    _General Appearance._—With points emphasised above, a somewhat
    curious and striking looking cat, of medium size; if weighty, not
    showing bulk, as this would detract from the admired “svelte”
    appearance. In type, in every particular, the reverse of the ideal
    short-haired domestic cat, and with properly preserved contrasts of
    colour, a very handsome animal, often also distinguished by a kink
    in the tail.

    _Remarks._—While admitting that blues, blacks, whites, tabbies, and
    other coloured cats may be also cats of Siam, these being common to
    all parts of the world, this club recognises only as Siamese cats
    those cats the points of which conform to the above standard, and
    is, in fact, desirous of encouraging the breeding of those
    particular cats first made known to British fanciers as the “royal”
    Siamese.

    The points of the “chocolate” Siamese are the same as above, with
    the exception of body colour.


                            VALUE OF POINTS.

                         Body colour        20
                         Shape              10
                         Coat               10
                         Head               10
                         Eyes               20
                         Mask               15
                         Density of points  15
                                           ———
                               Total       100

    Any cat failing to obtain 75 of the above marks shall not be
    eligible for the club’s challenge prizes and medals.


  It was shortly after the formation of the Siamese Cat Club that the
  following letter appeared in _Fur and Feather_:—


                         POINTS OF THE SIAMESE.


    The committee of the Siamese Club wish to draw attention to the
    unfortunate diversity of opinion concerning Siamese cats expressed
    in articles which appear from time to time in some of the papers
    which devote a portion of their issue to cat news. One great object
    of the Siamese Club is to encourage the distinct breeding of the
    royal cat of Siam and also of the chocolate cat of Siam—both
    beautiful in their own way, but recognised as distinct breeds. The
    Siamese Club is young, and not infallible; but, containing as it
    does most of the principal breeders and exhibitors, its committee
    would like to record their opinion on some few points which have
    appeared in the Press, in order to avoid a silence which might be
    construed as consent. With regard to colour, they cannot agree that
    a royal can be too light in body colour, nor can they endorse “we
    like a rich cream body, chocolate saddle, and the points glossy
    black, shading away to chocolate.” Another paper advises the mating
    of royal Siamese with the chocolate variety. It is true that the
    young kittens are very pretty, but after six months old quickly
    become dark and blurred. The great beauty of royal Siamese is the
    contrast between the sharply defined, deepest brown markings and a
    body of as light a cream as possible. A third paper gives the
    information that an exhibitor known to it has bred prize-winning
    Siamese from a cross between a white cat with blue eyes and a
    Siamese queen. It also mentions another case where such crossing has
    produced good Siamese kittens, and thinks that many other people
    have, with more or less success, followed the same tactics. The
    above experiment has often been tried, purposely and accidentally,
    but no case is known to the writers where the result has been
    anything like Siamese, the kittens always favouring the English
    parent. All Siamese are born white, and therefore if the children of
    one white parent died quite young such a mistake might be natural.
    It certainly would be very unfair to sell such kittens, as their
    progeny would inherit, and might pass on, an English parentage, not
    even necessarily white. A white is, or may be, merely an albino
    variety.—(Signed) A. Forestier-Walker, Jean A. Spencer, May
    Robinson, L. Parker Brough, S. E. Backhouse, Constance Carew Cox.


[Illustration:

  MRS. ROBERTS LOCKE, WITH “CALIF,” “SIAM,” AND “BANGKOK.”

  (_Photo: S. S. Finley, Chicago._)
]

  Miss Forestier-Walker and Mrs. Vyvyan were amongst the first to
  introduce Siamese cats into England, and they have always owned a
  direct descendant from the first and famous “Tiam-o-Shian,” and many
  are the prize-winners they have reared and shown from this celebrated
  strain. Miss Forestier-Walker has frequently acted as judge of
  Siamese, and took a very active part in the formation of the
  specialist club for this breed. She has kindly furnished me with the
  following notes, and given me some photographs of Mrs. Vyvyan’s cats:—

[Illustration:

  “SI.”

  THE PROPERTY OF W. MARGETSON, ESQ.
  (_Photo: H. J. Comley, Stroud._)
]

  “Siamese cats were first introduced into England about twenty-five
  years ago, but were not often seen until a few years later. Among the
  earliest were those belonging to Sir Robert Herbert, Lady Dorothy
  Nevill, the Rev. S. Baring-Gould, Mrs. Cunliffe Lee, Mrs. Vyvyan, and
  myself. Since then they have become fairly common.

  “There are two distinct varieties in the present day. (1) The royal
  cat of Siam, cream-coloured in body, with sharply defined seal-brown
  markings on head, ears, legs, feet, and tail; eyes a decided blue. The
  cats generally become darker after two years old, but where great care
  has been taken in breeding the true royal cats keep the light colour
  longer. In any case the body colouring should be even, not blotched or
  striped. The larger, lighter-coloured cats have china or ultramarine
  blue eyes; the more slender, darker cats have deeper-coloured eyes.
  (2) The chocolate cats are deep brown in colour, showing hardly any
  markings, and have blue eyes.

  “All Siamese kittens are white when born, but in a few days slight
  markings appear on tail, ears, and paws, and by four months old the
  markings are dark and complete, excepting those which connect the face
  and head; these are seldom perfect before eight months old.

  “The tails are sometimes straight, which is not a fault; but a knot or
  kink in the tail is a peculiarity of the breed, and therefore
  desirable. In England it has been asserted that this is a defect, but
  in Siam it is highly prized, and cats from the royal palace which have
  been given by the King as presents of value to important people have
  had this distinction. In the East a cat with a kinked tail fetches a
  higher price.

[Illustration:

  “TIAM-O-SHIAN IV.”

  OWNED BY MRS. VYVYAN.
  (_Photo: Speight, Kettering._)
]

  “The Siamese have a great affection for animals, and there is no doubt
  that the cats are much valued, those in the royal palace having been
  kept exceptionally pure.

  “There is a legend that the light-coloured cats, with blue eyes,
  represent silver; the dark cats, with yellow eyes, gold; and that the
  possessor of both will always have plenty. This rather gives the idea
  that originally the eyes of the pure chocolate cat were yellow, and
  that the present variety has been crossed with the royal cat.

  “Mr. Young, of Harrogate, had some years ago a chocolate cat with
  yellow eyes.

  “Another belief is that they receive the souls of their owners at
  death, and it is well known that the King of Siam had one on board his
  yacht when visiting Europe a few years ago.

[Illustration:

  “IT.”

  OWNED BY LADY MARCUS BERESFORD.
  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Windsor._)
]

  “It is a great mistake to mix the varieties, as the result after they
  become adult is a blurring of the markings and a patchy coat.

  “The males are extremely powerful, and will kill strange cats and
  fight dogs. They are devoted to their wives and children, and to their
  owners. They are exceedingly intelligent. With the dogs of the house
  they will be on excellent terms.

  “The litters vary in size, but four to five is the usual number. The
  kittens are difficult to rear, as they suffer from worms and teething,
  but after seven or eight months old there is little danger. Some
  people think a meat diet best, but I find it satisfactory to bring
  them up on lighter food, such as Ridge’s food, milk, gravy, and fish,
  until they begin to cut their teeth, when meat is required.

  “A pair from the Palace were given to Mrs. Vyvyan and myself in
  1884–5, and we have been very careful in breeding, mating when
  possible with such good cats as Mrs. Lee’s celebrated ‘Meo,’ Miss
  Moore’s ‘Siam,’ Mrs. Harrington’s ‘Mechi,’ etc, and have bred in
  consequence the famous ‘Tiam-o-Shians’ II., III., and IV.,
  ‘Polyphema,’ ‘Susa,’ ‘Kitya Kara,’ ‘Goblin,’ ‘Champion Eve,’
  ‘Mafeking,’ ‘Vishuddha,’ ‘Ah Choo,’ ‘Suzanne,’ and many others.”

  Among fanciers and importers of Siamese cats in the past, I may
  mention the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison, Lady O’Malley, Lady Decies,
  Mrs. Brodie, Mr. Temple, Mr. Gambier Bolton, Miss Moore, Mrs. Elliott
  Hill, Mrs. Cunliffe Lee (owner of the celebrated “Meo”), and Mrs.
  Carew Cox, who later in this article will give some account of her
  “King Kesho” and the breed with which her name is still associated.
  Mrs. Herring has exhibited good specimens from time to time. Mrs.
  Chapman’s “Wally Pug” used to cross the Irish Channel to visit English
  cat shows. Mr. Young and Mr. Inman, both of Harrogate, favoured this
  breed, and had some lovely cats. Mrs. Nield owned a charming little
  female named “Mintha-mee”; and Miss Sutherland, who lives in the south
  of France, used to breed a lot of good Siamese from her imported
  “Prince of Siam.” Several of her breeding have been sold in England,
  and have won at shows. Mrs. Patton Bethune has often exhibited, and is
  an ardent admirer of the breed. Mrs. Parker Brough, in whose care
  “Tiam-o-Shian IV.” is placed by Mrs. Vyvyan, is well known as a
  Siamese breeder, as is also Mrs. Spencer, of Eye Vicarage, who exports
  quite a number of cats; one of her breed—owned by Mr. E. Ratcliffe—is
  a beautiful animal. Mrs. Vary Campbell, the president of the Siamese
  Club, is a generous supporter of the breed. Mr. and Mrs. W. R. Hawkins
  have always had some fine specimens; and Mrs. Hankey, Miss H. Cochran,
  Miss Derby Hyde, and Miss Armitage are among others who owned some
  notable Siamese cats. Mrs. Backhouse’s “Champion Eve” was a
  distinguished prize-winner, and Mrs. Robinson’s “Ah Choo” was chosen
  as a model for the medal of the Siamese Club. But it is chiefly as the
  owner of the celebrated “Champion Wankee” that Mrs. Robinson is known
  in the cat fancy in general, and among Siamese breeders in particular.
  “Wankee” was the first Siamese to win the title of “Champion.” He was
  bred in Hong-Kong, his mother—“Nims”—being a stolen palace kitten.
  “Wankee” was six months old when he arrived in England: and was born
  in September, 1895. He has won over thirty prizes, but was never shown
  till June, 1898, therefore losing the time in which most Siamese cats
  gain their honours—namely, between six months and two years, when they
  are pale in colour of coat.

[Illustration:

  MR. RATCLIFFE’S SIAMESE.

  (_Photo: Hartley, Burnley._)
]

  Many are the prize kittens he has sired, too numerous to mention. Mrs.
  Robinson, who is a member of the National Cat Club committee, has
  frequently acted as a judge of Siamese, and has kindly written the
  following account for this chapter:—

  “One of the most beautiful of the short-haired cats is undoubtedly the
  royal cat of Siam, and the breed is greatly increasing in popularity;
  but is never likely to be common, as the cats are delicate in this
  country. The best description is that drawn up by the Siamese Cat Club
  in their standard of points. The points of the chocolate Siamese are
  the same as the royal, with the exception of body colour, which is a
  dark rich brown all over, thus making the markings less noticeable.
  All Siamese cats darken with age, and when they get dark there is a
  tendency to call them chocolates. I know of only one real
  chocolate—Mr. C. Cooke’s ‘Zetland Wanzies’—so consider them more
  likely to be a freak than a distinct variety.

  “Of the royals there seem to be two types in England: the one—rather a
  small, long-headed cat, with glossy, close-lying coat and deep blue
  eyes, and with a decided tendency to darken with age—is generally the
  imported cat or having imported parents; the other is a larger cat,
  with a rounder head, a much thicker, longer, and less close-lying
  coat, and the eyes a paler blue (these cats do not darken as much or
  as soon as the other type, and have generally been bred for several
  generations in England).

  “The kittens are born absolutely white, and in about a week a faint
  pencilling comes round the ears, and gradually all the points come. At
  four or five months they are lovely, as generally they retain their
  baby whiteness, which contrasts well with their almost black ears,
  deep brown markings, and blue eyes. Some kittens are much longer than
  others in getting dense, these making the lightest cats.

  “This breed is said to be kept very carefully in the palace in
  Bangkok—hence the title ‘royal’—and is by no means the common cat of
  Siam. One gentleman (a missionary), who had lived there fifteen years,
  had during that time seen only three. A few years ago there was a pair
  of these cats in the Zoological Gardens at Bangkok, but they were very
  poor specimens.

  “They have occasionally been given by the King as presents of great
  value, and several pairs have come to England in this way; also
  kittens have undoubtedly been stolen from the palace from time to
  time.

  “There is a legend that these cats were kept exclusively and with
  great care in the King’s palace, as resting places for royal souls.
  The Siamese are Buddhists, and consequently believe in the
  transmigration of souls; but with the growth of Western ideas and
  Western scepticism I doubt this being admitted.

  “They are very intelligent, almost doggy in their ways, and very
  affectionate, but not universally friendly. The males are great
  fighters, and freely use their terrible voices; but they are well
  suited for house pets, as they seem happiest with their human friends.

  “The first specimens were brought to England about twenty-five or
  thirty years ago, and Mr. Harrison Weir says that among those who
  possessed them were Lady Dorothy Nevill, whose cats were ‘imported and
  presented by Sir R. Herbert of the Colonial Office. The late Duke of
  Wellington imported the breed, also Mr. Scott of Rotherfield.’”

[Illustration:

  LADY MARCUS BERESFORD’S “URSULA.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  Miss Armitage, of Chaseleyfield, Pendleton, has sent me some charming
  photographs of her pets. She writes:—

  “I have very few cats at present; I lost so many beautiful Siamese
  last year, and I think I made rather a mistake in having their skins
  made into mats! ‘Cora,’ the mother of my Siamese cats and kits, is
  still a beauty, and I really think she improves with age; and though
  her eyes are not all I could wish for in colour, yet her kittens have
  always had the desired tone of blue. I have now a lovely daughter of
  ‘Cora’ and ‘Champion Wankee,’ aged nine months. When she was a few
  hours old I put her to be fostered by our old English garden tabby,
  who makes her headquarters in the greenhouse. This kitten has never
  had a day’s illness. She leads a wild life, catching birds and mice,
  and nibbling the tips off the ferns—much to the gardener’s annoyance.
  I am hoping to send her to our next National Cat Club show, if I can
  catch her that day, but she is generally up a tree when wanted!

  “I find the way to succeed in breeding and rearing Siamese kittens is
  to only keep a few. I strongly believe in putting them forth into
  cottage homes. Distemper spreads like wildfire amongst this breed, and
  it is heartrending to lose whole litters at once. It is strange how
  much stronger the females are than the males. I have never lost a
  female kitten yet; but, alas! many a promising male.”

  I remember a beautiful male bred by Miss Armitage that she exhibited
  at one of the Manchester shows. “Sam Sly” was as near perfection as
  possible, and after taking everything in the way of prizes, medals,
  and championships this fine fellow came home and died! Mrs. Spencer,
  of Eye Vicarage, to whom I have alluded as a Siamese fancier, has bred
  so many large litters of kits that I wrote to ask if she would kindly
  give me and my readers the benefit of some of her experience in
  rearing young Siamese. She writes in reply:—

  “My ‘Royal Siam’ came from the royal palace, and I consider him a
  splendid specimen. I did not breed from him until he was between three
  and four years old, which may be one of the reasons why all the
  kittens by him are so wonderfully strong and healthy. He has never
  ailed anything since I have had him. I have never placed him at stud,
  but have allowed a few friends to send their queens to visit him.
  Neither have I ever exhibited him, for he is far too precious a pet to
  be allowed to run any risks. My queen ‘Princess Maimowne’ is also a
  fine strong cat, a daughter of Mrs. Carew Cox’s ‘King Kesho’; and many
  are the prize-winners bred from these two. I heat my catteries during
  the day in winter, and at night in cold weather I give the cats a hot
  stone bottle in their sleeping boxes, for it is the damp and cold of
  our English winter nights which are so dangerous. The windows of my
  catteries face south, and this is important in rearing Siamese. I
  always allow my cats an abundance of fish; this I give—mixed with
  bread soaked in water—twice a day, with another meal of something
  different, thus making three meals a day. I boil all the milk.
  Sometimes I give a little cod-liver oil over their food—with very
  beneficial results. If the kittens have bad colds or any trifling
  ailment, I indulge them with a little finely cut up raw beef. I have
  been breeding Siamese for over five years, and I have only lost one
  kitten of my own rearing. I think the reason of my success is that I
  never pass over the most trifling symptom of illness, and it is very
  necessary to take the temperature of Siamese at the slightest sign of
  sickness. I send a great number of kittens away to purchasers, and I
  am most particular in the way I pack the kits for their journey. The
  basket outside should be covered with thick brown paper, leaving just
  a square piece in the lid for ventilation. Inside I line with new
  house flannel, and place a soft cushion at the bottom, and if very
  cold weather I put an indiarubber hot-water bottle under the cushion.
  If the cats have to pass through London, I arrange with the District
  Messengers Company to meet the cat and convey it to its destination or
  to another station. Thus dangerous delays are avoided at a very little
  cost.”

  As everyone knows, Lady Marcus Beresford has always been especially
  fond of Siamese cats, and many splendid specimens have inhabited the
  Bishopsgate cat cottage. At present “King of Siam” and “Khoula,” and a
  quaint little female called “It,” represent this breed. In the days
  gone by “Tachin” and “Cambodia” were the admired of all admirers, and
  I doubt if ever a more perfect pair has landed on these shores. These
  cats were given to Lady Marcus Beresford twelve years ago by the late
  Lord William Beresford, who brought them straight from the palace at
  Bangkok. Lady Marcus writes:—

  “I never once had any trouble or anxiety with them—dear, gentle,
  friendly little people, so clever and attractive. I have never seen
  any I have so admired. They had many fine, healthy litters, scattered
  about now amongst various friends. My success all round was great with
  them—no illness of any kind, till one day a fiend poisoned both
  ‘Tachin’ and ‘Cambodia,’ and some of their six months kittens. I have
  replaced them with some bred in England; and my opinion is that, as a
  rule, the imported ones are much the stronger. A pair of Siamese
  imported from the temple at Bangkok I purchased from Mrs. Vary
  Campbell, and had the great misfortune to lose them. They differed
  from the royal Siamese, being darker and having a more pointed head
  and face, and their eyes were larger and fuller.

  “I consider that Siamese cats are much cleverer than other breeds, and
  with patience can be taught several clever tricks. I intend to go in
  more largely for them in the future.”

[Illustration:

  MISS ARMITAGE’S “CORA.”

  (_Photo: Salmon & Batchan, New Bond Street, W._)
]

  Several of Lady Marcus Beresford’s Siamese found their way into Mr.
  and Mrs. Hawkins’ possession, and were exhibited from time to time,
  always gaining great distinction. Mrs. Hawkins possesses a daughter of
  “Tachin,” and so hopes to keep up this unique strain. Mrs. Hawkins has
  some of the best arranged and very solidly built catteries at
  Brighton, of which I give an illustration. These are specially adapted
  for the breeding of Siamese and silvers, the two varieties which find
  favour at Shalimar. A long experience with Siamese enables Mrs.
  Hawkins to write with authority, and I give her notes as given to me
  for the benefit of my readers:—

  “The first thing you have to consider with regard to these animals is
  that when newly imported they are naturally delicate, and must be
  hardened off, so to speak, just as our delicate foreign birds have to
  be; that is to say, you cannot treat them at first as you would our
  ordinary fireside cats. If you are fortunate enough to pick up newly
  imported ones, even if you have to pay a good price for them, they
  will prove a good investment; and perhaps you may be able to get some
  from one of our numerous cat fanciers, though they are very scarce at
  present and difficult to obtain. My advice is to get the best possible
  pair, and let them breed in the spring in the house, if you can let
  them have a spare room, which need not be warmed in any way. Leave the
  mother quietly with the kittens; and, having provided a warm bed and
  bedding for them previously, leave them to nature as much as possible,
  just going in now and then to see that all is going on all right, and
  giving the mother warm milk, etc., and coaxing her to get used to you.

  “Siamese cats are particularly gentle and affectionate, and if you are
  kind to them they soon get to know and love you. It is a pity their
  nature is not more copied by human beings—then we should not have so
  much dissension and wrangling in our cat fancy. But this is a
  digression! As the kittens get on it is as well to have a warm place
  outside prepared ready for them; but do not put them out too soon, and
  if any show the slightest suspicion of cold they must be brought in
  and allowed to get over it completely before being turned out in the
  garden or outhouses, with the others.

  “My own Siamese kittens were born in a cat house in my garden at
  Brighton, but they were June kittens, so by that time we were having
  very nice weather. The father and mother I had as kittens; I pulled
  them through their baby ailments successfully, and as soon as the
  weather was propitious and sunny I put them in their outside houses.
  Siamese and chinchilla kittens (both of which I go in for) must be
  hardened off gradually. They are just like English children brought
  from abroad, who have to be carefully nurtured at first and trained to
  get used to our English climate.

  “What we want is to establish a really healthy, strong strain of
  Siamese in England, and by following the above suggestions I think it
  is possible to do it—not without difficulty, as, of course, it takes a
  little time and trouble (like everything else), but what is worth
  having is worth trying for.

  “I may say I won with my Siamese at Brighton shows every time I
  exhibited them, and am now starting breeding them again; and I think
  that everyone who will have the patience to go in for this charming
  variety will find themselves well repaid, as the kittens command £5 to
  £10 each if successfully reared, and sometimes more. Of course, one
  must keep a careful watch over their diet, and not over-feed (this is
  a great point, as they will contract skin diseases if you do); but all
  these things apply as much to all cats, and I cannot see why Siamese
  should be more difficult to breed and establish thoroughly in England
  than other cats. One of mine, a female, is out now (and has been all
  the winter) in a brick cat house, and is perfectly well. I have been
  told Siamese are so delicate that people cannot rear them. This is
  often the fault of the people themselves, for if they will not take a
  little trouble over animals they cannot expect to make money by them.
  By this I do not mean fussing and worrying your servants over them.
  Look after them yourselves, see that they are all right every day (a
  good feed twice a day is quite sufficient), and then your Siamese will
  soon be as healthy and strong as your other cats. All the points of a
  good Siamese are so well known that I need not touch upon them here.
  Start with a good strain, be careful, be patient, and you will be
  rewarded in the end.”

[Illustration:

  PAIR OF SIAMESE BELONGING TO MRS. ARMITAGE.

  (_Photo: Salmon & Batchan, New Bond Street, W._)
]

  I have mentioned Mrs. Parker Brough as a breeder of Siamese cats, and
  I am indebted to her for the following account of her favourite
  breed:—

  “A peculiarity of royal Siamese is that the kittens are born quite
  white, and at about fourteen days the points begin to look rather
  grey, turning at two months to a deep seal-brown, while the rest of
  the body usually remains white or cream for at least a couple of years
  (the whiskers and claws remain white). The colouring process resembles
  nothing so much as that of a meerschaum pipe. There are distinct
  varieties of Siamese known to fanciers—the palace or royal cat, the
  temple cat (chocolate), and there is likewise the common cat of the
  country, which is also found within the palace. The points of the
  chocolate cat are identical for shows with those of the royal except
  body colour, but the imported chocolate is often dark chocolate, with
  blue eyes, stumpy tail with a marked kink, short legs, and heavy,
  thick body. There are not many chocolates exhibited, owing to the
  preference given to the royal variety.

  “It must be understood that there is no definite royal breed as such,
  but the palace breed seems to have originated by selection. The
  Siamese as a nation are lovers of anything quaint or uncommon, and the
  white-bodied cats in Bangkok seem to have been given to, or bought by,
  the inhabitants of the palace, until they have established a breed of
  their own, and reproduced the cat that fanciers know to-day as the
  royal cat of Siam. This should explain a point which has given rise to
  much controversy, as travellers agree that other cats than royal
  Siamese are to be found inside the palace, yet the King and Prince
  Damurong have given from time to time royal Siamese to friends,
  naturally choosing for a present the cat that has the most value in
  their eyes. That is to say, that the term ‘royal Siamese’ or ‘royal
  cat of Siam’ is a descriptive term applied to a particular variety of
  cat, and should imply no more than this. We have a parallel case in
  ‘King Charles spaniels.’ The temple cat is under the care of the Jan
  priests, who have the greatest reverence for animal life, and whose
  temple is a sanctuary for all animals.

  “Those who have kept Siamese will readily understand that, given a
  climate to suit them, only one breed of cat would be left in the
  temple—_i.e._ the Siamese, for this breed is distinguished as much by
  its pluck and activity as by hatred for any other breed of cat. The
  common cat of Siam is very much the same as anywhere else, except that
  the Malay kink in the tail is to be found in many of them. Until
  recently the Siamese was but little known in Europe, but occasionally
  was to be found in the various zoological gardens. At present there is
  a fine female specimen to be seen at the Zoo at Frankfort-on-the-Main,
  having been purchased from the King of Roumania. One or two are to be
  seen at Berlin, and we understand some are to be seen at the Hague.
  London has the first one it has had for six years, but it is not shown
  owing to its want of condition.

  “A point on which the Siamese fancy is divided is whether the ideal
  cat should have a kink in the tail or not. The Club remains neutral.
  ‘Champion Wankee’ has a decided kink, looking, in fact, as though the
  tail had been caught in a door in his early youth. ‘Tiam-o-Shian IV.,’
  on the contrary, has none. This kink is a peculiarity of the animals
  of the Malay Peninsula, and sometimes is so marked, as to make the
  tail appear like a corkscrew, though others of the same litter may
  have quite straight tails. There is a peculiarity in breeding
  Siamese—_i.e._ the rarity of female kittens in a litter, the average
  seeming to be five males to two females. This may be due to the
  artificial lives so often led by these cats; and, if so, corroborates
  the theory of Herr Schenk, the Austrian doctor, of the probabilities
  of sex at birth. Three of the most noted male cats exhibited in
  England have been Mrs. Robinson’s ‘Champion Wankee,’ Mrs. Vyvyan’s
  ‘Tiam-o-Shian IV.,’ and Mrs. Parker Brough’s ‘Koschka.’ Probably Mrs.
  Backhouse’s ‘Champion Eve’ and Mrs. Vyvyan’s ‘Polyphema’ were the best
  females exhibited. ‘Koschka’ was, perhaps, the finest cat we ever saw,
  having eyes of the most glorious blue imaginable. ‘Koschka’ died after
  the Westminster show of 1900. Owners run a great risk in sending their
  Siamese (especially kittens) to shows, as in addition to being more
  liable to take cold, are apt to fret themselves ill at being separated
  from their mistresses. Many fanciers are leaving off showing Siamese
  for that reason—for instance, the Siamese classes were cancelled at
  the Westminster show of 1903 owing to lack of entries.

  “It is hard to say how they should be kept and how they should be fed.
  Some Siamese thrive by being treated just the same as ordinary cats,
  but they are few and far between. We have known cats which have been
  allowed to run about in the snow, and in and out of draughts, and
  remain perfectly healthy; and others, who seem quite strong as long as
  they are taken care of, catch cold and die if they get their feet wet.
  However, if their cattery is kept constantly at a temperature of 50
  degrees, and they are fed on scraped beef, milk (without boracic acid
  or preservative), water, and vegetables they seem to do better than
  under any other conditions. Personally, we have two catteries—indoor
  and outdoor. The indoor one is fitted up with ‘foster mothers,’ as
  used for chickens, on legs about three feet from the ground. We find
  this very necessary owing to the draughts on the floor. The rooms can
  be quickly warmed to any temperature required, even in the depth of
  winter. We like our grown-up cats loose about the house, but it is
  impossible to allow kittens their full liberty when there are many of
  them, as they are bound to get into mischief and do much damage to the
  furniture, climbing up curtains and breaking ornaments on mantelpieces
  and scratching leather, etc. Of course, they are allowed downstairs a
  portion of every day when their mistress is able to look after them.
  They are most fascinating, frolicsome little creatures. The outdoor
  catteries—for use in summer—consist of a house and greenhouse, with
  covered runs leading from them, and so arranged that any or every cat
  can be isolated at will. These arrangements have taken a great deal of
  anxiety off our shoulders.

  “This breed is certainly the noisiest, least dignified, most
  intelligent, and most active of all the cats. They are doglike in
  their nature, and can be easily taught to turn back somersaults, and
  to retrieve, and in the country take long walks like a terrier.

[Illustration:

  MRS. ROBINSON’S “AH CHOO.”

  BRED BY MRS. VYVYAN.
  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “If they think it is meal-time and they fancy themselves neglected,
  they cry like children. The points of the perfect royal Siamese lie in
  the eyes, which should be a most perfect blue, and the contrast
  between the seal-brown of the paws, mask, and tail and the white or
  cream of the rest of the body, which should _not_ be disfigured by
  bars or blotches. Age should be taken into consideration in judging
  this contrast. There are many beautiful kittens shown that we never
  hear of again after they have grown up, age having blurred their
  coats, thereby making the contrast less defined.

[Illustration:

  MRS. ROBINSON’S “CHAMPION WANKEE.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “For travelling short distances there are few better travelling cases
  than a Canadian cheese box, with holes bored in the side. They are
  cheap (say 4d.), light, and damp and draught proof, and can be burnt
  after once using.”

  It will be gathered from the accounts given by Siamese fanciers that
  these cats, though delicate, with the exercise of care may be reared
  like ordinary ones of other breeds. Miss Cochran is very emphatic on
  this point. She says:—

  “If Siamese are treated like common English cats, given plenty of
  fresh air and proper food, they are hardy and healthy; and by proper
  food I mean a meat diet—raw shin of beef, and as often as possible any
  kind of bird with the feathers on, or fowls’ heads and mice. The fur
  and feathers act as a mechanical vermifuge. If the Siamese cats are
  coddled, they will certainly die. They have naturally rather delicate
  lungs, and for these fresh air is absolutely necessary; a close, hot
  atmosphere and heated rooms are fatal.”

[Illustration:

  “MAFEKING.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. VYVYAN.
  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  Mrs. Carew Cox I have alluded to as one of the pioneers of the Siamese
  fancy, and she still remains an ardent admirer of this breed, and
  often acts as judge. She has kindly written a very valuable article
  specially for this work, and I have therefore great pleasure in giving
  her interesting experience in this chapter on Siamese:—

  “Only those who possess Siamese can understand how reluctantly a lover
  of this breed takes up a pen to endeavour to do justice to its
  characteristics—it is like attempting the impossible. One feels one
  must step softly—so to speak—in the presence of these wonderfully
  fascinating creatures, whose thoughtful yet penetrating eyes appear to
  see so far and so much, whose intelligence seems almost human, and who
  seldom stay with us for long. Unfortunately, these cats are difficult
  to rear, the constant damp of our climate affecting their lungs and
  producing frequent colds and coughs, lowering vitality and causing
  debility.

  “There are two recognised varieties of this breed—the royal and the
  chocolate. The former is certainly the most beautiful in appearance,
  the seal-brown points—sometimes black in adults—relieving the pale but
  rich cream colour of the rest of the body, and the brown mask forming
  a grand setting for the superbly blue eyes. The mask on the face
  should circle well above the eyes, but should not extend into the ear
  space; the cream colour should be in evidence beyond the circle; the
  ears should be seal and well and distinctly put on—_i.e._ the seal or
  brown should not merge into the cream; the legs, feet, and tail should
  be of the same shade of seal, the darker the better. The tail of a
  Siamese cat has been the subject of considerable discussion and
  argument, some preferring the straight tail and some the kinked. The
  former is surely the most to be desired for appearance sake; but the
  latter undeniably adds to the quaint and foreign appearance of the
  cat, and in Hong-Kong preference is given to them and higher prices
  paid for ‘kinks.’ The eyes should be large and luminous, of a bright
  shade of true blue, appearing flame-coloured at night or by artificial
  light; good specimens are often spoilt by small eyes, pale in colour.
  There appear to be two distinct types—the compactly built, short in
  body, short on legs, and round in head; and the long-bodied,
  long-faced, lithe, sinuous, and peculiarly foreign-looking variety. I
  am informed that the small cats are held in great esteem in Siam, some
  of the females being quite liliputian. It is a matter for regret that
  as the cat ages the beautiful clear cream colouring becomes cloudy and
  dark. There have been exceptions to this rule: the late ‘Polyphema,’
  owned by Mrs. Vyvyan, retained her pale colouring and her well defined
  points to the last, and was the mother of many very beautiful kittens.
  Male cats are generally larger than females, and possess voices, which
  demand instant attention.

[Illustration:

  THE LATE “KING KESHO.”

  (_Photo: Phillips, Croydon._)
]

  “The chocolate Siamese are of a rich chocolate or dark seal, with
  still more intense points. These cats usually possess eyes of rich
  amber. I have Miss Forestier-Walker’s kind permission to utilise the
  following most interesting—and hitherto unpublished—extract from a
  letter received by her in October, 1902:—‘I am very pleased to write
  and give you the following information _re_ Siamese cats. During a
  stay of some thirteen years in the Straits Settlements I have visited
  Siam on several occasions, and on one of these visits the present King
  of Siam gave a friend of mine a pair of cats. These cats were what the
  King called palace cats, were very valuable and perfect specimens,
  with short twisted tails. It may also interest you to know that the
  Siamese have a superstition about their cats, and like to have both
  breeds in their houses—_i.e._ the dark, coffee-coloured ones with
  yellow or golden-coloured eyes, and the cream-coloured with blue or
  silver eyes. The idea is that the yellow-eyed cats will bring gold and
  the blue-eyed silver, hence if you have both breeds there will always
  be plenty in the house.’

[Illustration:

  LADY MARCUS BERESFORD’S “CAMBODIA.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  “I advocate that all kittens should be reared by healthy English
  foster-mothers, and am convinced that if breeders would adopt this
  plan we should in time succeed in establishing a far stronger breed of
  cats. As matters now stand, the kittens inherit and develop any
  ailment or weakness to which their mothers may be subject, so that
  from the very commencement of their existence they have but little
  chance of becoming strong and healthy enough to withstand our climate
  of many moods.

  “Plenty of sun and air they require, but damp and draughts are fatal.
  All young kittens should be encouraged to take exercise; empty cotton
  reels cause hours of amusement, also a rabbit’s foot tied on to string
  or otherwise; corks of any description must be avoided. Large bones
  should be given when the kittens are two months old—they assist the
  growth of teeth; small ones, such as of game, chicken, or fish, are
  dangerous. The best and safest of all is a bullock’s foot boiled down
  and pulled apart; these bones will occupy kittens for a considerable
  time.

  “Worms cause an enormous mortality amongst Siamese, and are, I feel
  convinced, at the root of nearly every ailment from which cats or
  kittens suffer; therefore, however reluctant one may feel as to giving
  medicine to youngsters of tender age, it is better to do this than to
  run the risk of these odious parasites establishing themselves, for
  they are most difficult to dislodge permanently. I have used Saunder’s
  worm powders with considerable success. Of course, the dose for
  kittens must be administered in minute quantity—just a small pinch
  given in warm olive oil early in the morning after an all-night fast.
  In giving the powder to adults I always enclose it in capsules. In
  cases of weakness or exhaustion a few drops of brandy or whisky in a
  teaspoonful of warm milk works wonders. It is often necessary to give
  some sort of tonic after medicine of this description.

  “Siamese kittens should be well fed; not much at a time, but little
  and often—lean scraped beef or mutton, vegetables, stale bread and
  gravy, boiled fish, rabbit, raw eggs, milk (previously boiled); in
  fact, anything light and nourishing. The remains of a meal should
  never be left on the floor. These kittens’ digestions are not strong,
  and their intestines are most delicately formed.

  “The colour of the eyes of Siamese kittens should be well determined
  at eight weeks. They are most interesting and playful at this age; a
  tunnel made of newspapers will afford endless amusement, and after a
  long and energetic game of play they will sleep for hours. It is not
  desirable to lift or handle them more than can be avoided whilst they
  are very young. In cases of bad colds or coughs, a simple but usually
  effective remedy is a mixture of three pennyworth of oil of almonds
  and three pennyworth of syrup of violets, mixed by a chemist—a quarter
  of a teaspoonful thrice daily (it is absolutely necessary to shake the
  bottle thoroughly before administering the medicine). For an adult an
  eggspoonful three times daily may be given. Cod-liver oil is always
  safe (also the best olive oil), and helps to build up the
  constitution. As a tonic I know of nothing to equal half-grain
  (coated) quinine pills, given early each morning for a few days now
  and again. In cases of bronchitis, Carvill’s Air Purifier (about a
  teaspoonful) should be placed in boiling water, and the cat or kitten
  made to inhale the steam several times daily, and particularly the
  first thing in the morning and the last at night.

[Illustration:

  PUGS PAYING A VISIT TO THE SIAMESE.
]

  “For adults suffering from bad throat complaint and total refusal of
  all food I have found no remedy to equal the following prescription,
  if given in time. I have administered it with great success to
  numberless cats: Forty drops Calvert’s pure carbolic acid, two drachms
  spirits of wine, six ounces pure water. Not quite half a teaspoonful
  to be mixed with a teaspoonful of warm milk, poured down the throat
  three times daily; for very young cats a smaller quantity of the
  mixture should be given. I doubt if it would be advisable to give it
  to young kittens. Even if the cat does not swallow the whole dose, it
  acts beneficially as a mouth-wash and disinfectant, apparently
  removing an unpleasant taste and re-establishing the power to
  smell—the loss of this sense often preventing a sick cat from eating.
  Weak eyes, sickness, and diarrhœa are tedious ailments to which all
  kittens are very subject, and to effect a permanent cure the treatment
  must be very persistent.

[Illustration:

  MRS. HAWKINS’ CATTERY.
]

  “I do not know when Siamese were first introduced into England, but
  Lady Dorothy Nevill possessed some several years ago. Sir Robert
  Herbert imported some; and Miss Forestier-Walker and her sister (Mrs.
  Vyvyan), who have owned and bred many beautiful specimens, first made
  acquaintance with this breed in 1883, and soon afterwards were
  presented with ‘Susan’ and ‘Samuel’ direct from the palace at Bangkok.
  ‘Tiam-o-Shian I.’ also came from Bangkok. All these cats had kinked
  tails. From ‘Susan’ and ‘Tiam-o-Shian I.’—mated with Mrs. Lee’s ‘Meo,’
  Mr. Harrington’s ‘Medu,’ and Miss Moore’s ‘Siam’—descended, amongst
  others, the following well-known and typical cats: ‘Bangkok,’
  ‘Tiam-o-Shian II.,’ ‘Goblin,’ ‘Kitza Kara,’ ‘Queen Rhea,’ ‘King
  Wallypug,’ ‘Prince of Siam,’ ‘Tiam-o-Shian III.,’ ‘Adam,’ ‘Eve,’
  ‘Cupid,’ ‘Mafeking,’ ‘Rangsit,’ ‘Vishuddha,’ ‘Tiam-o-Shian IV.,’
  ‘Suzanne,’ ‘Ah Choo,’ ‘Tornito,’ and ‘Evangeline.’ In awarding prizes
  in the Siamese classes at the Cat Club show at Westminster in 1901 I
  found ‘Suzanne’ quite the best cat present, and upon referring
  subsequently to a catalogue was not surprised to find that Mrs. Vyvyan
  was her owner. ‘Champion Wankee’ for a long time held his own in the
  show pen, and has sired some very good kittens; but, of course, as is
  usual, age has darkened him.

  “Mrs. Robinson’s ‘Ah Choo’ and Mr. Cooke’s ‘Zetland Wanzes’ are
  well-known cats of to-day. Lady Marcus Beresford’s ‘King of Siam’ is
  imported, has glorious eyes of sapphire-blue, and sires exceptionally
  good kittens; he is short on the leg, has a coat like satin and an
  excellent constitution. ‘Royal Siam,’ the property of Mrs. Spencer, of
  Eye Vicarage, Suffolk (who has bred some of the best kittens I have
  ever seen), is a superb creature with eyes of deepest blue; he was
  given to a friend of Mrs. Spencer in Siam, is a genuine royal
  palace-bred specimen with bright blue eyes, a handsome cat with,
  strictly typical points, and—he is never ill! Miss Harper’s (late)
  ‘Curly Tail,’ a daughter of ‘King Kesho,’ was an excellent example of
  the breed, all her points were very good; unfortunately her life was
  not of long duration—she died a victim to dropsy. It is so long ago
  since I first possessed a Siamese kitten that I cannot remember from
  whom I purchased her; she was a very perfect little creature,
  absolutely adorable with her quaint ways appealing and yet assertive
  nature.

  “After her death from rapid decline I tried to put aside all thoughts
  of securing another, and not until September, 1893, did I again fall a
  victim to the attractions of this breed, purchasing a female of about
  one year old from Zache, of Great Portland Street. I named her
  ‘Yuthia’; she was supposed to have been imported, had very expressive
  blue eyes, and she lived until February, 1899.

  “In October, 1893—immediately after the Crystal Palace show—I became
  the owner of ‘Kitza Kara,’ a very perfect male, bred by Miss
  Forestier-Walker, which won first prize and several medals and
  specials. He also carried all before him at Bath in March, 1894.
  Unfortunately, he died that year from congestion of the lungs.

  “‘King Kesho,’ the well-known male (sire of many beautiful kittens), I
  bought from Mr. Forsgate in 1894; he claimed descent from the Duchess
  of Bedford’s, Mrs. Seton-Kerr’s, and Miss Forestier-Walker’s cats; he
  had large bold eyes of a glorious shade of blue, and very dark points;
  he won many prizes and specials, but died in 1897. ‘Lido,’ a male bred
  by Mrs. Chapman and sired by ‘Champion Wankee,’ was descended from
  some of the best of his time; he was of the long-bodied, narrow-faced
  type, most graceful in his movements.

  “Amongst the many females I have possessed, ‘Cameo’ was one of my
  best, her pale body colour being relieved by intensely dark points;
  this little pet died suddenly in July, 1896, from failure of the
  heart’s action. ‘Koko’ was a very large cat, comparatively coarse in
  appearance for one of this variety; she won the Duchess of Bedford’s
  special at Holland Park in 1896, for the best adult Siamese. ‘Princess
  To-To,’ 1900, bred by Mrs. Bennet, became a great favourite; no words
  of mine could ever do justice to her remarkable individuality, her
  fascinating moods, her expressive little face and sense of the comic.
  She loved to be sung to sleep, closing her eyes with an unmistakable
  air of enjoyment and confidence, and clearly requesting an encore when
  the song ceased. I taught her to dance, and every night at ten o’clock
  she frantically enjoyed prancing round the room on her hind legs.

  “Alas, that these little companions to whom we are permitted to become
  so deeply attached should be only lent us to brighten our weary way
  for so short a period! ‘To-To’ was always very delicate, and after
  lying at death’s door on several occasions she finally entered in;
  with her very last breath she crept into my arms to die. ‘Yolanda,’
  the female I now own, was presented to me by Mrs. Hankey, and bred, I
  believe, by Mrs. Foote. She is a small cat with very blue eyes, and
  has recently had a litter of five kittens by Lady Marcus Beresford’s
  ‘King of Siam’; these kittens all possessed the gloriously blue eyes
  to which both of their parents can lay claim.

[Illustration:

  “ROMEO” AND “JULIETTE.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. VARY CAMPBELL.
  (_Photo: J. Clapperton, Galashiels._)
]

  “‘Attaché’ (a neuter) was given to me in October, 1900, when six
  months old, by Mrs. Spencer, of Eye Vicarage, Suffolk; he is a very
  large and powerful creature, with massive limbs, and an unconquerable
  antipathy to all other cats of any description, excepting only my
  Russian neuter, whose presence he tolerates. So great is his aversion
  to even the semblance of a cat, that he has attacked a life-size print
  of an assertive-looking Persian that acted as a stove ornament in the
  room he occupied during the summer months, scratching it several times
  across and across, and then retiring behind it, evidently to watch the
  effect from another point of view! He has large and luminous eyes, in
  whose unfathomable depths linger many and varied expressions; he is of
  a peculiarly jealous disposition, capable of intense devotion. In
  spite of his living the life of a recluse, he is by no means a victim
  of _ennui_, possessing his own special playthings, which he keeps
  under one particular cushion, hunting them out when he feels inclined
  to play; for so large a cat he is remarkably athletic, and as yet his
  health has caused me no anxiety.

  “It is highly desirable that all who own cats should keep a few simple
  medicines always at hand. Personally, I am never without the remedies
  previously alluded to. Delay, in neglecting to note and treat at the
  very commencement certain symptoms of illness, often proves fatal,
  whereas a ‘stitch in time saves nine,’ and may even save one of the
  nine lives that a cat is (or was) supposed to possess.”

  The love of Siamese cats has not seemed as yet to have developed in
  America, and specimens of the breed are few and far between. Lady
  Marcus Beresford sent out two good cats to Mrs. Clinton Locke, and I
  believe several fine litters have been reared, and some fine exhibits
  appeared at recent shows. I give an illustration of some of these
  pets, with Mrs. Robert Locke, on page 256.

  In the foregoing remarks of noted breeders of this variety many useful
  hints are given, and some peculiarities of the breed mentioned. I
  would, however, draw attention to a curious and rather remarkable fact
  in connection with Siamese cats.

  When they are ill, a sprinkling of white hairs invariably appears all
  over the face and head. The bright blue of the eye vanishes, leaving
  it a sort of pale opal colour. It often takes many weeks before the
  cat regains its ordinary appearance. Harrison Weir, in his allusions
  to Siamese, tells us that he had observed a great liking of these cats
  for “the woods,” and goes on to describe them as not passing along
  like an ordinary cat, but quickly and quietly creeping from bush to
  bush; nor do they seem afraid of getting their feet wet—like the
  feline tribe in general. The male Siamese will take a most friendly
  and parental interest in the welfare of madame’s family; indeed, he
  shows a great liking always to have the company of a lady, and frets
  greatly when left alone.

  The males are, however, antagonistic to others of their sex, and fight
  with a terrible persistency. I have heard of a stalwart fellow who,
  being allowed his liberty, cleared the neighbourhood of all other
  wandering toms. When made neuter, Siamese become most charming home
  pets, and can be taught to do tricks more easily than other cats. The
  sole objection to a Siamese house cat is the trying nature of its
  unmelodious voice. Siamese are rather prolific breeders, the litters
  being generally large ones, and the females, as a rule, in the
  minority.

  I do not believe that Siamese will ever become common in England, for
  many reasons. These cats are expensive to purchase, difficult to rear,
  and fanciers are afraid to risk them in the show pen; but in spite of
  these drawbacks, I think, as time goes on, and the Siamese Club
  extends its labours, we shall see and hear more of these really
  curious creatures, for what we call the royal Siamese bears no
  resemblance to any other cat, and the distinguishing differences,
  being so great, tend to make the breed one of our best show cats and a
  clear class to itself, for the Siamese of the purest blood should not
  be crossed with other cats. We have heard of “any other colour”
  Siamese, but these cats of varied hue claiming to be Siamese are but
  the offspring of a cross. We have been told of black and blue and
  tabby Siamese; but the fanciers of Siamese look askance at these
  freaks, and feel that it is worse than useless to attempt to produce
  any other variety than that which we have learned by custom to
  designate the Royal cat of Siam.

[Illustration:

  A COSY CORNER.

  (_From a Painting by Madame Ronner._)
]




[Illustration:

  “ASHBRITTLE PETER.”

  THE PROPERTY OF MRS. E. A. CLARK.
]




                             CHAPTER XXIV.
                           SHORT-HAIRED CATS.


  If a census could be taken of the cats in England, or even in London,
  I suppose the proportion of short-haired cats to long-haired cats
  would be about ten to one. In the cat fancy, however, the breeders of
  Persians in comparison with those of the short-haired varieties are
  far more numerous. In former days, when cat shows were first held at
  the Crystal Palace, the premier position was given to the short-haired
  breeds. On reference to the catalogues up to 1895 I find the following
  heading at the commencement: “Class I. Short-haired Cats: He Cats,
  Tortoiseshell or Tortoiseshell-and-White.” Then followed the rest of
  the short-haired varieties, including Siamese, Manx, and blue (self
  colour).

  The long-haired breeds, therefore, in those days had to play second
  fiddle, so to speak. It was in 1896, when the National Cat Club took
  over the Crystal Palace shows, that the place of honour was given to
  the long-haired or Persian cats; and now, as all the world knows—or,
  at any rate, all the cat world—at every show the short-haired cats are
  in a very small minority.

  At one time—not so very long ago—there was a danger of these breeds
  becoming an unknown quantity at our shows. This would have been a
  grievous pity; so some champions of the household or homely puss
  arose, and Sir Claud and Lady Alexander founded in 1901 the British
  Cat Club, to encourage the breeding, exhibiting, and kind treatment of
  these cats. The subscription first started at 5s., but was reduced to
  2s. 6d., so as to try to get members of the poorer classes to join and
  take an interest in the welfare of pussy. A goodly number of members’
  names are now on the list, and much has been done in supporting shows
  by offering specials—chiefly in money—and in the generous guaranteeing
  of classes. The hon. secretary and treasurer is Sir Claud Alexander,
  Faygate Wood, Sussex. There is a Scottish branch of this club, of
  which the secretary is Miss Leith, Ross Priory, Alexandria, N.B.

[Illustration:

  TORTOISESHELL TOM AND SILVER TABBY SHORT-HAIRED CATS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

  It was also in 1901 that the Short-haired Cat Society was founded by
  Mr. Gambier Bolton, whose name is so well known in the animal world.
  At most of the principal shows this society is represented, and some
  handsome challenge cups and prizes are placed for competition. The
  hon. secretary is Mrs. Middleton, 67, Cheyne Court, Chelsea, and the
  annual subscription is 5s., and 2s. 6d. to working classes.

  In considering the short-haired breeds, I will divide them into three
  sections—viz. selfs or whole colours, broken colours, and any other
  distinct variety. The Siamese and Manx cats I have dealt with in
  previous chapters, and foreign cats will have a corner to themselves
  later on; so I propose to deal first with those interesting
  short-haired self-coloured cats formerly called Russian or Archangel,
  and which in America are termed Maltese.

  There has been a good deal of discussion lately as to the points
  desirable in these cats, which of recent years have clearly become a
  species of British cats, and therefore are rightly classed as such at
  our shows, instead of as Russians. Yet this latter name sticks to the
  variety, and no doubt there are still some real foreign short-haired
  blues to be found, differing, however, in type from those we have
  become accustomed to breed and exhibit in England. Harrison Weir and
  John Jennings, in their book on cats in the early days of the fancy,
  deal with cats called Russians amongst the long-haired breeds, and
  these are described by them as larger in body and shorter in leg than
  Persians, with a coat of woolly texture interspersed with wiry, coarse
  hairs. In colour we are told they were generally dark tabby, the
  markings being rather indistinct.

  I do not think such cats are to be found now in our midst, and so I
  presume this species of long-haired cat has died out. Anyhow, the term
  “Russian,” when now used, is meant to designate the self-coloured,
  smooth-haired cat with which we are all familiar. Certainly, the best
  blues I have always remarked are those that have been bred in England,
  or that, at least, can boast an English sire or dam; and, after
  writing right and left to breeders of British cats, I have had a
  difficulty in obtaining any really good photographs. I cannot,
  however, complain of the pictures of blue short-hairs which illustrate
  these pages, and which have been really showered upon me. I have
  failed, however, to be able to illustrate the difference between the
  foreigners and Britishers.

[Illustration:

  “BALLOCHMYLE BLUE QUEEN.”

  BELONGING TO LADY ALEXANDER.
]

  That there are two distinct types of these blue cats is apparent to
  anyone who observes the specimens exhibited at our shows. The foreign
  or imported variety have wedge-shaped faces, and are longer and larger
  in the head, with prominent ears; otherwise, in colour and coat, they
  are similar to those bred in England, and which partake of the same
  formation as an ordinary British cat. In describing the correct
  texture of coat of these short-haired blues, I would compare it to
  plush, for the hair does not lie softly on the slope, but has a
  tendency to an upright growth, and yet the coat should not have any
  suspicion of coarseness or roughness to the touch. We know the
  difference between silk and cotton plush, and it is to the former I
  would liken the correct coat of these blues. Needless to say that, as
  in all self-coloured cats, the colours should be absolutely even—of a
  bluish lilac tint, without any sootiness or rusty shade. As in other
  breeds of “selfs,” the young kittens exhibit distinct tabby markings,
  but these vanish as the coat grows, and many a ringed tail which may
  have caused distress to the breeder will as time goes on be proudly
  held aloft without a suspicion of any blemish. The blues now exhibited
  appear generally to fail in eye, the colour being yellow, and often
  green or greenish-yellow; whereas a special feature of this breed
  should be a deep orange eye, round and full. Another fault which is
  sometimes apparent is too thick a tail, which is suggestive of a
  long-haired ancestor. The following is an interesting letter from Mrs.
  H. V. James which appeared in _Fur and Feather_:—


    BLUE RUSSIANS.

    I am very interested in the discussion on blue Russians, as years
    ago I had a perfect type of a blue Russian, which had been imported.
    When Russians were judged as Russians it won well at shows, so you
    may like to have a description of the cat—which is, I believe, a
    correct one, according to several authorities on Russian cats. A
    real Russian should be longer in the leg than the English blue. The
    head is pointed and narrow; the ears large, but round; tail long,
    full near the body, but very tapering. According to the English
    taste, it is not a pretty cat, and only excels over the British blue
    in the colour and quality of its coat, which is much shorter and
    softer than the latter. The true colour is a real lavender-blue, of
    such softness and brilliancy that it shines like silver in a strong
    light. The eyes are amber. I think it a great mistake to give
    “Russian” in our show classification now, as these are really almost
    extinct in England, I believe, and our principal clubs have been
    wise enough to drop the title for “Short-haired Blues,” in the same
    way that “Persian” has been dropped for “Long-haired Cats.” The last
    time I showed my Russian was at the first Westminster show, in a
    class for Russians. She was, however, beaten by the round-headed
    British blue, although she was, I believe, the only Russian in the
    class. In 1901 the class was altered to “Short-haired Blues,” which
    was more correct, as few of the blues shown then had anything of the
    Russian about them, either in shape or coat. As these classes are
    now arranged, it would be unfair to judge them except by the
    standard of our own short-haired cats, and I think that if a club
    wants to encourage Russians it should give the extra class, “Blue
    Russian,” and let it be judged as such. I must own it is
    disappointing for a Russian owner, who, seeing “Russian Blue” only
    given in the schedule, enters his cat accordingly, and gets beaten
    by a short-haired blue failing in just the points that the Russian
    is correct in. I know my feelings after Westminster, 1899, when my
    Russian was described as “grand colour, texture of coat, failing to
    winner in width of head and smallness of ears.” The blue short-hairs
    now shown are, I know, far more beautiful with their round heads and
    shorter legs; but, unfortunately, the beautiful is not always the
    correct type. As British cats, however, they are both beautiful and
    correct, so why not drop the Russian name altogether? I had a most
    amusing talk with a blue Russian (?) owner the other day, and a good
    laugh with him over the ancestors of his “Russian” blues.

                                                         ANNIE P. JAMES.


[Illustration:

  MRS. CAREW COX’S BLUE MALE “BAYARD.”
]

  At the Crystal Palace show of 1902 Mr. Woodiwiss judged the blue
  classes, and awarded first to a cat having the English type of head.
  He gave as his reasons that although he considered the long nose and
  thin head the right shape for a Russian, yet, he added, “I am not here
  to judge on those lines; I have to judge according to the standard,
  which gives preference to round head, neat ears, and short nose; and,
  although I really believe Mrs. Walker’s blue ‘Moscow’ to be the
  nearest in type to those I have seen in Eastern countries, yet
  according to our English breeders’ standard it is out of it, and I can
  only give it reserve.” Mr. Mason, our ablest judge of all classes of
  cats, upheld Mr. Woodiwiss in his awards, and makes the following
  remarks in _Fur and Feather_ of February, 1903, in reporting on the
  Manchester show:—“I hope exhibitors and breeders of short-haired self
  blues will take my remarks in the spirit in which they are written. I
  am glad to see that the Manchester committee named the classes ‘Blues
  (Male)’ and ‘Blues (Female).’ To call them Russians is a mistake,
  seeing that a very large number of those exhibited are crosses from
  some other varieties. To all intents the self blues, as we find them
  to-day, have little of the Russian blood in them. Then why call them
  Russian? Why not “self blues,” and judge them on the same lines as the
  British short-haired cats? What I want to obtain is a uniform type. To
  go for two opposite types in one class of exhibits cannot be right or
  advantageous to breeders or exhibitors.”

[Illustration:

  “SHERDLEY SACHA II.” “SHERDLEY SACHA I.”
]

[Illustration:

  “SHERDLEY MICHAEL.”
]

  Breeders of short-haired blues have never been many in number, nor has
  there ever appeared any startlingly good specimen in the show pen. Mr.
  Woodiwiss kept and exhibited several fine specimens—“Blue Boy,” “Blue
  King,” and “Blue Queen.” The two latter have been passed on to Lady
  Alexander. Mr. Mariner, of Bath, is an old exhibitor and great
  enthusiast of this breed. Mrs. Middleton, Mrs. Herring, Mrs. Crowther,
  Miss Butler, Mrs. Illingworth, and Mrs. Pownall have all from time to
  time been possessed of fairly good Russians so-called. Mr. Cole used
  to show a lovely fat-faced cat called “Muff,” but she had green eyes.
  Mr. Dewar’s “Firkins” and Mr. McNish’s “St. Juan” are blues that have
  made their name.

[Illustration:

  “SHERDLEY ALEXIS.”
]

  The three principal breeders at the present time of these cats are
  Lady Alexander, Mrs. Michael Hughes, and Mrs. Carew Cox. It is at the
  Crystal Palace shows that an opportunity is given of admiring the fine
  team of blues from the Faygate cattery. “Brother Bump” has won a first
  prize whenever he has appeared in the show pen, and, curiously enough,
  each time under a different judge. He is a full champion, and special
  prizes have been showered upon him. Besides this handsome fellow, Lady
  Alexander owns another male—“Blue King”—and two good females.

  At Sherdley Hall, in Lancashire, there is quite a colony of blues
  owned by Mrs. Michael Hughes.

  The cats are reared in outside and unwarmed houses, with ample
  wired-in runs. All the Sherdley cats are prize-winners. I am able to
  give illustrations of “Alexis Michael” and the two “Sachas.” The first
  named has been quoted as a typical British blue.

  Mrs. Carew Cox is a most ardent supporter and successful breeder of
  short-haired blues. As she has had a long and varied experience, I
  asked her to send me some notes. I have pleasure in publishing them
  for the benefit of my readers:—

  “Blue short-haired cats—many of them imported from Northern
  Russia—make very desirable pets, presenting, as they do, a neat,
  smart, ‘tailor-built’ appearance all the year round, and possessing
  the great intelligence usually to be met with in all short-haired
  breeds. They have the advantage over many other varieties in that they
  are, as adults, strong, healthy cats—not at all liable, as a rule, to
  pulmonary attacks. Kittens, however, require both care and patience to
  rear successfully, and, strange to say, attain sounder constitutions
  when brought up by healthy English foster-mothers. Females are more
  difficult to rear than males. A Russian cat should be of an even shade
  of blue throughout, even the skin itself being often—in fact,
  generally—of a bluish tinge. There should be no stripes or bars,
  and—for exhibition purposes—there should be no white patches. Kittens
  frequently have body markings when very young, also rings on their
  tails; but in pure-bred specimens these defects generally become
  effaced before they are many weeks old. In one case a kitten (now a
  large neuter) had until five months of age two broad black stripes
  down his back on either side of his spine; they were so decided in
  appearance that it seemed very doubtful that they would ever
  disappear. However, at six months old he was a perfectly self-coloured
  cat! This is, of course, most remarkable and unusual, and amongst all
  the many kittens of this breed that I have reared for the past
  thirteen years there has never been another presenting a similar
  appearance.

[Illustration:

  “MARIA.”

  OWNED BY MRS. WOODCOCK.

  (_Photo: S. Richardson, Standish._)
]

  “The eyes of a Russian should be golden in colour, or deep orange. To
  procure deep-coloured eyes, experiments have been made in crossing
  Russians with Persians, but the results—so far as I have seen—have not
  proved satisfactory, and to an experienced eye the cross is
  perceptible. I believe there is no really recognised standard of
  points for this breed, which until quite recently was comparatively
  little known. I note that there is a very fair demand for Russians at
  the present time—chiefly, strange to say, from the North of England.
  The shape of the head in many of those imported is more pointed than
  round; indeed, some have long, lean, pointed heads and faces, with big
  ears. The backs of the ears should be as free from hair as possible;
  some, I remark, are entirely devoid of hair on the upper parts of
  their ears—at least, if there is any, it is not perceptible to the
  naked eye. Others, again, have ears covered with peculiarly fine,
  close, silky hair. Some imported blues are very round in face and
  head, with tiny ears, and eyes set rather wide apart. These are surely
  the prettiest, and are generally given the preference at shows; but,
  of course, it cannot be denied that the long-faced variety present the
  most foreign appearance, more especially when this type also possesses
  a lithe and rather lean body. The whiskers, eyelashes, and tip of nose
  should all be dark blue.

  “The coat should be short and close, glossy, and silvery; sometimes it
  is rather woolly and furry, Nature having evidently provided these
  cats with their warm, close coats to enable them to resist the
  severities of their native climates, short-haired blues existing also
  in the north of Norway, Iceland, and—I am told—in some parts of the
  United States. Many years ago some blues (with faint tabby markings)
  were imported from the north of Norway; these were called ‘Canon
  Girdlestone’s breed.’ I owned two very pretty soft-looking creatures.
  Blue-and-white cats have been imported from the north of Russia, and
  are particularly attractive when evenly marked.

  “Some blues are far paler in colour than others. Amongst my kittens
  are frequently some very beautiful lavender-blues; I have remarked
  that these are rather more delicate in constitution than those of
  darker hue. As these cats advance in years they frequently become a
  rusty brown during the summer months, or when acquiring a fresh coat;
  this discoloration asserts itself principally at the joints of legs
  and feet. The fur of a very old cat becomes dull and rough, losing the
  soft and glossy appearance identical with the blue Russian in his
  prime.

  “There are some people who appear to wish to assert that there is an
  English breed of blues, and I have been told strange tales of
  unexpected meetings in country villages with cats of this colour,
  whose owners declared that both parents were English-bred. As,
  however, it is not always possible to identify the sires of household
  cats, I venture to doubt these assertions. It is sometimes possible to
  breed blues from a black English female mated to a Russian male. This
  experiment does not always succeed, as some blacks never breed blues,
  although mated several times consecutively with Russians. A white
  English female mated to a blue male simply produces white kittens—at
  least, this has been my experience. Cats imported from Archangel are
  generally of a deep, firm blue throughout; the eyes and ears rather
  larger than those of English cats, the head and legs longer. In many
  of the Russian peasants’ cabins can be seen a curious coloured print
  (executed in Moscow). It represents the burial of the cat after a
  dramatic fashion, and derives its origin from a very interesting
  Russian legend. The cat is represented as slate-coloured.

  “It is often impossible to decide the ultimate colour of a kitten’s
  eyes until it is four months old. They vary very much, sometimes
  giving one the impression that they are green, and perhaps a few days
  afterwards one discovers them to be yellow! As these cats become
  better known they naturally increase in popularity, and I should not
  be surprised to hear of several well-established kennels of this breed
  in the immediate future.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CAREW COX’S “YULA.”
]

  “It is many years ago since I first made acquaintance with this breed;
  but I find I made no notes at the time, so cannot give full
  particulars. In 1889, however, I purchased a smooth blue, whose owner
  declared her to be a Siamese—she certainly resembled a puma-shaped
  Siamese in her body outline and movements—and I believe I entered her
  in the stud book as such. ‘Dwina’ won many prizes at Crystal Palace
  and other shows in ‘any variety’ classes, was a most faithful
  creature, reared many families, and lived until June, 1901. In 1890 I
  owned a very pretty soft-looking blue female—she was, in fact, a blue
  tabby (one of Canon Girdlestone’s breed); also a male of the same
  variety. They had evidently been the victims of tapeworm for a
  considerable period, and finally succumbed owing to the presence of
  these odious parasites in overwhelming numbers. That same year
  ‘Kola’—a very pretty blue-and-white female—became mine. She was
  imported from Kola, and after changing hands more than once whilst at
  sea she was finally exchanged at the London Docks for a leg of mutton!
  A very lovable little cat was ‘Kola,’ with very round face and very
  soft fur. She lived until November, 1900, and evidently died from old
  age, becoming feeble and toothless, but quite able to enjoy the soft
  food that was specially prepared for her. These two old pets—‘Dwina’
  and ‘Kola’—were a great loss, after twelve and ten years’
  companionship. ‘Lingpopo’—an extremely beautiful blue—was imported
  from Archangel, very sound in colour, rather long in face and legs,
  sleek, sinuous, and graceful, peculiarly lethargic in her movements,
  and dainty in her deportment. I bought her in 1893, when she was seven
  months old. Unfortunately, a disease of the kidneys carried her off
  when in the flower of her existence. ‘Moscow’ (1893) was a very
  successful blue Russian sire of many kittens; he won many first and
  special prizes; he died in 1897, during my absence from home. In 1895
  Lady Marcus Beresford presented me with a very handsome kitten—a
  male—with a very thick yet close coat, and very compact in shape.
  ‘Olga’ came to me in 1893 or 1894, and still lives; she was imported,
  and has been a great winner in her time, but is getting an old cat
  now. She is the mother of my stud cat ‘Bayard,’ who was born in 1898,
  and whose sire was ‘King Vladimir.’ ‘Fashoda’ was born in 1896, and
  was imported; she is a large, strong cat, and a winner of many prizes.
  ‘Odessa’ is a daughter of ‘Fashoda’ by ‘Blue Gown.’ ‘Yula’ came to me
  in 1901, and was imported from Archangel. ‘Sing Sing’ (neuter) is the
  cat that as a kitten had the peculiar black stripes down his spine
  alluded to previously. He was born on Easter Monday, 1899, a son of
  ‘Fashoda’ and ‘Muchacho.’ He has two toes off one of his hind feet—the
  result of a heavy weight falling upon his foot when a kitten; he
  suffered greatly from shock, and every day for three weeks he paid
  visits to the doctor, who dressed his foot, having previously
  amputated the toes. The little fellow had a sad time, but he does not
  miss his toes now.

[Illustration:

  LADY ALEXANDER OF BALLOCHMYLE.

  (_Photo: Lafayette, Ltd._)
]

  “‘Muchacho,’ the stud cat that has sired so many winning kittens, is a
  son of Mrs. Herring’s (late) ‘Champion Roguey’ and my (late)
  ‘Lingpopo.’ I sold him as a kitten, but after two people had had him I
  again became his owner, and now he will never leave me until he is
  called to the ‘happy hunting grounds’ that I hope, and think, must be
  prepared for all faithful creatures somewhere ‘beyond the veil.’”

  In America the classification given for these cats at the Beresford
  Cat Club show is “Blue or Maltese,” but I have not heard of any ardent
  fanciers of this breed over the water. More will be written on the
  so-called Maltese cat by one well qualified to give information later
  on in this work.

  I have always been told what delightful pets these blues become, being
  extremely intelligent and affectionate. Mrs. Bagster, the Cat Club’s
  hon. secretary, owns a splendid fellow—one of Mrs. Carew Cox’s
  well-known strain. At the time of writing there is no specialist club
  for short-haired blues, but they are included in the list of the
  British Cat Club, founded by those ardent supporters of the
  short-haired breeds, Sir Claud and Lady Alexander. No standard of
  points has been drawn up for these cats, but the following definitions
  are descriptive of the two types exhibited at our shows:—


    BRITISH BLUE (SHORT-HAIR).

    _Head._—Round and flat, with good space between the ears, which are
    small and well set on.

    _Shape._—Cobby in build, round quarters, and good in bone substance.

    _Coat._—Short and close, of sound blue colour throughout. Legs and
    feet shade lighter in colour, with no bars or markings.

    _Eyes._—Deep orange in colour.


                             RUSSIAN BLUE.

    _Head_ longer in formation, has space between the ears, more
    prominent in ears, and well-tapered face; fairly round under the
    cheek bone, thin, falls away under the eye.

    Comes out rather longer in back. Less bone substance.

    _Colour_ same as the British short-hair, with no bars or markings.

    _Eyes_ deep orange colour.


[Illustration:

  “BALLOCHMYLE CHAMPION BROTHER BUMP.”
]




[Illustration:

  SHORT-HAIRED TABBY KITTENS.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw._)
]




                              CHAPTER XXV.
                           SHORT-HAIRED CATS.


  And now I will take a general glance over the other short-haired
  breeds commonly called English or British cats.

  As regards points, these are the same as in the long-haired varieties.
  I give a list as drawn up by a sub-committee of the Cat Club for the
  use of fanciers and judges:—


                             SHORT-HAIRED CATS.

    _White._—Colour, pure white. Eyes, blue.

    _Black._—Colour, pure and rich black; no white. Eyes, orange.

    _Tortoiseshell._—Colour, patched yellow, orange and black; no
    stripes; no white. Eyes, orange.

    _Tortoiseshell-and-White._—Colour, white, patched with yellow,
    orange and black; no stripes. Eyes, orange.

    _Silver Tabby._—Colour, silver grey, marked with rich black stripes
    or bars; no pure white. Eyes, green or orange.

    _Spotted Tabby._—Colour, any shade of light colour, evenly marked
    with spots of a darker shade or black; no stripes; no pure white.
    Eyes, orange, yellow or green.

    _Brown Tabby._—Colour, golden brown, marked with rich black stripes
    or bars; no white. Eyes, orange or green.

    _Orange or Red Tabby._—Colour, light orange or red, with darker
    stripes or bars; no white. Eyes, hazel, or golden brown.

    _Tabby and White._—Colour, any shade of tabby with white. Eyes,
    orange or green.

    N.B.—Where more than one colour is given for the eyes, the first one
    is to be preferred to the second or third.

                              _The Sub-Committee_,      FRANCES SIMPSON.
                                                        GAMBIER BOLTON.


  It will therefore be seen that texture and length of coat are really
  the distinguishing points between the two varieties. It is just as
  grave a mistake for a Persian cat to have a short, close coat as it is
  for one of British type to possess any of that woolliness or length of
  fur which denotes a _mésalliance_. The commonest species of all
  short-haired cats may be said to be represented by broken-coloured
  specimens—that is, orange-and-white, tabby-and-white, and
  black-and-white. These sorts of cats we most frequently see about our
  public streets and in the homes of country cottagers. At our shows
  this type of cat—which would be classed as “any other colour”—is fast
  disappearing from our midst. In America I observe that a class is
  still specially reserved for orange-and-white cats, and it would seem
  that this is rather a favourite breed with our cousins over the water.

  A good black, with rich glossy coat and deep amber eyes, is, to my
  mind, one of the choicest of our short-haired breeds. These cats are
  often marred by the white spot at the throat, and, of course, green
  eyes predominate to a very great extent. As in the long-haired cats,
  blue-eyed whites are coming much more to the fore, and on the show
  bench, at least, we do not see many other specimens with yellow or
  green eyes.

  Our British tabbies—orange, brown, and silver—are always well
  represented at the principal shows, and of late years competition has
  been much keener in these classes. It is when we come to markings that
  the long-haired breeds must take a back seat, so to speak; and the
  British puss has an easy walkover. In the short, close coat, the broad
  or narrow bands of the darker colour show up in grand relief on the
  ground-work of a rich, though paler, shade. The rings round the neck
  and tail, and the bars on the legs are seen to great perfection. It
  will be easily understood, therefore, that markings in short-haired
  tabbies claim the first and greatest consideration, and that these
  should be sharp and distinct, great care is needed in mating and
  breeding.

[Illustration:

  ANOTHER VIEW OF LADY DECIES’ CATTERY.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]

  A serious and rather common defect amongst silver tabbies is a tinge
  of brown about the face—generally on the nose. Orange tabby females
  are rarer than males. The peculiar species known as spotted tabbies is
  becoming very rare, and whereas formerly some of this breed were
  generally exhibited at large shows, we now seldom see them. Spotted
  tabbies are usually brown or silver. I do not recollect having heard
  of an orange-spotted tabby. The spots should be spread uniformly over
  the body, feet, and tail, and if on the face so much the better. A
  perfect specimen should not have a suspicion of a stripe or bar
  anywhere. Harrison Weir considers that the spotted tabby is a much
  nearer approach to the wild English cat and some other wild cats in
  the way of colour than the ordinary broad-banded tabby.

[Illustration:

  LADY DECIES’ “CHAMPION XENOPHON.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  Amongst writers on cats—such as Harrison Weir and Mr.
  Jennings—priority of place is given to the tortoiseshell cat, and this
  breed heads their list of short-haired breeds. So also formerly in the
  Crystal Palace catalogue, to which I have before alluded,
  tortoiseshells lead the way. Here, again, the patchy nature of the
  three colours is—or, at least, ought to be—the distinguishing feature,
  and the long-haired cat of the same variety loses some of its
  individuality by reason of the length of fur, causing a mingling or
  blurring of the colours.

  It is a strange fact in natural history, which no one has attempted to
  explain, that the tortoiseshell tom is a most rare and uncommon
  animal. A number of clever fanciers and breeders have used their best
  endeavours and patiently persevered in the fruitless attempt to breed
  tortoiseshell male cats. In my long experience I have never known of
  anyone who has succeeded, and those specimens that have been exhibited
  from time to time have been picked up quite by chance. I recollect,
  many years ago, at the Crystal Palace show, seeing the pen of a
  short-haired cat smothered with prize cards, and the owner of the puss
  standing proudly by, informing inquirers that it was a tortoiseshell
  tom that lay hidden behind his awards. This man had been paid a
  shilling by a London cook to take away the troublesome beast out of
  her area! He had taken it away to some purpose, and his surprise at
  finding himself and his cat famous was amusing to behold.

  A very beautiful cat is the English tortoiseshell-and-white when the
  colours are well distributed, the red and black showing up so
  splendidly on the snowy ground-work. I must say I far prefer those
  cats to the tortoiseshells, which are often so dingy in appearance. In
  this breed the male sex is conspicuous by its absence. The two breeds
  that have made great strides of late years amongst long-haired
  cats—namely, creams and smokes—are very rarely met with in the
  short-haired varieties. I know, however, of a silver tabby that, when
  mated to a black, throws smoke kittens. These are quaint and pretty,
  with bright green eyes. The under-coat is snowy white, and gleams
  through the dark outer fur, giving a very distinguished appearance. It
  is a pity some fanciers do not seriously take up the breeding of cream
  short-haired cats, as I think they would repay any trouble spent over
  them. They should, of course, be as pale and even in colour as
  possible, without any markings, and with deep amber eyes. I can only
  recall one or two, and these not at all perfect specimens.

  Amongst our present-day fanciers of short-haired cats I may mention
  Sir Claude and Lady Alexander, who have splendid specimens of many of
  the breeds. Mrs. Collingwood has recently almost discarded Persians
  for the British beauties, being specially partial to silver and orange
  tabbies. Lady Decies for many years owned the invincible “Champion
  Xenophon”—a brown tabby of extreme beauty—who died in 1902. There are
  several fine short-hairs at the spacious catteries at Birchington.

  Mrs. Herring’s name has always been associated with “Champion Jimmy,”
  the noted silver tabby, and she is also the owner of “King Saul,” one
  of the few tortoiseshell toms that appear at our shows. Many other
  specimens have been bred by this well-known fancier. Mr. Harold
  Blackett has a trio of famous prize-winning silver tabbies, and Mrs.
  Bonny is a noted breeder of browns and silvers. This enthusiastic
  fancier writes:—“For many years past I have devoted myself to the cult
  of the British tabby cat; it has been my one hobby. Really good
  specimens of browns and silvers are scarce. Certainly silvers have
  increased in numbers during the last few years, and the quality has
  improved. They are difficult to rear, more especially the males.” Mrs.
  Bonny’s celebrated brown female tabby, “Heather Belle,” died in 1903.
  A silver tabby, “Dame Fortune”—her daughter by Mrs. Collingwood’s
  “Champion James II.”—created quite a sensation at the Westminster and
  other shows. Miss Derby Hyde has always been faithful to short-haired,
  blue-eyed whites. Mr. Kuhnel is noted for his gorgeous-coloured and
  finely marked orange tabbies. Many breeders of Persians keep one or
  two short-haired specimens, and I cannot help believing that, as time
  goes on, we shall have a larger number of fanciers taking up British
  cats.

  Harrison Weir, in comparing the two varieties, writes:—“I am
  disappointed at the neglect of the short-haired English cat, by the
  ascendancy of the foreign long-hair. Both are truly beautiful, but the
  first, in my opinion, is far in advance of the latter in intelligence.
  In point of fact, in animal life, in that way it has no peer; and,
  again, the rich colourings are, I think, more than equal to the
  softened beauty of the longer-coated. I do not think that the breeding
  of short-hairs is yet properly understood.”

  A correspondent writing to _Our Cats_, complaining of the
  classification for short-hairs at shows, says:—“All fanciers of that
  beautiful animal the British cat feel how they are handicapped when
  they receive schedules of the various shows and compare the
  classification of short- and long-haired cats. Far better it would be
  honestly to announce a ‘foreign cat show,’ with a rider that a few
  English may compete if they choose. ’Tis a pity, in many ways; for,
  given a little encouragement, the standard of the poor, everyday,
  homely pussy would be raised, and we would not see so much wanton
  cruelty and neglect attached thereto.”

[Illustration:

  AN AMERICAN BEGGING CAT.

  (_Photo: A. C. Hopkins._)
]

[Illustration:

  “EBONY OF WIGAN.”

  OWNED BY MISS JOAN WOODCOCK.
  (_Photo: S. Richardson, Standish._)
]

  In America short-hairs have not “taken on,” and at the various shows
  the specials offered are as small in number as the entries made. I
  never hear of any exportations of British cats to American fanciers;
  but perhaps some enthusiast of the breed will start a short-haired
  cattery. There is certainly room for such an enterprise, and the
  sturdier Britisher would more easily resist the trials of an Atlantic
  trip and the terrors of a three days’ show.

  I have been fortunate in obtaining the kind assistance of two of our
  best authorities on short-haired cats—namely, Mr. H. E. Jung and Mr.
  T. B. Mason. Some notes by these competent judges will be read with
  interest.

  Mr. H. E. Jung says:—

  “It is a matter of regret that this variety at shows is not so fully
  represented as it should be, taking into consideration the large
  number of cat exhibitors. There is no doubt that the prettier
  long-haired variety secures greater support from the lady exhibitors.

  “In addition to the characteristic of being a native production of the
  British Isles, they have certainly a great advantage in their racy,
  workmanlike appearance, which is lacking in the long-haired variety.
  What is handsomer than a sleek-coated black, with its grand,
  golden-amber eyes; the workmanlike spotless white, with its clear blue
  eye; the aristocratic silver, with its rich tabby markings, its soft
  emerald or orange eye; or the pale, lavender-hued blue, with its coat
  of velvet-like texture?

  “Thanks to such enthusiastic breeders as Lady Alexander, Mrs. Herring,
  Lady Decies, Mr. Sam Woodiwiss, Mr. R. P. Hughes, Mr. Kuhnel, Mr.
  Louis Wain, and several others, we are not likely to allow the English
  short-haired variety to deteriorate. I myself think there has been a
  great improvement in the specimens penned the last few years. The
  fault we must guard against is the loss of size and stamina, which can
  only be averted by judicious mating. The increasing number of shows in
  America, the Colonies, and even on the Continent, should stimulate
  breeders of the short-haired variety to extend their catteries, for no
  doubt in a few years there will be a strong demand for the
  English-bred, short-haired cat. Up to the present only in England has
  anything like a systematic rule been followed out, which is most
  essential: in fact, the only course possible to obtain good specimens
  is to follow out a system of breeding as near perfect as possible—for,
  as in everything else where breeding is concerned, the old maxim of
  ‘blood will tell’ holds good.

  “The stud books should be kept up to date, and stud registrations
  should be followed out, just as in the dog world. I can imagine many
  of my readers who do not take up cats as a hobby saying, ‘The ordinary
  common garden cat suits my purpose; he is affectionate, he catches
  mice, and that is all I require.’ But how much more satisfactory it is
  to be able to say, ‘My cat is blue-blooded, has an aristocratic
  pedigree, is handsome; he goes to shows, perhaps wins, and he is still
  affectionate; he also catches the mice as well as his brother of lower
  birth and less striking appearance.’ You must also bear in mind he
  does not require any daintier feeding. I consider it is always
  pleasanter in cat, dog, or horse to own a distinguished-looking animal
  than an ill-bred, ungainly one that neither pleases nor satisfies the
  eye.

  “I would here remark upon the absence of men who take up breeding cats
  as a hobby, and yet the short-haired variety is essentially a man’s
  breed. They require very little grooming and attention compared to the
  long-haired varieties.

  “Several of the most prominent judges of cats are also recognised
  authorities in the dog world. I may mention the late Mr. Enoch
  Welburn; Mr. F. Gresham, the keen, ‘all-round’ judge; Mr. L. P. C.
  Astley, also at home both in one or the other; Mr. Sam Woodiwiss, the
  well-known fancier and expert; Mr. Lane, who also adjudicates on both
  breeds; and Mr. Louis Wain, to whom we are indebted for those
  delightful pictures depicting cat life.

  “Tortoiseshells are most difficult cats to breed. Either they come too
  dark or too light, or the colours are not sufficiently well blended.
  One of the singularities of the breed is the nearly entire absence of
  males in every litter; in fact, I remember the saying was that a
  tortoiseshell tom was as scarce as the dodo. At the present time,
  however, we have two good toms—viz. ‘Champion Ballochmyle Samson,’
  winner of no fewer than twelve first prizes and championships, the
  property of Lady Alexander, and ‘Champion King Saul,’ winner of
  numerous championships and first prizes, owned by Mrs. Herring. Both
  these males are very good, and whenever they have been penned together
  it has always been a difficult matter for me to decide the winner. In
  females, ‘Ballochmyle Bountiful Bertie’ (sire, ‘Champion Ballochmyle
  Samson’), also the property of Lady Alexander, winner of several
  firsts and championships; ‘Fulmer May,’ the property of Lady Decies,
  winner of many firsts—they are both grand females, of the right colour
  and type; the tortoiseshell-and-white ‘Champion Ballochmyle Otter,’
  the best tortoiseshell-and-white I have ever seen penned, winner of
  nine first prizes and championships, the property of Lady Alexander.
  This cat has held her own in her class for the last seven years—a most
  remarkable feat.

[Illustration:

  SLEEPING AND WAKING TABBIES.

  (_Photo: T. Fall, Baker Street, W._)
]

  “Silver tabbies I must certainly class among the most aristocratic of
  the breeds. Fanciers will tell you how difficult it is to obtain a
  good one. Either the tabby markings are not clear, nor sufficiently
  defined, the black is not dense enough, the butterfly markings are not
  distinct, or the eyes are not of the correct colour. To get anything
  like a perfect type in silvers is a great feat, and only the outcome
  of judicious mating. One of the great faults of many silvers on the
  bench to-day is that they are deficient in size, and unless we attend
  to this I am afraid that shortly we are likely to produce a diminutive
  type which, of course, is greatly to be avoided. I hardly think this
  breed is sufficiently supported, taking into consideration the
  richness in colour and markings of the silver tabby.

  “Among the many winning males, ‘Champion Jimmy’ stands out very
  prominently, having won numerous championships and first prizes; he
  was the property of Mrs. Herring. Others of note were ‘James II.,’ the
  property of Mrs. Collingwood; ‘Sedgemere Silver King,’ owned by Mr.
  Sam Woodiwiss. Prominent in the female classes were the noted queen,
  ‘Champion Shelly,’ owned by Mr. H. W. Bullock, shown some years ago;
  by that noted sire, ‘King of the Fancy,’ owned by Mr. Sugden. It is
  notable he sired both ‘Champion Jimmy’ and ‘Champion Shelly.’ ‘Silver
  Queen,’ winner of many firsts and specials, the property of the Hon.
  Mrs. McLaren Morrison; ‘Sedgemere Silver Queen,’ owned by Mr. Sam
  Woodiwiss; ‘Silver Queen,’ the property of Mr. Harold Blackett; and
  that grand female, ‘Sweet Phillis,’ the property of Mrs. Herring.

  “Very few good brown tabbies are benched, and breeders, I am afraid,
  get very disheartened at the result of their efforts. I despair to
  think of the litters I have seen, and not a good one amongst them. The
  rich brown sable colour is very seldom met with, and now that the
  world-renowned champion of champions, ‘Xenophon,’ is no more, we have
  only ‘Flying Fox’ and ‘King of Lee’ anything like the type you expect
  in this handsome breed. Of ‘Champion Xenophon’ I am afraid we can
  truly say, ‘We shall ne’er look on his like again.’ His wonderful
  colour, markings, and size approached the ideal short-haired cat. I
  believe he was either bred by Mr. Heslop, or came under his keen eye,
  and, like a good many others, was brought down south by that fancier
  to make a name.

  “He was claimed by Mr. Sam Woodiwiss, who showed him for some years,
  and he secured for his owner numerous championships, first prizes, and
  specials, afterwards changing hands and becoming the property of Lady
  Decies, still following up his winning career after an unbroken record
  of ‘second to none.’ I think I am correct in saying this cat has won
  more money and specials than any short-haired cat ever exhibited.

  “Red tabbies, again, are one of the difficult varieties to obtain. The
  dense, dark red tabby markings against the light red ground is only
  the result of judicious mating and breeding.

  “Among the many notable males, ‘Ballochmyle Perfection,’ the property
  of Lady Alexander, winner of some 100 first prizes, championships, and
  specials, the sire of ‘Champion Ballochmyle Goldfinder’ and
  ‘Ballochmyle No Fool’ (the mother of ‘Ballochmyle Red Prince’), stands
  out very prominently. ‘Champion Perfection,’ despite his ten years,
  has still the grand dense markings and colour as of old. In
  ‘Ballochmyle Perfection’ we have a chip of the old block. Then a later
  red tabby, Mrs. Collingwood’s ‘Clem,’ is a good-coloured red. Mr.
  Kuhnel, of Bradford, for many years held his own in this handsome
  breed—in fact, most of the present-day winners can be traced from that
  fancier’s cattery.

[Illustration:

  A BLACK-AND-WHITE BRITISHER.

  (_Photo: A. Warschawski, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

[Illustration:

  BLUE-AND-WHITE SHORT-HAIRED CATS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

  “Blues (self-coloured). There seems to be a great difference of
  opinion as to the shape and make of head of these cats. Some judges
  look for a round, full head of the English-bred cat; others, the long
  head of the Eastern variety. I think that difference arises to a great
  extent according to where these cats originally came from. I have
  heard the opinions of some who give Archangel as the port of origin;
  others, Malta. If the cat originated from Archangel, one would
  naturally expect a long head of Eastern type. The specimens, however,
  from Malta have certainly the round head and more of the English-bred
  type. The chief points, in my opinion, apart from the shape of head,
  is body colour, shape, colour of eye, and closeness of coat. They are
  no doubt a very handsome breed. In colour they are a light blue, with
  a delicate lavender bloom pervading the whole coat.

  “Of the many good ones that come to my memory, ‘Moscow’
  (Russian-bred), a big winner, owned by Mrs. Carew Cox; ‘Champion
  Ballochmyle Blue King,’ winner of seven championships and first
  prizes, owned by Lady Alexander; ‘Champion Brookside Iris,’ late owner
  Mrs. Pownall; ‘Blue Boy,’ owned by Mr. Sam Woodiwiss; ‘Ballochmyle
  Brother Bump’ and ‘Ballochmyle Sister Goose,’ the property of Lady
  Alexander—a big winner.

  “White English cats appear to have lost less in size than many others,
  as two of the largest winners of to-day—viz. ‘Ballochmyle Snow King’
  and ‘Ballochmyle Billie Blue Eyes’—will testify. The white retains the
  racy, workmanlike character of the true English-bred cat. One fault is
  very prevalent: they lean very much towards a broken coat (a good many
  of the white cats penned to-day have this failing); it is, no doubt, a
  very difficult fault to breed out. It is noticeable that the females
  in this breed are so very small, and in marked contrast to the toms.

  “The chief points one desires in this breed are closeness of coat,
  size, and a distinct light blue eye (not washy). Among the numerous
  winners are ‘Ballochmyle Snow King,’ formerly owned by Mr. Sam
  Woodiwiss, and now the property of Lady Alexander; ‘Ballochmyle Billie
  Blue Eyes’ and ‘Biddy Blue Eyes,’ the property of Mrs. Herring.

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION BALLOCHMYLE OTTER,” TORTOISESHELL-AND-WHITE.

  OWNED BY LADY ALEXANDER.
]

  “Blacks, I am sorry to say, are somewhat neglected, considering how
  striking they are. The dense black coat, the contrasting grand amber
  eye, should always find a weak spot in the heart of every exhibitor of
  the short-haired varieties. The points we look for are chiefly
  closeness of coat, the black of great density, pure amber eyes set in
  a good round head topped with small ears. I can well imagine my
  readers will say, ‘A pure amber eye—how is it to be got? It is such a
  rarity.’ I know, however, that by careful mating it is not only
  possible, but most distinctly certain, as Mr. R. J. Hughes, the late
  owner of that lovely female ‘Amber Queen,’ one of the best-eyed cats I
  have seen, can testify. He, in fact, has bred many of the best-eyed
  winners of late years: ‘Amber Queen,’ winner of numerous firsts and
  championships, the property of Miss Una Fox; ‘Ballochmyle Black Bump,’
  owned by Lady Alexander, and formerly the property of Mr. Hughes;
  ‘Sedgemere Black King,’ winner of several championships and first
  prizes, originally owned by Mr. Sam Woodiwiss.

  “An explanation may be deemed due to my readers for having included
  blues amongst the English types, but as the clubs have recognised this
  breed, and sanctioned their being catalogued amongst the English
  exhibits, I felt justified in adopting this course; more particularly
  as the country of origin still remains a matter of speculation.”

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION BALLOCHMYLE PERFECTION.”

  OWNED BY LADY ALEXANDER.
]

  Mr. T. B. Mason’s name is a household one in the cat fancy, and this
  most popular judge has been kind enough to set down some of his many
  experiences, and a little of his universal knowledge, for the benefit
  of my readers.

  “For more than twenty-five years I have taken a very great interest in
  all our minor pets, so the breeding and exhibiting of cats has had a
  large share of my attention. I look at the past, and compare it with
  the present, and I am more than satisfied with the progress made and
  the high-water mark of excellence attained. In the ‘eighties, when
  that noted North Country breeder the late Mr. Young, of Harrogate, was
  hard at work laying the foundations of markings and colour in the
  silver tabby, orange tabby, and the tortoiseshells, which has resulted
  in making the strains of the North Country short-hairs so far ahead of
  all others, he had little or no idea that in so brief a time the cat
  fancy would develop into such an important one as it is at the present
  time. In recent years we have seen the National Cat Club, the Cat
  Club, and a great many specialist clubs formed for the special object
  of breeding cats to perfection in colour and markings. Standards have
  been made and issued by noted breeders, who have met together and have
  exchanged ideas, so that at the present time we have standards that
  are ideals of perfection. Shape, colour, markings, coat, and colour of
  eyes for each separate variety are all plainly stated. All this
  interest, together with the holding of many big shows in different
  parts of the kingdom, have brought into prominence a great host of
  fanciers, including many ladies holding high positions in the best
  class of society. No wonder, then, that there should be a call for a
  standard work dealing with all varieties of cats. In the few remarks I
  have to make on short-haired cats I shall take the self colours first.
  They are, I believe, our oldest variety; the black or the white cat is
  to be found in many a household. In some parts of the North when I was
  a boy it was said to be a sign of good luck to have a sound-coloured
  black cat, with a coat like a raven’s wing, with not a white hair to
  be found in it. If you have one like this in your home, with a good
  round head, neat ears, and rich orange eyes, let me ask you to take
  great care of it. If you reside in a district where shows are
  held—either in connection with the local agricultural society or in
  the winter time in the town hall in connection with the local
  fanciers’ society—by all means enter it, and you will find you have an
  exhibit of real value. We possess grand examples of first-class blacks
  in Lady Alexander’s ‘Black Bump,’ Lady Decies’ ‘Charcoal’ and
  ‘Shamrock,’ Mrs. Nott’s ‘King of Blacks,’ and many other present-day
  winners. In self whites Lady Alexander’s ‘Snow King,’ ‘Billie Blue
  Eyes,’ and ‘Snow Bump’; Mrs. Western’s ‘Prickly Pearl’; and the Hon.
  A. Wodehouse’s ‘White Devil’ are about the best living, and in
  condition and coat hard to find fault with. The eyes of the self white
  must be a rich-coloured blue. The shorter and fuller you can get both
  the self black and the self white the better will be the chances of
  their winning prizes; a long, coarse coat, big or badly set-on ears,
  and long, thin, snipy faces are little or no good in the show pen. In
  your breeding arrangements you do not need at this time of the day to
  make many experiments. In breeding self whites the great aim is to
  obtain shape and colour of eyes. So many good sires are to be obtained
  that if you are deficient in bone, shape, or colour of eyes, you can
  with careful mating obtain these—in some cases with the first cross.
  My opinion is that in breeding whites no other colour should be mixed
  with them. In the breeding of blacks you are altogether on another
  matter. It is a well-known fact that the cross with the self blue is a
  most distinct advantage. It not only gives tone and soundness to both
  the blue and the black, but it also adds lustre.

  “For a long time we have called the self blues Russians. No doubt
  they, in the first instance, came from the East; but since they were
  imported into this country they have been mixed in a great measure
  with self blacks, and in some cases with long-haired blues, to get
  strong, short, round heads, so that at the present time we have very
  few pure-bred Russians in this country.

  “My advice to those who are breeding self blues or self blacks is, by
  all means put one cross of blacks in the blues, especially if the
  black has orange eyes. It is in eyes that most of our self blues fail.
  Let me, however, give here a word of warning. Do not mix the colours
  too often, or you will get the blues too dark or nearly like black. If
  you get one cross of the black and blue, use it as it should be used,
  by mixing the offspring well together. I know a great many breeders
  are not in favour of this in-breeding. This is, without doubt, their
  loss. In all branches in-breeding is the sure road to success.

  “To go outside at every cross, or too often, brings with it a lot of
  trouble and disappointment. To all my advice is, having got the
  strains of noted sires in your youngsters, so mix them that all the
  good and little of the bad points will come out as the result of your
  breeding. That you will not get all winners is a sure conclusion, but
  my experience is—and it is formed after thirty years’ breeding of
  fancy pet stock—that in this way you are more likely than in any other
  to breed winners. Anyone who has seen Lady Alexander’s ‘Brother Bump,’
  Mrs. Hughes’ ‘Alexis,’ Miss Butler Ayton’s ‘Blue Bell’ and ‘Blue
  Stockings,’ Mrs. Carew Cox’s ‘Fashoda,’ and Mrs. Dewar’s ‘Firkens’
  cannot but fall in love with this colour. All that is needed to make
  this one of our most popular varieties is uniformity in shape. In my
  opinion these cats should be judged on the same lines as our self
  blacks and self whites.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BARKER’S “TYNESIDE LILY.”

  (_Photo: E. C. Farmer, Bedford._)
]

[Illustration:

  MISS HARPER’S CATTERY, BRIARLEA, HAYWARD’S HEATH.
]

[Illustration:

  ANOTHER VIEW OF BRIARLEA CATTERIES.

  (_Photo: E. Harper._)
]

  “I now come to the tabbies—silver, orange, and brown. What a lovely
  variety they are, and what a fine picture any of the three colours
  makes if they are seen in full coat and clear markings! In silvers the
  old-time champion ‘The Silver King’ was without a doubt the foundation
  of most of our present-day winners. Mrs. Herring’s ‘Jimmy,’ the noted
  female ‘Shelly,’ and a host of others that at the moment I cannot
  remember are worthy of the great deeds of the past. In the present day
  champions are to be found—Mrs. Collingwood’s ‘James II.,’ Mrs.
  Herring’s ‘Sweet Phyllis,’ Mrs. Bonny’s ‘Heather Belle’ and ‘Dame
  Fortune,’ Mrs. Turner’s ‘Masterpiece,’ Mrs. Western’s ‘Princess,’ and
  last, but not least, Mr. Blackett’s noted team, including ‘Silver’ and
  ‘Silver Star.’ In the orange we have a strong lot, including Lady
  Alexander’s capital team—‘Perfection,’ ‘Red Prince,’ ‘Miss
  Perfection,’ and ‘Mother Pop’—Mrs. Temple’s ‘Dr. Jim,’ Mrs.
  Collingwood’s ‘Clem’ and ‘Belle of Bradford,’ Mr. Thompson’s ‘Red
  Rufus,’ and Mr. Kuhnel’s ‘Coronation King,’ all of them getting close
  on the standard both in colour and markings.

[Illustration:

  A CORNER OF THE BOSSINGTON CATTERIES.

  (_Photo: A. J. Anderson & Co., Luton._)
]

  “In browns the old champion ‘Xenophon’ is, to my mind, the best tabby
  of any colour ever seen in the show pen; his picture is before me as I
  pen these lines. I well remember giving him the first and special for
  best cat in the show; since that time how many times he has won the
  championship I cannot say. His loss will be great, both to the fancy
  and also to Lady Decies. ‘Flying Fox’ (the property of Messrs. Ainsley
  and Graham), Mrs. Pratt’s ‘Tommy Jacks,’ and Mrs. Oliver’s ‘Danefield
  Vera’ are all good ones; but in this colour of tabbies the competition
  is not half so keen as it is in silver and orange.

  “One standard governs all the three colours. The ground or body colour
  must be pure, and clear from any other colour. In a great many
  well-marked ones I meet in the show pen the rusty brown tinge on nose,
  ears, and brindled in the body markings puts them out of the prize
  list. It is a great mistake to cross the silver tabby with the brown
  tabby or with one that has in its pedigree the brown tabby blood. If
  the black markings need a darker shade, my advice is use for once the
  self black. If you do not get the desired effect the first cross, the
  youngsters mated together have been known to breed some really good
  ones. By all means, if possible, get into your silvers green eyes. I
  am aware that the standard says green or orange eyes; but in all cases
  where the competition is very keen the orange eyes are a distinct
  disadvantage.

[Illustration:

  TORTOISESHELL MALE “SAMSON.”

  OWNED BY LADY ALEXANDER.

  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Crystal Palace._)
]

  “In the breeding of the orange tabby you need to be very careful. The
  use of the tortoiseshell has been found to be very advantageous; in
  fact, some of our best orange tabbies have been bred from the
  tortoiseshells. The mixing of these two varieties, if done carefully,
  will bring success on both sides; but care should be taken not to
  bring too much of the tortoiseshell into the orange, or, on the other
  hand, carry too much orange into the tortoiseshell. The pale yellow
  eye in an orange is a great point against it winning in the keen
  competition which we have at the present time.

  “The eyes must be a very rich orange, to match the body colour, which
  should be two or three shades lighter than the markings.

  “In the browns we have two distinct colours—the sable colour and the
  old brown colour. The old cat that I have referred to of Lady Decies’
  was a sable tabby. No doubt this colour is the more taking of the two,
  but both are useful, and the old brown colour must not by any means be
  overlooked in our liking for the sable colour. In all the colours of
  tabbies we find that the chief bad points are the white lips in the
  sables mostly, the white spots in the chest in our orange, and the
  rusty mousy colour in our silvers. The colour of eyes, too, in our
  browns and sables is far from what it ought to be. Some eyes are a
  pale green, some a pale yellow. All this proves that the breeders at
  times go too far in the outcrossing, and bring in with it faults that
  crop up when those crossings are nearly forgotten.

  “In the breeding of browns nothing more is needed than what we
  have—namely, the sable colour ones and the old coloured browns. The
  blending together of these two colours will put any breeder on the
  highway to success. I am more than surprised that this variety is not
  stronger than it is at the present time. I am sure, of all the race
  and colours of tabbies they are the easiest to breed, and yet we find
  they are the fewest in number at our big shows. In looking for a real
  good tabby, do not miss the chest, feet, and tail. We have a great lot
  of good cats if body markings and colour were all that was needed, but
  when it comes to the ringed tail, the rings around the chest, and the
  markings right down to the toe ends, then they ‘come a cropper,’ as we
  say in the North.

[Illustration:

  BLACK MANX AND ROYAL SIAMESE CATS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

  “One more important point before I finish. What a painful task it is
  to the judge to find very good all-round exhibits that have plain head
  markings. The face and cheeks are right in ground colour; and the
  pencil markings on the fore-face, running into the markings behind the
  ears, and those on the cheeks are of the faintest colour, and in many
  cases broken. Such head markings and colour spoil many otherwise
  really good cats.

[Illustration:

  MRS. A. M. STEAD’S BROWN TABBY.

  (_Photo: E. N. Collins, South Norwood._)
]

  “I now come to the tortoiseshells—a mixture of orange and black. I
  have dealt with mixing of colours in my remarks on the orange tabbies.
  All I need say here is, mind that in your tortoiseshells you do not
  get the orange markings. The most successful breeder in the North of
  this variety—the late Mr. Young, of Harrogate—made tabby markings in a
  tortoiseshell a disqualification in the show pen. The presence of any
  white is also a very great drawback, and this is often found in small
  patches on the chest or on the belly. You can have both too light and
  too much orange colour, or you can have them too dark or too much
  black. Equal colours and well mixed is about the right thing, with
  good orange eyes. At the present time we have Lady Alexander’s and
  Mrs. Herring’s males—‘Champion Samson’ and ‘Champion King Saul.’
  Females are very strong, and well represented in Mrs. Pratt’s ‘Tib of
  Rochdale’ and Messrs. Graham and Ainsley’s ‘Sunine.’

  “The tortoiseshell-and-white is a most lovely and taking variety,
  commonly called the ‘chintz-and-white’ in our homesteads. Very few and
  far between are good specimens to be found, and yet in the show pens
  these tricolour cats have a great advantage over their fellow-felines.
  Lady Alexander has exhibited some splendid tortoiseshell-and-whites,
  ‘Ballochmyle Otter’ being one of the best (see illustration, page
  289). A very common drawback in this variety is the mixture of tabby
  with the orange-and-white, instead of the patches of black. I feel
  sure if this variety were only taken up more we should see a
  remarkable advancement both in markings and in colour. The
  patches—white, orange, and black—in an ideal specimen should be, if
  possible, about equal in number, and well placed on the body, head,
  and feet; they look very charming when you see a really good one. I
  hope a few more fanciers and breeders of short-haired cats will be
  coming forward, so that the number exhibited at our shows may steadily
  increase.”

[Illustration:

  MRS. COLLINGWOOD’S “JAMES II.”

  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Crystal Palace._)
]

  In this hope I do most heartily join, for although my name is mostly
  connected with the long-haired breeds, I am such a lover of all cats
  that I feel as anxious for one variety as another to obtain friends
  and favour. It is specially in the South of England that the interest
  in our short-haired breeds is on the wane, and it behoves all fanciers
  to strive to assist in keeping alive the love of the British cat in
  our midst.

  In 1902 Sir Claud and Lady Alexander most generously guaranteed the
  whole of these classes, and although they themselves made a very
  numerous entry, yet there was a deficit to pay of several pounds, a
  thing which ought not to be.

  I find that the Manx, Siamese, and blues are generally able to take
  care of themselves at shows, or they have clubs and secretaries who
  look after their interests; but the “common or garden” puss needs a
  kindly hand to assist in drawing him to the front, for, as that
  well-known lover of “the domestic cat,” Harrison Weir, writes, “Why
  should not the cat that sits purring in front of us before the fire be
  an object of interest, and be selected for its colour, markings, and
  form?”

[Illustration:

  “BEN-MY-CHREE.”

  OWNED BY MISS G. E. SILLAR.

  (_Photo: J. W. Thomas, Colwyn Bay._)
]




[Illustration:

  BURMESE CAT.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXVI.
                           SOME FOREIGN CATS.


  It is not intended in the following notes to enter into a description
  of the various beautiful and interesting wild felines, for although
  some of these—such as the Ocelot, the Geoffroy’s Cat, and the Wild
  Cat—are not infrequently seen in the pens at our leading shows, such
  matter really comes more within the province of a natural history than
  of the present work.

  Two varieties alone may justly claim some slight attention here, these
  being the Egyptian cat (_Felis maniculata_) and the European wild cat
  (_F. catus_). It might reasonably be imagined that our common cat was
  derived from the last-named, considering that at one time it was a
  common animal all over England, as well as on the Continent. The
  untamable ferocity of this variety—which is probably the least
  amenable of all living creatures—has doubtless prevented its ever
  having been domesticated, and the high value which, as we learn from
  old writings, was placed upon the domestic puss at a time when the
  wild cat was a common animal in England, plainly show that _F. catus_
  was not the ancestor of _F. domestica_, although the two will freely
  interbreed. Many years ago, for instance, the old Spanish wild cat
  which used to be kept at the Zoological Gardens in the so-called
  aviaries, now occupied by the civets, mated with his cage mate—a
  tortoiseshell-and-white queen—and of these cross-bred kittens both Sir
  Claud Alexander and the writer of these lines possessed specimens.

  It is usually assumed that the Egyptian or Caffre cat is the
  progenitor of the majority of the domestic cats. This is the variety
  which was domesticated, revered, and embalmed by the ancient
  Egyptians. It is found over the whole of Africa, and it is quite easy
  to understand how, with its eminently tamable disposition, it
  gradually spread over Europe. Our so-called Abyssinian cats, to which
  reference will be made later on, bear a very striking resemblance to
  this handsome variety of cat.

  The domestic cats of other parts of the world, however, are
  undoubtedly derived from the smaller wild cats of the countries in
  question. Thus it is probable that several varieties have a share in
  the creation of the Indian domestic cats, of which Blyth distinguished
  two varieties. The fulvous variety he considered to be derived from
  the Indian jungle cat (_F. chaus_), a fulvous cat which in its high
  legs, shorter tail, and slightly tufted ears—and it is worthy of note
  that some of the best Abyssinians have large and slightly tufted
  ears—marks the approach to the lyncine group. The spotted kinds he
  traces to the leopard cat, the desert cat, and the rusty spotted cat.

  A most extraordinary variety, of which next to nothing appears to be
  known, is the hairless cat, and we cannot do better than quote in
  extenso the description given by the owner of what, if his surmise
  should unhappily prove to be correct, was the last pair of these
  peculiar animals, a portrait of which we give.


                                            _Albuquerque, New Mexico,
                                                    February 3rd, 1902._

    MR. H. C. BROOKE.

    Dear Sir,—Yours of January 20th is at hand. In answer I would say my
    hairless cats are brother and sister. I got them from the Indians a
    few miles from this place. The old Jesuit Fathers tell me they are
    the last of the Aztec breed known only in New Mexico. I have found
    them the most intelligent and affectionate family pets I have ever
    met in the cat line; they are the quickest in action and smartest
    cats I have ever seen. They are fond of a warm bath, and love to
    sleep under the clothes at night with our little girl. They seem to
    understand nearly everything that is said to them; but I have never
    had time to train them. They are marked exactly alike—with
    mouse-coloured backs; with neck, stomach, and legs a delicate flesh
    tint. Their bodies are always warm and soft as a child’s. They love
    to be fondled and caressed, and are very playful; will run up and
    down your body and around your waist like a flash. “Nellie” weighs
    about eight pounds, and “Dick” weighed ten pounds; but I am sorry to
    say we have lost “Dick.” We have never allowed them to go out of the
    house, as the dogs would be after them. They were very fond of our
    water spaniel, and would sleep with her. “Dick” was a sly rascal,
    and would steal out. One night last year he stole out, and the dogs
    finished him. His loss was very great, as I may never replace him.
    The Chicago Cat Club valued them at 1,000 dollars each. They were
    very anxious for me to come on with them for their cat shows, but I
    could not go. They were never on exhibition; as this is a small
    city, I feared they would be stolen. I have made every endeavour to
    get another mate for “Nellie,” but have not been successful. I never
    allowed them to mate, as they were brother and sister, and I thought
    it might alter “Nellie’s” beautiful form, which is round and
    handsome, with body rather long. In winter they have a light fur on
    back and ridge of tail, which falls off in warm weather. They stand
    the cold weather same as other cats. They are not like the hairless
    dogs, whose hide is solid and tough; they are soft and delicate,
    with very loose skin. “Nellie” has a very small head, large amber
    eyes, extra long moustache and eyebrows; her voice now is a good
    baritone, when young it sounded exactly like a child’s. They have
    great appetites, and are quite dainty eaters—fried chicken and good
    steak is their choice. Have never been sick an hour. The enclosed
    faded picture is the only one I have at present; it is very
    lifelike, as it shows the wrinkles in its fine, soft skin. “Dick”
    was a very powerful cat; could whip any dog alone; his courage, no
    doubt, was the cause of his death. He always was the boss over our
    dogs. I have priced “Nellie” at 300 dollars. She is too valuable a
    pet for me to keep in a small town. Many wealthy ladies would value
    her at her weight in gold if they knew what a very rare pet she is.
    I think in your position she would be a very good investment to
    exhibit at cat shows and other select events, as she doubtless is
    the only hairless cat now known. I have written to Old Mexico and
    all over this country without finding another. I would like to have
    her in some large museum, where she would interest and be
    appreciated by thousands of people.—Trusting this will reach you in
    safety, I am, very truly yours,

                                                          F. J. SHINICK.


  We can only add, whilst deeply regretting that Mr. Shinick did not
  mate his cats, the earnest hope that we may hear that he has
  discovered the existence of other specimens. Should it prove that a
  parcel of street curs are responsible for this curious variety
  becoming extinct, even such confirmed dog lovers as ourselves are
  almost tempted to acquiesce in a universal and everlasting muzzling
  order! It is to be regretted that no information is given as to
  whether the dentition of these cats was abnormal and imperfect, as is
  the case with the Mexican hairless dogs.

[Illustration:

  MEXICAN HAIRLESS CATS.
]

  Very curious and handsome is the Indian cat “Indischer Fürst,”
  exhibited by Mrs. H. C. Brooke. His most striking peculiarities are
  the length and slenderness of his limbs, the extreme shortness of his
  coat, and his thin and tapering tail, which reminds the observer of
  that of a pointer. His ears are small, but as a kitten they were of
  enormous size, and with his long and pointed head gave him a most
  weird appearance. The voice of this cat is very variable, and far more
  resembles the raucous call of the Siamese than the voice of any
  European cat.

  This cat has had a very adventurous existence. He, with his litter
  sister, was originally stolen from a hotel in Bombay by an English
  sailor. On the way home he twice fell overboard, but, more fortunate
  than his companion, was safely rescued. He also suffered shipwreck in
  the Sobraon on Yung Yung Island. On arriving nearer home he
  disappeared, and was only after several days’ absence discovered in
  the bowels of the ship, as black as the coal amongst which he had been
  sojourning. His last exploit was to fall in the docks, after which the
  sailor handed him over to a shoemaker at Leytonstone, where he was
  discovered by his present owner. After he had twice escaped from
  bondage and astonished the natives of that place by perambulating the
  housetops, lamenting in the tones of a lost soul, his owner arrived at
  the conclusion that he had no convenience for restraining him, and at
  last yielded to persuasion, and handed him over to his present
  proprietors for consideration of sundry gold coins of the realm and a
  kitten with seven toes on each foot.

[Illustration:

  AFRICAN CAT.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  It is a very remarkable thing that the Asiatic cats are so subject to
  abnormal formations of the tail. The Siamese cats, as is well known,
  very frequently possess kinked tails. In Burma also cats are
  found—some tailless, some with crooked or twisted stumps. These cats,
  when spotted, are very striking; when of an ordinary colour they
  simply recall an indifferent Manx.

  Japan also possesses tailless cats; but those with ordinary caudal
  appendages also occur, and are probably the most numerous. There is
  said to be a variety of Chinese cat which is remarkable for its
  pendent ears. We have never been able to ascertain anything definite
  with regard to this variety. Some years back a class was provided for
  them at a certain Continental cat show, and we went across in the hope
  of seeing and, if possible, acquiring some specimens; but, alas, the
  class was empty! We have seen a stuffed specimen in a Continental
  museum, which was a half-long-haired cat, the ears being pendent down
  the sides of the head instead of erect; but do not attach much value
  to this.

  We have seen specimens of a very tiny domestic cat, full-grown
  individuals of which weigh only about three pounds. Those we saw came
  from South America.

  A cat called the Mombassa cat, from the East of Africa, is said to
  have a short coat of a wiry texture. There are, of course, no cats
  indigenous to Australia. An American writer gives it as his opinion
  that a certain strain of Australian cats is derived from imported
  Siamese cats. A specimen we possessed last year, which was born on a
  ship during the passage from Australia, and which exactly resembled
  its dam, certainly had every appearance of being of Eastern origin. It
  had the marten-shaped head, and a triple kink in the tail; its voice
  also resembled that of the Siamese. In colour it was grey, with darker
  spots.

[Illustration:

  ABYSSINIAN AND INDIAN CATS.

  (_From a Painting by W. Luker, Jun._)
]

[Illustration:

  MANX AND ABYSSINIAN (“SEDGEMERE PEATY” ON THE RIGHT).

  (_Photo: A. R. Dresser._)
]

  A very taking variety is the Abyssinian. A good specimen should very
  strongly resemble what one might well expect the Egyptian cat to
  become after generations of domestication. Since the death of
  “Sedgemere Bottle” and “Sedgemere Peaty” there have been no cats
  penned of such superlative merit as were these two specimens. The
  photograph of “Sedgemere Peaty” which we give hardly does justice to
  the cat. The colour of an Abyssinian should be a sort of reddish-fawn,
  each individual hair being “ticked” like that of a wild rabbit—hence
  the popular name of “bunny cat.” The great difficulty in breeding
  these cats is their tendency to come too dark and too heavily striped
  on the limbs; the face should be rather long, the tail short and
  thick, and the ears large. These points are well shown by “Little
  Bunny Teedle Tit,” first in the Abyssinian class at the 1902 Crystal
  Palace cat show, though in colour she was not the best penned. The
  Abyssinian should not be a large, coarse cat. A small cat of delicate
  colouring and with the above-mentioned body properties is by far to be
  preferred to the large, coarse, dark specimens one sees winning under
  some all-round judges, merely because of their size.

  More than any other varieties have the foreign cats suffered from the
  negligence of show committees and the awful judging of all-round
  judges, _plus_ the equally awful reports furnished by all-round
  reporters! At the best, knowledge of the different varieties of
  foreign cats is absolutely in its infancy. It should be the aim of
  large shows to provide, whenever possible, judges for these
  interesting strangers who do really take some interest in them. I am
  bound to say that of late years the National Cat Club has done its
  best to meet the wishes of owners in this respect, and with gratifying
  results, as witness the good classes at the Crystal Palace show, where
  there were no fewer than eleven Abyssinians penned—a record number!

  The Cat Club, on the other hand, has persistently neglected them,
  having on almost every occasion handed them over to some all-round
  judge who knows little and cares less about them, with the natural
  result that exhibitors are disgusted. Take, for instance, the last
  show, when a very dark, almost sooty Abyssinian was placed above a
  very fair specimen merely because the latter had about a dozen white
  hairs on its throat! The value of the winner may be gauged from the
  fact that its owner, a lady well known in the cat world, expressed her
  intention of having him neutered and keeping him merely as a pet. The
  same judge, in dividing the prizes amongst the Manx cats, appeared to
  think the colour of the throat of far more importance than the shape
  of the hind quarters in this section. Again, of what value does the
  reporter flatter himself his writings can be when we read in a
  so-called critique of a _spotted_ Geoffroy’s cat and of an ocelot that
  they are “pretty _tiger-marked_ specimens”? We wonder if the gentleman
  ever saw a tiger.

  There is much that is fascinating—much, nay almost all—to learn, the
  most beautiful colours and arrangements of markings to be studied, by
  those who will devote their attention to foreign cats. To the search
  for something new we owe the beautiful Siamese. Will no one pay some
  attention to the other varieties of the feline tribe from distant
  lands? They are well worth it, and the addition of more foreign cats
  at our shows would be interesting and instructive.

                                                           H. C. BROOKE.

[Illustration:

  GEOFFROY’S WILD CAT.

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]




[Illustration:

  “THE STORM KING.”

  OWNED BY MISS C. WALLACE.
  (_Photo: Lewis Studio, East Brady, Pa._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXVII.
                            CATS IN AMERICA.


[Illustration:

  “RADO.”

  BLUE, OWNED BY MRS. KRESS.
  (_Photo: Branch, Minneapolis._)
]

  A review of the cat fancy in America carries us over so vast an
  expanse of territory, that it is not easy at one fell swoop really to
  do it justice. The only way that seems feasible is to take the fancy
  by districts; and as the cat fancy—exemplified by shows—may be said to
  have arisen in the east, this district should, I think, have the pride
  of place, though it has for a time to give way to the reign of the cat
  further towards the setting of the sun.

  On referring to Mrs. Pierce’s notes, it will be seen that Maine had
  its cat shows long before we had—some of us—come to America. The cat
  fancy—as it is now—in America may have been said to have sprung into a
  steady existence with the first show held in the Madison Square
  Garden, New York, on May 8th, 1895. This show was organised by Mr.
  James T. Hyde, an Englishman, who has been closely identified with the
  horse shows at the Garden for many years, and the idea of holding a
  cat show came to him suddenly, from having attended the Crystal Palace
  show.

  The first cat show in New York was a great success from the time the
  doors opened till its close, though the temperature—which was for part
  of the time as high as 96 degrees—was hard upon the cats, especially
  those that had just come from England. When we returned home the
  morning after the show there was a white frost! Part of the judging
  was done—and well done—by the late Dr. Huidekoper, who had picked up a
  good deal of his cat lore while a medical student at Paris and
  Edinburgh and in London. Miss Hurlburt and Mr. T. Farrer Rackham were
  the other judges.

  In regard to this show—which marks the beginning of the cat fever in
  America, that spread outside of the State of Maine—I think I ought to
  point out what was chiefly remarkable, and the parts of the show that
  were destined to bear upon the future. In the first place, the prize
  for the best cat in the show was won by a brown tabby—a native, or, as
  some people designate them, Maine cats. This cat was in every way a
  good one; but he was a gelding, and, of course, in May, much ahead of
  the breeding cats as to plumage; but, still, there was little
  dissatisfaction at the awards. Of English cats there were not more
  than about eight, and several died soon after; and of all those shown
  at this our first show the only ones that have really made any mark or
  real impression upon the cat fancy in America may be mentioned “King
  Humbert,” “Topaz,” “Minnie,” and “The Banshee.” The first named were
  all brown or grey tabbies, the last a white. Cats bred from these are
  still winning, and their descendants keep their names green in the
  annals of present-day stud books.

  White cats had always been popular in America, and the first show
  produced specimens as good as, or even better than I have ever seen in
  this city; up to now, in fact, we have never had anything to beat
  “Ajax,” who made his first and last bow to the public here.

  No other shows occurred for some time till the autumn, when an
  exhibition was held at Newburgh, sixty miles up the Hudson River, to
  be repeated the next year, with the New York show of 1896 in between.
  At this latter great improvement had been made in colours and
  varieties; and, in fact, all concerned had made considerable advance
  in the meantime as to knowledge of different varieties of cats.

  At the second show in New York a club was formed, intended to be the
  National, but it died, and affairs were in a comatose condition as
  regards shows in New York until the consent of Mr. Crawford, the
  manager of the poultry show, was obtained for the holding of a cat
  show in January, 1902, in the concert hall which opens out of the main
  hall at Madison Square. This show, though a small one, was well
  attended, and though the entries only numbered about 110, the quality
  of many of the cats was very much ahead of the five years before, and
  the classes of silvers were good enough for any country. The impetus
  gained by this show and the results obtained were not overestimated by
  those who promoted the show, and the bringing together of many staunch
  breeders who had sprung up in the meantime made it possible to
  organise the Atlantic Cat Club, which has gathered such headway in the
  year of its existence that it is becoming one of the most powerful
  factors in the American cat fancy. The show held at Madison Square in
  1903, with the fine collection of challenge cups and the many other
  valuable specials, speaks to the gathering interest and the strength
  of the fancy in the district, and the club is being every day still
  further strengthened; and, if the treasury balance is any indication,
  the future of the Atlantic Cat Club will be very marked, especially as
  many people of wealth and influence are being enrolled upon the books
  and are becoming most enthusiastic upholders of the cat in New York.

  In discussing the eastern affairs, we must not leave out the Boston
  shows, which have been a steady factor for some years, and gave
  opportunities to the more northern cats to meet and compete together.
  These shows have been kept alive by Mr. T. Farrer Rackham, to a great
  extent, and from the opening of the cat fancy up to now he has been a
  steady promoter of the interests of the cat, and has steadily worked
  to keep up the interest.

  In thinking of the breeders of the eastern portion of this continent
  we have to range over a good deal of territory, and even the State of
  New York alone takes us quite out west, and from Mrs. Conlisk (who
  lives at Gowanda, and who owns “Bitterne Silver Chieftain” and a
  daughter of “Whychwood,” besides “Silver Belle,” who came from England
  lately) our thoughts drift down to Pittsburg to Mrs. L. T. Hodges, who
  is making a speciality of smokes and silvers, and has commenced well
  by winning in kittens at Cleveland with “Wahanita,” “Southampton,” and
  “The Dusky Pilgrim”—a capital smoke, since sold for £50. Mrs. Mix,
  although in New York State, lives 180 miles to the westward of New
  York City; but, still, the effect the cats that she has imported from
  England have had upon the young stock and the future of our cats in
  certain lines has been very marked. As a sire of good ones no cat has
  exceeded “King of the Silvers,” and his children have been picked on
  several occasions for best in show, and the influence that these may
  have in the future cannot yet be fully estimated. The winnings of this
  cattery have been many, but as the home of good breeding stock and as
  the practical founder of a strain for the future this cattery is
  destined to rank very high in our annals. At the Old Fort cattery
  reside “King of the Silvers,” “Jack Frost,” “Tortie Diana Fawe,” “Lady
  Lollypop,” and many other good ones, and from this cattery to many
  parts of the country have gone cats that for type and quality have not
  been excelled.

  Not far from here—at Saratoga—is the summer residence of Dr.
  Ottolengui’s cats, under the care of Mrs. Hall, and these at the
  present time are doing a great deal of winning, not so much by cats
  purchased as by home-bred ones. For instance, I may mention “Lord
  Lossie,” who has some of the cream of the English blood in his veins;
  and lately has come to this cattery “Sir Robert,” the black, a winner
  at the Crystal Palace, and who repeated his triumphs at other shows
  here. “Dollie Dutton,” a black daughter of “Persimmon,” is largely
  aiding this cattery as a mother and a show cat.

  Dr. Ottolengui’s advent into the fancy in January, 1902, as secretary
  of the Atlantic Club gave an impetus to things in general that only
  future times can show the full effect. The cat fraternity needed an
  organiser and a worker to bring it together, and he was found just at
  the right time.

[Illustration:

  THE OLD FORT CATTERY.
]

[Illustration:

  MRS. COLBURN AND HER WHITE PERSIAN “PARIS.”

  (_Photo: F. Schnabel, Chicago._)
]

  Miss Lincoln, of Worcester, Massachusetts, has done quite a little
  work for the good of the majority; but has not had the best of luck
  with her cats so far, and Mrs. A. G. Brown, of Melrose, Massachusetts,
  is a steady breeder of whites and other colours, and she has in her
  cattery “His Majesty,” the white that has won many prizes and is the
  sire of winners.

  Mrs. Neel, at Urbana, New York, established a cattery, and has been a
  very hard worker in the cause, doing good from her experience in a
  medical way, by writing for the papers, by upholding the shows—often a
  good distance from home—and by the general support she has afforded to
  all who made use of the help she was willing to give.

  Whilst in this direction I must not forget Mr. C. H. Jones, who
  commenced as a breeder and exhibitor, though his business kept him
  away from home a great deal; yet the fever grew upon him until he
  started a newspaper called _The Cat Journal_, which, no doubt, is one
  of the principal factors in keeping up the interest in the cat in
  general. Though on account of Mr. Jones’s other business engagements
  it is not possible for him to report shows, he brings out this paper
  monthly at great personal cost to himself and with little chance of
  profit on anything like a fitting scale at present; so that we may say
  that, considering the work of the paper is done after business hours
  and is largely supported by his own purse, we cannot help but think
  that it is most probable the cat family never found a more
  enthusiastic and disinterested devotee in the whole course of its
  history. Mr. Jones gave up his exhibition cats, and yet for sheer love
  of the race and from motives of pure humanity he still continues to
  move heaven and earth for their support, and must always be reckoned
  one of the foremost exponents of the cat in America, and one of the
  staunchest friends the cat ever had.

  Among fanciers in the vicinity of New York must be enumerated Miss A.
  L. Pollard, who has imported and bred a few good cats, and has made a
  name for herself with “Omar,” by “St. Anthony.” Miss Pollard’s place
  is situated at Elizabeth, New Jersey, about fifteen miles from New
  York, and so is practically in the metropolitan district. “Purity,”
  the white which was so successful in England, and the tortoiseshell
  “Woodbine,” are factors in this cattery, which is quite a large one,
  and very well-arranged. The crops of kittens have been most
  successfully reared and distributed, in fact with more success than
  many of our fanciers have been able to show.

  Mrs. W. S. Hofstra, the president of the Atlantic Cat Club, lives on
  Long Island, the other side of New York, and devotes herself to her
  Siamese and Persians, and has had a very decided influence in the
  development of the club over which she so ably presides.

  The Lindenhurst Cattery at Ridgefield, New Jersey, is also becoming
  prominent, and in Brooklyn the Misses Ward have done very good work
  and have reared some fine cats and kittens. The keynote of this
  establishment has been “Robin,” an orange tabby son of “Persimmon,”
  who seems to breed back to his sire, and begets a good many brown
  tabbies as well as oranges.

  We must not leave New York State without remembering Mrs. F. L.
  Norton, of Cazenovia, who has built one of the most beautiful
  catteries in America, and has spared no expense or trouble to stock it
  with good cats; and here reside “Sussex Timkins,” “Sweetheart,” and
  many others known to fame.

  Mrs. Champion, now settled at Hart Park, New Brighton, Staten Island,
  New York, with her two daughters, is doing a great deal for the cats
  of America, and the two Misses Champion will probably have to do for
  some time a good deal of the judging for us. Mrs. Champion’s cats did
  well at the first New York show at which they made their appearance,
  and “Lord Argent,” “Silver Flash,” “Argent Puffy,” “Moonbeam II.,” and
  “Lord Sylvester” are becoming household words. “Argent Moonbeam II.”
  was best in the show of January, 1903.

  Mrs. Gotwalts, of Pottstown, Pennsylvania, must not be omitted from
  the eastern contingent, for she has the nucleus of a good cattery, and
  owns a son of “Blue Boy II.” called “Amesh,” and she has some
  “Persimmon” blood in the cattery, and also some of the smoke blood of
  the “Backwell” strain obtained from Mrs. Harold James. Mrs. Gotwalts
  keeps fine cats, and is very fond of breeding her own, in which she
  takes much pride.

  Mrs. Brown, of Millerton, New York, has bred and kept cats for some
  time, but does not favour the shows much.

[Illustration:

  BRUSHWOOD CATTERY.

  (_Photo: F. Schnabel, Chicago._)
]

  Washington has come to the fore of late, but has not within her
  borders many regular breeders outside of Mrs. Hazen Bond, who
  exhibited with a good deal of success during the season of 19011902,
  and Miss Eleanor Burritt, who most successfully brought to a
  termination a good show in Washington in December, 1902; and this
  will, no doubt, be followed by others in years to come.

  Our travels in search of cats do not take us very far south, for in
  these regions the fleas alone make the rearing of cats in anything
  like numbers an impossibility. Mrs. B. M. Gladding most pluckily tried
  it at Memphis, Tennessee, but has been obliged to give it up, though
  she was one of our most promising cat lovers.

  The Connecticut cats bid fair to be quite a factor in the American
  race for prominence in catty matters, and within the borders of
  Connecticut we have to record a few breeders. In 1903 we have a show
  at Stamford, Connecticut, which is an important place, and where the
  show now begun might assume quite extensive proportions; for at
  Stamford are many large country houses, and it is a centre that can
  well afford to have the best of everything.

  Connecticut has within her borders the possibilities of future
  greatness, and is at present emerging from comparative obscurity,
  though always having had some good fanciers. Miss Lucy Nicholls was,
  for a time, perhaps one of the best, known, but she died in the spring
  of 1902. Dr. Frank Abbott is stirring up the fanciers of Connecticut,
  and a little while from now there would probably be a good deal more
  to say about this region, which holds such breeders as Mrs.
  Copperberg, Miss Anna Marks, Mrs. Ida Palmer, and others.

  I leave the Maine and the northern division to Mrs. Pierce, who was
  born there, and has known this region and its history for many years,
  and who can cover it so much better.

  Mrs. M. B. Thurston was much missed as an exhibitor, as for a time she
  was very successful, but more with cats she bought than with cats she
  bred.

  Miss K. L. Gage, of Brewster’s, New York, is not now so prominent as
  of yore, but still for a time was energetic in disseminating good
  cats, and was the owner of the silver tabby “Whychwood,” who bids fair
  to leave a name behind him.

  The New York show of 1903 revealed to us that we are making steady
  progress in long-haired silvers, and the probability is that at the
  present time, if we could make up a team of four or five of our best
  and take them to England, we should give a good account of ourselves.

  At this show the blacks, thanks to recent importations, were much
  better than heretofore; and Miss Hurlburt’s “Eddie Fawe,” Dr.
  Ottolengui’s “Sir Robert”—a previous winner at the Palace—and Miss
  Lincoln’s “Jack Fawe” made a trio that we may be proud of.

  The blues were a decided improvement on last year, and so were the
  whites; and Miss Pollard had “Purity” and the blue-eyed “Fairy” put
  down in splendid shape, and won well.

  Orange cats are always pretty popular in America, and are, owing to
  Miss Ward and Mrs. Copperberg, coming well up to the front.

[Illustration:

  MISS L. C. JOHNSTON’S “PERSIMMON SQUIRREL.”

  (_Photo: Finley, Chicago._)
]

  In the silvers Mrs. Champion’s “Argent Moonbeam II.” carried all
  before him in males, and Mrs. Conlisk took first in queens with
  “Silver Belle”—a big one and a good one. The “Blessed Damozel” is
  perhaps our best queen, and there is really nothing to beat her in the
  female division; but she was not put down for competition, as her
  owner does not approve of a four days’ show. Mrs. Mallorie had a big
  strong silver—“Silver Glen”—second to “Argent Moonbeam II.” The silver
  tabbies are coming along well, and so are the smokes, and one—“The
  Dusky Pilgrim,” a son of “The Passionate Pilgrim,” who has been
  altered—was sold for £50. “The Passionate Pilgrim,” a very light and
  massively built cat, promises to be a great loss to breeders, as he is
  an almost complete out-cross, but he has left several good kittens.
  Mrs. Mix, who was judging, brought out some beautiful silvers, and her
  home-bred “Jack Frost” was a notable cat.

[Illustration:

  A RECEPTION ROOM IN A CHICAGO CATTERY.

  (_Photo: S. E. Wright, Chicago._)
]

  “Arlington Hercules,” the brown tabby, made his first appearance in
  New York, and was very much admired. Prices ran high for good cats,
  especially smokes and silvers, as these are new to Americans. The blue
  colour they are more familiar with from the long acquaintance with the
  short-haired blues or Maltese; but there is no denying the fact that
  the blues are always dangerous when it comes to judging for specials,
  for in their all-round quality they show the care that has been
  bestowed upon them in England.

  Old “Tortie Diana Fawe” is still our best tortoiseshell, without much
  apparent chance of being deposed.

  Mr. H. T. Draper—an old Londoner, who has exhibited short-hairs
  steadily since 1895—is still with us, and taking prizes as before; he
  has been a very steady supporter of the short-hairs for years.


                            DISTRICT NO. 2.

  District No. 2, that we shall consider next, is the city and region of
  Chicago, which is not placed second as a matter of its importance, but
  simply comes in in chronological order. The first show to be held
  there was three years after the first in New York, and was promoted
  and managed by Mrs. Leland Norton; and this show was such a decided
  success that a club was formed, called the Chicago Cat Club, which
  held together for some years, but was in the end dwarfed by its rival
  the Beresford Cat Club. This came into being in 1899, and grew to such
  dimensions that the club soon numbered over 300 members, and reached
  in January, 1902, to the highest place by far of any American cat
  club, having at the show in Chicago over 250 cats, which was at least
  100 in excess of any show ever held up to that time in America.

  Not the least important work done by this club was the inauguration of
  a stud book, which has now three volumes, and contains a record of
  nearly all of the cats that have been factors in the development of
  the fancy in America. No doubt a greater part of the success of the
  Beresford Club has been brought about by the energy and management of
  Mrs. Clinton Locke, aided by the corresponding secretary (Miss L. C.
  Johnstone), and it is impossible to compute the work they have done.
  The mass of information collected in the stud books will always be the
  basis for the future, and on this may be built the stud book in use by
  the whole of America.

  The vicinity of Chicago has been the centre of the cat fancy in
  America, and in this city and its vicinity there have been more steady
  breeders and more people who have selected, bred, and reared the best
  cats they could obtain, so that, of course, the shows have been the
  biggest and best ever held in America. The one striking feature of the
  Chicago shows has always been the white long-haired cats.

  Of late another club has started, called the Orange and Cream Club,
  which may be said to have had Chicago for its birth-place, and this
  club flourishes and prospers.

  We can best gauge the Chicago division by looking over the breeders
  and taking a glance at the shows, and as I was judge there at the show
  of 1901 and also in 1902 I have had the opportunity to make
  acquaintance with many of the owners and many of the cats. If we turn
  back to the Beresford Cat Club stud book we find among the officers of
  the year many of our best known breeders, and I commence with Mrs.
  Clinton Locke, the president. It must not be imagined that this was
  her first attempt at cat breeding, for she had been a breeder of
  long-haired cats for years, and I must say I had heard of Mrs. Locke
  many years before I ever had the pleasure of meeting her, and her cats
  were well known before the advent of cat shows. Mrs. Locke has made a
  name with several colours and breeds, and has imported and bred
  Persians, Siamese, Russians, etc., and the last two shows displayed
  the fact that she held a strong hand in most of these. “Melrose
  Lassie”—a blue sent over in 1900 from England by Miss Frances Simpson,
  and who developed into a beautiful quality cat with lovely orange
  eyes—was the best at the Chicago show in 1901. This cat the next year
  was not shown for competition, and the premier honours went to her
  kennel mate “Lupin,” and these two when mated together have produced
  several winners. “Lupin” was bred by Miss Beal, and is by “Romaldkirk
  Midshipmite” _ex_ “Daisy Belle,” by “Romaldkirk Toga.” “Lupin” was
  selected at Romaldkirk by myself when a promising kitten of six
  months, and to say that he fulfilled his promise is sufficient, for he
  grew in size and stature, and retained his beautiful golden eyes. He
  is now owned by Mrs. White.

  The winning kitten of the 1901 show was from the two (“Melrose Lassie”
  and “Lupin”), and Dr. Ottolengui’s two winning queens in 1902—“Lady
  Lola” and “Isis”—are bred from the same two. It is curious to watch
  how blood will tell, for in the winning blue male at Washington,
  December, 1902, we had some of the same blood again in “Lord Lossie,”
  by “Lucullus” _ex_ “Dollie Dutton,” who was by “Persimmon,” “Lucullus”
  being a son of “Lupin” _ex_ “Lucy Claire”—late the property of Mrs.
  Falconer Sinclair, and known in England as “Baby Flossie.” Among other
  celebrities of Mrs. Locke’s cattery were “Lord Gwynne”—the white
  imported from England through the kind offices of Mr. A. A. Clarke—and
  this cat at once made a name for himself as the sire of “True Blue,”
  “Mars,” “Prosper Le Gai,” and many other good cats. “St. Tudno” and
  “Blackbird” were two blacks that did well for Mrs. Locke, and “St.
  Tudno” sired the winning black in 1902, who very nearly annexed the
  prize for best in show. The “Beadle,” another of Mrs. Locke’s blues
  that must not be forgotten, was a cat bred by Mrs. Dean, and he did
  yeoman service in his time, and has left many promising young ones.
  Mrs. Locke has been the owner of good Siamese, and from “Siam” and
  “Sally Ward” she bred “Calif” and “Bangkok,” who carried all before
  them at the Chicago show of 1902, and were the best pair I have seen
  this side the water, and would have given a good account of themselves
  anywhere.

  Mrs. Locke’s Russians—“Blue Royal” and “Schuyla”—were respectively
  obtained from Mr. Towlerton, of Wakefield, and Mrs. Carew Cox, and
  have passed into other hands after winning many prizes. Among other
  Chicago ladies who have been very prominent in cat breeding for many
  years we must not forget Mrs. Cratty, who built up a beautiful strain
  of whites from a pair she obtained in Switzerland twelve years ago.
  Mrs. Cratty has now given up breeding, finding the rearing of kittens
  too great a tax upon her powers; but as a consistent and steady
  breeder, instead of simply a buyer and exhibitor of other people’s
  efforts, she will be much missed.

  Mrs. W. Eames Colburn has at the present time probably one of the
  largest and most successful catteries in America. In 1901 she made a
  reputation with her cat “Paris,” which was bred by herself, and which,
  besides winning in the strongest of company, has been a most
  successful and prolific sire of white kittens, a good many of which
  have taken honours on the bench. Mrs. Colburn also possesses two very
  fine blacks—“Blackthorn,” which she imported from Asia, and
  “Blackberry Fawe,” sent to her from England by Miss Frances Simpson.
  Many people who have visited the cattery of late are heard to speak
  enthusiastically of the quality of the inmates and of the perfection
  of the appointments and the way the cattery is fitted up. Miss L. C.
  Johnstone, the ever busy secretary of the Beresford Club, has been a
  prominent exhibitor, and has taken many honours with “Blue Flash,”
  “Persimmon Squirrel,” and “Kew Laddie.” “Blue Flash” grew into a
  beautiful cat, taking at the Chicago show, 1902, the special for best
  queen in the show.

  Mrs. Jerome H. Pratt has usually been an exhibitor at the Chicago
  show. She won her championship with “Sir Henry Irving,” a very richly
  marked silver tabby by “Whychwood,” who was by “Charlbury Silver
  King.” Mrs. Tolman has always been an energetic officer of the
  Beresford Club, and is very energetic at the shows, and in cats her
  fancy runs to creams, of which she has brought out several winners.
  Mrs. L. Nicholson (formerly Mrs. F. Fisk Green) has been a prominent
  and good supporter of past Chicago shows.

  Mrs. F. W. Story has been known as a successful breeder of orange cats
  and some whites, and in having obtained possession of the fine orange
  “Hamish” will, no doubt, find herself in a few years in the position
  of being a prominent breeder of this colour. “Bunch,” the former stud
  cat belonging to this cattery, did good service in his day, and is
  responsible for a few winners; but the absence of any details in the
  American catalogues of the shows makes it difficult to arrive at a
  very accurate estimate of all his performances.

[Illustration:

  MRS. E. N. BARKER.

  ONE OF THE PIONEERS OF THE AMERICAN CAT FANCY.
  (_Photo: J. Hübner, Rutherford, N.J._)
]

  In speaking of Chicago we shall have to include Miss Hazelton, who has
  turned out several winners, all descended from “Sapphire,” that she
  bought of Mrs. Barker in 1896. Mrs. Fred E. Smith has been one of the
  shining lights among the Chicago breeders, and has been a consistent
  winner at Chicago shows; she now holds a strong hand in the white
  division, and was fortunate enough to pick up on the Pacific coast a
  fine male in “Light of Asia,” who was imported from Asia.
  “Swampscott,” another good cat, makes his appearance every year, and
  usually finds himself in the prize list, and he has the most
  fascinating way of turning up in splendid coat at most of the shows.
  This cat is a pure Maine cat, if we may so call him; but as an example
  of vigour and good health, year after year, he stands pre-eminent.
  Mrs. Smith is now building up a strain of silvers of her own
  composing, which may be very valuable to the attenuated strains of the
  ordinary breeder, who is only too glad to welcome something that will
  be an out-cross and will not spoil the silver colour.

  Mrs. C. E. S. Blinn is another breeder who is always present at the
  shows, and whose cats usually find their way into the prize list. Mrs.
  Blinn is a consistent breeder who does not always make herself very
  prominent, but she obtains the results on the quiet.

  Mrs. Blanche Robinson has bred several of her own prize-winners, and
  her black “Othello,” of which we spoke previously, is more than a good
  one. The name of Mrs. McKenzie will always be associated with “Prince
  of Orange,” whose name will designate his colour, and this cat is a
  hard one to beat in any orange class, for he is very rich and deep in
  tint.

  In 1902 there were two shows held in Chicago by the Beresford Cat
  Club, one in December, 1902, or just a month earlier than usual,
  really representing what would have been, in the natural course, the
  1903 show. This show did not reveal to us any very great changes;
  there are a few new home-bred ones, but the principal wins in the
  highest of the specials were made by imported cats. The advent of some
  nice new whites was welcomed, as usual, and “Toddles” is an addition
  to our list of white males, and is a nice cobby sort, bred from “Light
  of Asia.” “Little Miss Eiger,” one of Mrs. Cratty’s breeding and own
  particular strain, won in the blue-eyed white queens. “Lupin” kept on
  his winning career, and took the prize for the best in show once more,
  and this, under judges who had never seen him before, seems to endorse
  the estimate made of him heretofore. “Melrose Lassie,” shown this year
  again for competition, took the first prize in blue queens. Blacks,
  taking the open and novice together, came out strongly, and black
  seems to be one of our strongest colours. “Prince of Orange” is still
  invincible at this show in orange males, and the orange queens are
  coming along nicely. Mrs. Sarmiento’s “John Bull,” in much better form
  than last year, again sweeps the deck in the silver class. The silver
  tabbies still continue to prosper. “Arlington Hercules” went down, for
  the first time, at this show, largely on a question of eye colour.

[Illustration:

  “SILVER HAIR” AND “TIPTOE.”

  OWNED BY MRS. PIERCE.
  (_Photo: Howland, Cincinnati._)
]

  Smokes in the year gone by have not made much advance in the West, and
  this year the cream females outnumber the males, and a descendant of
  “Kew Laddie” takes the eye of the public with colour, coat, and
  points. Mrs. C. A. White, who in the spring bought “Lupin” and
  “Melrose Lassie,” was most successful at this show, and is probably
  destined to be one of our successful breeders, and with the
  co-operation of her husband (Dr. White), who is very clever with
  animals, the assistance she will receive will very largely help to
  bring her to the front.

  Mrs. White is the lady who is organising a home for deserted dogs and
  cats, with a hospital attached, and on a scale and with a foresight
  that is certainly remarkable. Considering that Dr. White is the head
  of the Veterinary College in Chicago, the benefit that may accrue to
  the dogs and cats in the future from the opportunity of humane study
  that this will give will be incalculable. This, when put alongside of
  the horrible revelations that we are treated to anent vivisection,
  may, I hope, have the effect of swinging the balance the other way,
  and help to show the rash experimenters that there are people in this
  world who recognise the individuality of the animal creation, and that
  we who use them for our own ends and have crowded them out of their
  place in Nature to a certain extent should at the same time look at
  the other side of the picture, and should consider the debt we owe to
  them during their short lives—that humanity, practised towards the
  dumb animals, is nothing more than their just due.

  A great many of the same cats won at Chicago at this last show,
  “Lupin” being again best cat in show, and among the younger brigade
  the most remarkable was a lovely cream kitten owned by Mrs. Locke,
  which is by “Kew Laddie.” “Toodles,” a white son of “Light of Asia,”
  was the best white.


                            DISTRICT NO. 3.

  District No. 3, which we shall assign to the Detroit contingent, is
  certainly one of our most important. The Detroit fanciers are situated
  more in a central position—that is, as regards getting to several
  shows a year, for Detroit is accessible to Cleveland, Rochester,
  Cincinnati, and Chicago, all of which are good shows; so this gives
  the Detroit fanciers the chance to come out at several shows besides
  their own in the course of the winter.

  At Detroit reside several of our most enterprising and successful
  breeders and exhibitors; for the Detroit fancier is not content simply
  to stay at home and only take part in the one local show of the year,
  but is to be found at a good many, even so far away as New York. In
  the list of these we place Mrs. F. J. Sarmiento and Mrs. Dwight
  Cutler, who own the well-known cats “Arlington Hercules,” “Bar Abdul,”
  “Marriame,” “Dingley Belle,” “Champion Floriana,” “Brownie Pink,” etc.
  The history of these and their wins is written on the sands of time
  and will not be lost for many years, and they represent the enterprise
  of buying and importing the best English strains and taking care of
  them.

  Mrs. Owen, at the Owena Cattery, has been an important factor at many
  shows for the last two years. Mrs. W. M. Chapman is well known to
  show-goers, and has won a good many honours, and rather in a way not
  too common here—that is, by breeding her own cats. This has been done
  with skill and patience; for Mrs. Chapman has selected the parents
  with forethought, and has not been one of those who has paid large
  sums for breeding stock. The keynote, more or less, of this strain has
  been a fine brown tabby obtained from Canada some years ago—viz.
  “Prince Rupert,” who goes back in his pedigree to cats owned by Mr. A.
  A. Clarke, and also to some imported by Mrs. Cumberland, of Port Hope,
  Ontario.

[Illustration:

  MISS R. WARD’S “ROBIN.”

  (_Photo: Gardner & Co., Brooklyn, N.Y._)
]

  Mrs. W. J. Stanton deserves mention in the Detroit list as a breeder
  of short-haired orange and tortoiseshells, with and without white, and
  I must say I watch this lady’s career with interest, for she has
  brought out several winners in her specialities, and is probably
  destined to make things interesting in the short-haired division.

  Mrs. N. C. Ellis is another of the Detroit breeders likely to be heard
  of at show times, and Mr. and Mrs. Franklin have both made a name for
  themselves with cats of their own breeding. We must not forget Mrs.
  Hemenway, who was the owner of “Royal Bengal,” a fine brown tabby, and
  several good orange cats bred by herself.

  Cincinnati is our next point of interest, though I have not had the
  opportunity of meeting so many of the Ohio breeders as I should like,
  but this is destined, I feel sure, to be one of the prominent fancier
  sections in the future. In passing through Ohio we must never forget
  that Ohio has the two important shows of Cleveland and Cincinnati, and
  holds within her gates Mrs. E. R. Pierce, whose tastes run to orange
  and creams; Mrs. Chas. McCloud, of Marysville, Ohio; and Mrs. Wagner,
  of Sandusky, who brought a very fine lot of long-haired cats to
  Cleveland this year. Mrs. Wagner is well known, and has been for some
  time a breeder of blacks; her silver tabby “Queenie” was the sensation
  of the Cleveland show in 1902, and is destined to win a great deal
  more in the future.

  Mrs. Ferris has developed a faculty for bringing out good orange and
  brown tabby cats. Mrs. C. F. Russell, Mount Pleasant, Michigan, is
  also well known. Mr. G. G. Brown, of East Cleveland, Ohio, deserves
  more than a passing mention, for though not a cat breeder, he has made
  it his business for two years to organise and carry through two of the
  best shows in the country at Cleveland, which have been of material
  help to the fancy, and did a great deal of good. What cats are kept at
  the Brown homestead are short-hairs and some nice Manx, but in other
  lines, such as poultry and dogs, Mr. Brown is hard to beat.

[Illustration:

  THREE LITTLE GRANDCHILDREN OF “PERSIMMON.”

  OWNED BY MRS. HOFSTRA.
  (_Photo: Maiceau, New York._)
]

  Mrs. D. E. Peters, of North Baltimore, Ohio, has owned quite a few
  good cats, including some that came from Romaldkirk, but of late she
  has signified her intention of selling out.

  Indianapolis, though rather south-westerly, is more in this division,
  and contains a good many cats and some breeders, though they have not
  been able up to now to come to shows and meet the more northern and
  eastern cats. Miss N. H. Wilson, whose prefix is “Spokane,” is well
  known; and so is the cattery of Mrs. Ida M. Shirk, who has carried on
  the business under the name of the Linden Cattery.


                     DISTRICT NO. 4.—CANADIAN CATS.

  The two pioneers of the cat in Canada—_i.e._ the two who were most
  prominent as breeders when I went to the first Canadian shows—were
  Mrs. Cumberland, of Port Hope, Ontario, whose prefix or affix of
  “Demain” bespeaks her early efforts. Even earlier than Mrs.
  Cumberland, the cats belonging to Mr. A. Burland, an Englishman,
  attained prominence, and the blood that he brought from England—mostly
  from Mr. A. A. Clarke—is now diffused into or among many of our
  best-known catteries.

  We had a dim suspicion—in fact, more than a dim suspicion—that there
  was tucked away in Canada more than one good cat; and so, being in
  Toronto, we made an exploration, thanks to the help of Mrs. Ellis and
  Mr. Boyd.

  Our first visit was to the Pioneer Cattery, where we found the ravages
  of gastritis had been severely felt only the week before, and, of
  course, some of the very best, including some we had portrayed lately,
  had succumbed. The most noted inmate was “Marie,” a cat of good type,
  very sound and in good condition, with capital eyes of a good, rich
  orange—she should breed something good; and—we hope we can say it
  without offending anyone—this cat, old as she is, is the peer of any
  brown tabby put down in America last year, and we only hope she will
  live to breed one more good litter, which should be retained to
  perpetuate the race.

  It was only a short walk to Mrs. Mallock’s, who is rejoicing in the
  possession of a very cute young black male, capital in style, with a
  lovely coat and colour, named “Furzo,” bred by Mr. Empey, of Montreal.

  After lunch we drove to see Miss Cox, who has the same nice white male
  we saw there six years ago, and he has done yeoman service in the
  meantime. “Cadi,” a young brown tabby male, is a year old, and a
  credit to any cattery. Miss Cox is also the possessor of a nice white
  queen by “Fluff,” who is responsible for some of the good kittens.

  We next journeyed to the home of Mrs. Bell, who has one queen and two
  very strong kittens. Mrs. Bell, however, intends to strengthen her
  cattery soon by the acquisition of some good queens.

  Leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bell, we journeyed to the ferry and went over to
  the Island, getting a glimpse of the beauties of Toronto and a fine
  view of the water front and the suburban attractions. We landed at the
  house of Mrs. McAdley, and were introduced to the grandest lot of
  brown tabbies we ever remember to have seen, outside, perhaps, Mrs.
  Cutler’s, which we should not like to compare, not having seen them.
  We may safely say that nothing so good was shown last year as Mrs.
  McAdley’s. At the head of the list is “Prince,” a grand old cat,
  imported from Ireland seven years ago, and there are few cats extant
  to-day, or ever were, that can take his measure. His head is
  magnificent, and he is short on the leg, has plenty of bone, grand
  colour, no weak colouring around the lips or chin, and, what is more,
  he sires the right sort. “Paddy,” his daughter, is the peer of any
  brown tabby queen we have seen in the ring for a long time, and we saw
  nothing to beat her in England two years ago.

  Mrs. Ellis has adopted the kittens, and these will not pass out of
  Canada under pretty stiff figures, and wherever they appear in the
  show room they will have to be reckoned with by the very best.

  We got back to our hotel at 11 p.m., after a most enjoyable day among
  enthusiastic and painstaking fanciers, and we had unfortunately to
  leave out one house for lack of time. Another cat enthusiast who has
  some good Romaldkirk stock to sell—viz. Miss Cottle—journeyed over
  from Kingston on purpose to have a catty talk at the dog show. We feel
  sure that the Canadian contingent will have to be reckoned with in the
  future as breeders, and in brown tabbies are a hard proposition. As
  soon as they get hold of some better cats of the other colours they
  will be up with us, though we do not see some of the best of the other
  colours, notably Miss Cottle’s and the Montreal blacks.


                            DISTRICT NO. 5.

  California is a district by itself, which can never be in active touch
  with the east, and the future cat of California may probably be the
  Siamese, for the demand for them is growing every day, and the climate
  favours them. California is too warm to coat the long-hairs, and the
  vermin are too promiscuous in most parts to make the rearing or caring
  for the long-hairs a pleasant occupation. Mrs. C. H. Hoag and Mrs. C.
  E. Martling have been two of the most energetic in promoting the cat
  as a fancy in California, and several shows have been held, but at
  present—in the language of the slang—“there is not much doing,” except
  in Siamese; so that in taking a look over the past from a high point
  and looking down, we cannot say that up to now we can point to many
  families or strains that have yet made their mark in America; that is,
  a mark that is very conspicuous, for there has not been time. But
  still there are signs of strains that will be matters of history, and
  there are families that may be called distinctive, because the
  descendants win under different judges with sufficient regularity to
  make this noticeable.

  Some of these I have sketched in my other notes; but probably the most
  far-reaching of the families that win in all colours is the “Humbert”
  strain, which emanates from Mrs. Barker’s “King Humbert,” imported in
  1895. Not only did this cat sire a lot of winners himself, but cats
  with the “Humbert” blood to the third and fourth generation, such as
  “Prince of Orange,” etc., are still winning all over the country.
  Judging by present appearances, the “King of the Silvers” family,
  coupled with his sire “Bitterne Silver Chieftain,” is forging to the
  front, and is marking out a path of its own as regards winnings in
  public. One cat—“The Blessed Damozel,” bred by Mrs. Barker in England,
  and by “Champion Lord Southampton” _ex_ “Peggy,” by “Champion Silver
  Mist,” is making a big reputation through her children, and the second
  generation is now beginning to win as did the first. This blood is
  very successful wherever found, and this is, no doubt, largely owing
  to the kittens by “King of the Silvers,” though “The Passionate
  Pilgrim,” who goes back through his sire to “Whychwood,” is as good as
  anything Mrs. Barker has yet produced; and this is saying a good deal,
  for she has bred a great many winners in many colours, and the effect
  of cats imported or bred by her is seen at every show we go to, and
  the ramifications of blood lines spread over America would make a book
  in itself.

  The very best cats from England will win here every time they are
  shown in good trim, and in picking cats for best in show the greater
  part of the prizes go to English cats, or to cats bred from English
  parents. The crossing of the natives with the English is very
  successful in some cases, and, no doubt, the changes of blood will in
  the future work to the good of the majority, for in size, shape, and
  coat many of the American cats are very good, but fail in type and
  quality.

  The cat fever in its present form may be said to be so comparatively
  new as an industry that it has not been easy to give a comprehensive
  view of the whole. Some exhibitors have come up suddenly, and after
  seeming to have carried all before them have disappeared as suddenly
  as they came, while others have kept on right through, though these
  are few by comparison with the great possibilities. We are now passing
  through the early days of organisation, and the future is not always
  too clear; but, still, I have tried to give the most prominence to
  those who have braved the light of day and have supported the shows,
  and this, really, is the only practical test of where we any of us
  stand. If I were to enumerate all I have heard of, and the many people
  who are interested in, the cat in America, there is no doubt but that
  a good deal more space than I have at my command would be used two or
  three times over; and such is the size of the country that it is only
  possible to give a light sketch of the whole; and I do not expect that
  I shall, or anyone else could, begin to do justice to, or could in any
  way really gauge, the number of people interested in cats in America.
  In ten years’ time I expect to see cities that now bring together
  perhaps 100 cats, then having shows containing hundreds; for in most
  places, even where shows have been held, we have hardly scratched the
  surface, and in perhaps only one out of 100 important and possible
  towns have we ever had a show. The extent of the possibility of the
  future can only be slightly grasped by those who have touched the
  fancy, but those of us who have worked for many years at it see signs
  of growth now that may increase the fancy as a snowball will grow—the
  further you roll it the faster it grows in proportion. We are only
  just waking. The future alone can say whether we shall succeed; but we
  must face the fact that in America the cat fancy, as a whole, is an
  impossibility, and that cats as exhibition cats can only, as a
  rule—unless belonging to rich people—meet each other in competition if
  within reasonable distance of each other.

[Illustration:

  AN AMERICAN BEAUTY.

  (_Photo: A. Lloyd, Amsterdam, New York._)
]


                          JUDGING IN AMERICA.

  In 1900, I am not afraid to say, we had not more than two judges
  capable of judging a small show correctly all the way through. To-day
  we have a great many breeders who could do very fair work, and would
  not make many mistakes if the classes were not too big for them. Of
  course, the fact must be recognised here, as elsewhere, that a judge
  improves with experience, and I hazard the opinion that the fewer cats
  he owns the better he may judge, though I personally prefer for my own
  stock a judge who has at some time bred the variety. I cannot say that
  I have found the judging of cats in America a very difficult matter,
  up to now, for classes have been, as a rule, small, and in most cases
  the winners stood out well; and though, no doubt, there have been
  differences of opinion upon what I have done, I have not had many
  qualms of conscience over past doings. The weakest spot in the
  American cat shows has been the tendency of owners to over-estimate
  the value of their cats in many cases, and the disappointment of
  defeat comes sometimes severely upon very enthusiastic people; but
  there is no hope for a fancier who cannot suffer defeat and come again
  for some more, so I think we need not waste our tears upon these, for
  they were never destined to succeed. Want of quality is another weak
  spot we have to contend with, and this often comes from the eye not
  having been trained to the best. Size as a factor of beauty is another
  fetish we have to destroy with a rude hand, but our people are apt
  pupils, and those who stay in the game are very anxious to be on the
  right track, though it will take some a few years longer to learn the
  give and take, to withdraw gracefully, and to admit that there may be
  another side to a question. My own position to-day is that I am as
  much interested in the fancy as ever, but I do not find the necessity
  for doing the work in so severe a manner now, for there are so many
  capable of carrying on what has been done, and the future is pretty
  well assured; so that for the health of the fancy at large it is
  better that too much should not be monopolised by two or three pairs
  of hands, and some of us old-timers who began in 1893 and 1894, and
  before that, are allowing the younger blood to take its share of the
  tasks.

  In judging cats, as in other stock, it seems to me that one of the
  greatest criterions as to the success of our efforts as judges is the
  success in many cases of cats or kittens bred from those we have put
  in the front rank. And only time can tell the force of what we have
  done. If in the future I see cats doing as well as they are this
  season, bred from those I have put in the prize list, and judged by
  other judges, then shall I feel repaid for work done in the past, and
  not until then can I be sure I have been right. It would be impossible
  to go back through the last eight years and their troubles and
  experiences, and though in many cases I know I may have been called a
  “beast,” I hope posterity will say I was a “just beast.”

[Illustration:

  “CHAMPION MISS DETROIT.”

  OWNED BY MRS. GROSE AND MRS. OWEN.
  (_Photo: D. D. Spellman, Detroit._)
]

  It might be as well to refer to the score card to show where in cases
  such as we have had to contend with it has done a great deal of good.
  One hundred points make perfection, and the question arose in one’s
  mind before using the score card as to whether the budding exhibitor
  would be for ever crushed by finding that the cherished one came out
  of the score card ordeal with about 75 points instead of the possible
  100; so that when it has been selected by a club for a show I have
  warned the owners of the danger; but to the everlasting credit of our
  fanciers I may say that I have not had to register a kick because of a
  low score, and many—even novices—were more than pleased with a score
  of eighty. If I may point out a failing in English judging—and we see
  the same thing here in the dog fancy—the criticism is left to the
  reporter, who has not the time or the opportunity for finding the real
  faults nor the space at command to do justice to the exhibits.

  The task of explaining to exhibitors why their animals have lost is
  not an agreeable one; but in a land like this, where nearly all have
  been beginners, this has been an absolute necessity, and the dose must
  be swallowed or no progress is made, and, as in the case of the score
  card, no doubt the having to give a reason is likely to keep us from
  giving prizes to one point at the expense of all the rest. Two great
  factors we have had to consider here are type and quality, the two
  weakest points in our cats; and if we had run to extremes in eye
  colour we should have made no progress in type or perhaps quality.
  Great stress has been laid upon markings in tabby cats, with very good
  results, and we are rapidly accumulating a good lot of
  tabbies—especially in the Detroit district, where tabbies are popular,
  which is a thing to be grateful for. We have never thought it well
  here to discourage the orange tabbies for the sake of unmarked orange,
  and we have some very good orange tabbies whose number is on the
  increase; and if the plain orange can range up beside the orange
  tabbies, all well and good. But I shall be an advocate, if there is a
  danger of one hurting the other, of making separate classes, for we do
  not want to drive out the good orange tabbies, which are very popular,
  and the average American who loves an orange cat at the present moment
  does not care whether it is marked or unmarked.

  Cats with white hair are much in favour, as is the case with Madame
  Ronner and the Continental fanciers; and, if so, there seems to be no
  reason for discouraging them, and we may as well first make up our
  minds to the fact that, in trying to force English ideas down the
  throats of the people of another country with too violent a hand, we
  may do a lasting injury to the fancy at large.

[Illustration:

  “THE COMMISSIONER.”

  (_Photo: Arthur, Detroit._)
]

  Another thing I might refer to, and that is that the average American
  exhibitor does not favour giving prizes to long-haired cats when out
  of coat, and the strength of the fancy and its future popularity lies
  in presenting to the public the cats in their best dress, and this
  mostly is the only logical way we can give out the principal prizes
  and appeal to the good sense of those who come to see them; for the
  general public, when not experts, can only judge from appearance. The
  strength in England lies in the fanciers themselves, who have the
  opportunity of seeing so much more and of learning. Our future here
  lies in being able to gather recruits by presenting the cats to them
  in as perfect a form as possible, and therefore we have to depend upon
  the public. Our shows have to be in the winter, when the cats are in
  coat, and the dangers of exposure to the weather are very great, all
  of which is a good deal to the disadvantage of the fancier.


                             MALTESE CATS.

  A great deal of interest has been taken in England in the subject of
  blue cats in America, which are often called Maltese, and really among
  the rank and file of the public this is the name they go by. So
  celebrated had some strains become that off-coloured cats bred from
  these cats are sometimes called Maltese, and the idea seemed to have
  gained considerable ground that this was a separate breed; but
  evidence of this fact is very much lacking in most parts, and in
  travelling over a good deal of the country and finding them thousands
  of miles apart, I must confess that I have never been able to trace
  the origin of these cats nor to find out any reason for their numbers.

  I have been led to think that they are the same, or were the same, in
  the beginning as the blue Russian or Archangel cat, and that they were
  brought to this country many years ago, and that the name was given
  them by sailors or others. The tradition possibly has been handed down
  in the same way as the name of Angora has remained fastened to the
  long-hairs with the average public here, and will be many more years
  in dying, for the band of fanciers who know better is but a drop in
  the bucket in this great land. No doubt the name of Maltese moved with
  the cat to the west as families moved, for in the case of native-born
  Americans the migration west has been often gradual: thus some moved,
  we will say, as far as Ohio, their sons and daughters moved to
  Illinois, and the next generation went still further, and the
  much-prized Maltese cat drifted on with his name.

  Probably a good many of the so-called Maltese are just blue specimens
  of the ordinary short-haired cat; and, in fact, there has never been
  anyone of my acquaintance who had any ideas as to points or type; but
  the colour was the feature to be looked at. We find Maltese cats of
  the short and cobby type besides the long and more extended species,
  but the latter predominate, and I am inclined to agree with some
  English judges that the fairly long cats with a cleaner cut head are
  the purer type of blue cat. On some, when judging, I find very good
  heads with clean-cut features, round, well-developed cheeks, with
  fairly long bodies, very even in colour. No doubt the preponderance of
  blue cats before the advent of the cat shows was largely owing to the
  selection of blue kittens in the litters, which left a great many blue
  sires to roam the streets by night and sire blue kittens.

  In many cases I have found families who had never heard of cat shows
  that had strains of blue or Maltese cats, and took pride in keeping
  the strain as pure as possible. And one great factor is that the blues
  have always had the name of being excellent mousers, and were valued
  as such. Besides this supposed strong point in their composition, they
  have always had a reputation for great intelligence and of being
  good-tempered and reliable about the house with children and young
  folk.

  Like the Plymouth Rock fowl, the Maltese cat has been one of the
  institutions of the American continent, and there seems to be some
  ground for believing the original tradition connected with the name
  Maltese—that the Maltese cat came from the East and was treasured as
  something out of the common, and fell among friends. Some are light
  and some are dark, and some have the white spot on the chest, but on
  most there is not much evidence of tabby markings; neither do you see
  this in the young kittens in the same way as the Russians are said to
  be at an early age. I have seen five and six pure light blue kittens
  in a litter, and the father and mother were both of the same colour.

  In quite out-of-the-way places you will, upon going to judge the
  short-hairs, find some blues, and often with deep brown eyes; and if I
  were to make a comparison between the average American blue and what I
  saw in England as Russians, I should say the American cats are mostly
  lighter in colour, and do not have quite so glossy coats. Perhaps if
  taken up and selected for a few generations, these features would come
  out more strongly.

  One of the worst features of the popularity of the Maltese, from the
  point of view of the breeder of long-hairs, has been that the blue
  colour has been so common that when the blue Persian was introduced he
  was not, in this country, considered peculiar. Among the Maine cats,
  so-called, the blue or Maltese colour was not at all uncommon, and
  plenty of this colour are to be found. Some people who bred them
  obtained their stock from Paris, and no doubt the Chartreuse blue of
  olden times had a good deal to do with many of these.

  The oldest blue cat I ever saw was one reared on a farm; he had always
  lived out of doors, more or less, and was the farm cat. His age was
  twenty-four years, and as he was born at the same time as the oldest
  son, who was also twenty-four years old, the evidence was pretty good
  that the age was correct.

  It must not be supposed from this that blue cats are so numerous as to
  overshadow other colours in North America, for we have short-hairs in
  all the common colours, and lots of them; but, still, the fact is
  pretty evident that short-haired blues have been a popular colour for
  a long time, and there are so many that everyone, whether cat fancier
  or not, is quite used to the colour. The native-born American, as a
  rule, calls this cat the Maltese, and the name, as I said before, will
  cling for many a day to come. In judging these cats, I must say that
  the proportion of small or short, round-headed cats is small, and that
  these—in America, at least—are not the most common type of blue cat;
  and I, personally, in judging have usually inclined to the more
  lengthy cat with longer face and bigger ears, though I think it is
  possible to find plenty without absolutely mean-looking heads. We do
  not want a ferret’s head on a cat, for there is a happy medium.

[Illustration:

  “AJAX,” BLUE-EYED WHITE.

  OWNED BY MR. W. J. STEVENS.
  (_Photo: Coleman, Westfield, Mass._)
]


                             WILD SPECIES.

  We cannot leave the American exhibition cats without saying a word
  upon the wild species, some of which find their way into the show
  rooms on more than one or two occasions. Of course, the cougar or
  mountain lion—our biggest species—is out of court on account of his
  size; but still, if history is to be believed, this fine animal was
  never injurious to man, and has not been known in recent times to
  attack man, though he is fitted by size and strength to do a great
  deal of damage. The next in order is the lynx, and though this animal
  is pictured as very fierce, there is as much evidence to show, in
  other ways, that if taken young and domesticated, the lynx is amenable
  to reason and is very intelligent, full of humour, and not afflicted
  with excessive nervousness. I have seen specimens exhibited, and one
  in particular that was the constant playmate of a little child; and
  this cat spent four days in a show playing most of the time with all
  the children that came along, and was the coolest and most unconcerned
  cat in the hall. Evidently the lynx shares the great brain power of
  the cat family which those who are well acquainted with cats are
  willing to concede to them, added to a calmness of temperament foreign
  to some of our so-called domesticated breeds that ought to have
  inherited by now, perhaps, more _savoir faire_ under show conditions.

  When on a ranch in the wilds with a few cats and dogs, where quarters
  were limited, I could never see that there was a natural antipathy
  between cats and dogs, for the bitches would rear kittens and _vice
  versâ_, and the friendship was great between them—so much so that they
  would play together for hours, and there was no danger in leaving dogs
  and cats together, shut up in the house, when we were absent. In later
  times I have had twenty cats or more running around with as many dogs,
  and never had a cat killed, and only two or three occasions when any
  trouble started. The supposed antipathy between cat and dog seems to
  be an acquired taste in a certain measure, and personally I do not
  believe in the antipathy being natural or a fact, for the two will
  live together in peace if not set upon each other by man.

  From a few observations I believe the lynx is capable of
  domestication; of course, his size precludes his being numerous, but
  in this variety there are possibilities as yet not sufficiently tried
  out.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CLARENCE HOUCK’S CATTERY, “ORCHARD RIDGE,” NEW SCOTLAND, N.Y.
]

  Of other cats, in contradistinction to this, we may mention that
  beautiful cat the ocelot. This cat is fairly plentiful, and is not
  very difficult to obtain when young; and though they are so handsome
  and can be reared and left to run about the house till a year old, as
  they arrive at maturity they become what the ladies call “impossible.”
  The ocelot with increasing age grows hopelessly savage, and will kill
  anything put in his cage that he is capable of handling, and even to
  his keeper he is a problem. This evidence is not hearsay, but is from
  one who tried for a long time to do something with these beautiful
  animals. They are, when in condition, one of our handsomest specimens
  of the cat tribe.

  One of the most fascinating little cats I ever judged was a little
  Marguay cat from Brazil, exhibited by the Zoological Society of
  Chicago, and though quite small and delicate-looking, it seemed
  perfectly healthy, and, as in the case of the lynx, was as tame and
  affectionate as possible, and seemed delighted to be noticed and
  handled. I cannot help thinking that if obtainable and kept pure this
  would make one of the most beautiful of exhibition cats. Small, of a
  reddish-brown colour, and clearly spotted all over, with beautifully
  shaped and small ears, which are black-and-white, this cat is gentle,
  sweet, sizeable, and possible as a pet. I have never seen it excelled
  by anything among the cat tribe; and having handled this cat a good
  many times during the show, I may say it was one of the tamest and
  best-natured cats I ever came across in the show room, and certainly
  the most beautiful short-haired cat possible to imagine.

  On one or two occasions we have had Australian cats exhibited, and
  they were funny little beasts, sitting up like a squirrel, and with
  much the same shape of head. When genuine they are most quaint, but do
  not seem to live long here. A very clever fake was carried out with
  these cats at some of the early shows—or, rather, I should not say
  with these cats, but an imitation of these cats. When the supply
  became limited, someone became clever enough to augment the number by
  shaving the long and ragged native short-hairs, and so well was it
  done that they not only won prizes, but on one occasion one was bought
  by a judge after winning, when to his purchaser’s disgust a month or
  two later he turned out to be an ordinary yellow tom with his coat on!

  The Australian cat fell into disfavour after a few of these
  experiences, and it has not been possible to resuscitate him.

  We often hear of the Pampas cat of South America being in certain
  catteries, but so far at the shows none have been produced, and I am
  inclined to think these also are of the impossible brigade on account
  of their savage disposition. It is a pity that some enterprising
  fancier does not try to tame these wild species.

[Illustration:

  MRS. CHARLES A. WHITE.

  AN AMERICAN CAT FANCIER.
  (_Photo: Bolls, Chicago_)
]


                  SOME OF THE DIFFICULTIES IN AMERICA.

  Our English readers will, no doubt, wonder at a good many things we do
  in America; but, never having had the experience of our conditions,
  they would not be able to appreciate what it is that keeps the fancy
  back. In the first place, on this continent anything except poultry
  shows and dog shows is an unknown quantity, and many of those who take
  up the cat fancy with enthusiasm are perfectly innocent of any show
  experiences, and have few to teach them; so that until a show or two
  has been held in a certain neighbourhood our affairs are apt to be a
  little mixed. For instance, the common idea of a tortoiseshell cat is
  as often as not a heavily marked tabby of the brown tabby persuasion,
  or it may be an orange tabby, or it may be a mixture of many colours.
  Until a show has been held in a town, very few of the inhabitants know
  whether they have good cats or not, and they are as likely to bring
  the bad as the good. The idea has prevailed to a large extent that it
  is very expensive to get up shows, and so the only opportunity made
  use of has been when a poultry show is being held and the promoters of
  this are asked for a little space, which they may grant, as the cats
  are found to be very conducive to a gate; but the drawback of this
  arrangement is that in most cases the poultry people want to make as
  much money as possible, and so keep the cats penned for four or five
  days, which in many cases means death to the cats.

  The cost of the hall being so great, and the prize money being
  consequently kept down to try to balance things, with the entry fees
  also put away up, which, all added to the travelling long distances
  and the added expense of hotel bills, makes the lot of the American
  cat exhibitor not too rosy, and it is something to wonder at that the
  fancy has ever developed at all.

  Distance from place to place is another factor, and when you read in
  England of the New York and then the Chicago show the week after, you
  hardly realise that they are 1,000 miles apart, and that if living in
  New York and you want to show in Chicago it may cost you £20 in
  travelling expenses alone.

  Another thing show committees have to face is the expense of the
  judge, and the difficulty of finding suitable sires within reasonable
  distance is one of the many drawbacks with which American fanciers
  have to contend.

[Illustration:

  “THE BLESSED DAMOZEL.”

  OWNED AND BRED BY MRS. E. N. BARKER.
  (_Photo: Jos. Hübner, Rutherford, N.J._)
]




[Illustration:

  “TOBEY,” A MAINE TRICK CAT.

  OWNED BY MISS CHAPLE.
]




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.
                              MAINE CATS.


  From my earliest recollection I have had from one to several
  long-haired cats of that variety often called Maine cats. As to how
  and when they came, I would say, like Topsy, they just “growed,” for
  their advent reaches far back beyond the memory of the oldest
  inhabitant.

  Our own family circle was never complete without one or more cats—not
  always long-haired, but that variety always held the place of honour.

  As early as 1861 my younger brother and myself owned jointly a
  beautiful long-haired black, pointed with white; he bore up for
  several years under the remarkable name of “Captain Jenks of the Horse
  Marines.” I have no recollection of his earlier history or advent. I
  fancy, however, that these cats came into Maine much in the same way
  and about the same time that they did in England.

  The Maine people having had them so long, it is difficult to arouse
  any great enthusiasm about them there. They are much like other
  people—they go into heroics over things they know less about.

  Not until the craze for long-haired cats struck the West did they
  think much about selling cats; their very best would be given to their
  dearest friends. When I think of the number of beauties that I have
  had given me on my return visits because I would be good to them, it
  makes me wish for the good old times when the little dears were beyond
  price in “filthy lucre.”

  I think the first really important development of the cat fancy that
  took deep and lasting root in me occurred in 1869, when I saw for the
  first time a pair of blue-eyed white Persian kittens that landed, to
  say the least, free of duty, in a sailmaker’s pocket, from a foreign
  vessel, which put into a seaport town for repairs after a severe
  storm.

  This Mr. P——, being a great lover of cats, while on board the vessel
  making repairs, admired a beautiful white Persian cat with a family of
  kittens, belonging to the cook, who gave him a pair of them. They grew
  and were nursed with tenderest care, the female developing much the
  better quality in hair; but females were not highly prized at that
  time.

  They were both kept two or three years to get a good male for a
  gelding. I was told that they destroyed all the female kittens; but at
  last they were rewarded, and then the original pair were sent to a
  relative in the country.

  From that time on long-haired blue-eyed white kittens sprang up in
  most unexpected places. At intervals they have appeared and almost
  disappeared several times for want of care in breeding, but with this
  drawback they will still frequently come forth in the same fine type.

  I owned a very fine specimen called “Dot,” who became a noted winner,
  and who came from this strain about eleven years after the kittens
  landed. I think he was quite as good a specimen of Persian as the one
  that came from the original kittens. They were both cat show winners
  at the same time, although “Baba” (or “Babie”) was in his dotage when
  “Dot” was in his prime. We were not thinking of pedigrees then, but
  merely who had the best cat.

  “Baba” at that time belonged to Mrs. Mason (formerly Mrs. Philbrook),
  and won the cup over everything in the Boston show. “Dot” was not at
  the Boston show, but won first in his class at Bangor, Maine, which
  was held at about the same time.

  “Dot” was sent to the Bangor show to please Mr. Robinson, owner of
  “Richelieu,” who had the management of it, and without the slightest
  thought of winning. He brought home a gorgeous silver butter-dish,
  elaborately inscribed, which sat about at least ten years before being
  given to the cook. Oh, that I had it now, that its picture might grace
  these pages!

  For intelligence and affection “Dot” was by far the superior cat. I
  have never seen his equal. Although deaf, his other senses were so
  keen that we hardly realised he did not hear. He would answer to the
  slightest beckon, and was always watching for a call. He was quite
  proud of his beauty, and never failed at his mistress’s receptions to
  speak to each person present before taking his seat in the window.

  At one time some office girls who passed our house every day on the
  way to their work told me he was usually on the gate-post at seven
  o’clock in the morning to salute them and wave his plume to them. Each
  one stroked his head, said “Pretty kitty!” and passed on. He then took
  his morning roll on the lawn, and was ready for his breakfast.

[Illustration:

  “HENNESSY.”

  OWNED BY MRS. HALL, BELFAST, MAINE.
]

  His benevolence and tender feeling for cats of low degree was
  displayed by his keeping a cat two winters; his _protégé_ was an
  example of the sad-eyed forlorn cat (one sad eye, the other closed
  beyond repair); spirit completely broken by neglect. As soon as the
  weather became cool, “Dot” would usher his sad friend into the kitchen
  every morning and ask for breakfast for him, then sit back on the rug
  the while, and with utmost satisfaction—expressed in song—watch the
  tramp cat eat it. Where he kept his friend when he was not eating we
  knew not; he was invisible.

  He also excelled as a traveller, making several short journeys. When
  with me he scorned a basket, much preferring to sit on the seat and
  look out of the window and incidentally entertain the other passengers
  by his unusual privileges in cat travelling.

  He developed an unusual taste for moisture, often sitting on a garden
  bench through a heavy shower, while his frolics in a light snowfall
  were most entertaining.

  Taking him all in all, I have not yet seen a finer pet cat. We sent
  him to rest in the happy hunting grounds at the age of ten years.

  I would like to say a few words here in regard to American cat shows.
  We are continually hearing it stated, or seeing it written by the
  clubs and those who are new to the fancy, “The first cat show ever
  held in this country,” and so forth, was, we will say, according to
  their light, some three years ago. That is true so far as clubs go,
  but large cat shows were held spasmodically in all the large and some
  small eastern cities as far back as the ‘seventies.

  I have a photograph of “Richelieu,” owned by Mr. Robinson, of Bangor,
  Maine, who had won first in his class at Boston, New York, and
  Philadelphia previous to 1884, when he was shown at Bangor, Maine, in
  a limited show of the one hundred best cats. He was a silver or bluish
  tabby, very lightly marked; about seven years old at the time; weight
  about twenty pounds; he was, as his picture shows, rather a
  coarse-grained variety; a drug store cat.

  I know nothing of his early history; but his owner had the cat fad—a
  well-developed case—and travelled from city to city to show his cat,
  much as we are all doing now twenty years later.

  At that time Maine, near the coast, was rich in fine specimens of the
  long-haired cats. That was before they began to sell. I have in mind
  their brown tabbies.

  We often hear it said by people who know them not that the Maine cats
  are unhealthy, that they have worms; and I have to admit it, and that
  they sometimes die like other cats; but here is one that didn’t until
  he had rounded out his full seventeen years.

  On page 329 is a picture of “Leo,” brown tabby, born 1884, died 1901;
  presented to Mrs. Persis Bodwell Martin, of Augusta, Maine, by Mrs. E.
  R. Pierce, when he was six months old.

  He lived a life of luxury and ease, having his meals served by his
  mistress’s own hand in the upper hall, where he chose to spend his
  time for the later years of his life.

[Illustration:

  “BLUE DANUBE.”

  BRED BY MRS. E. R. PIERCE.
]

  If I may be permitted, I would ask comparison between the picture of
  “Leo” and any thoroughbred brown tabby—first, colour of muzzle, length
  of nose, size and shape of eyes, breadth of forehead, size of ears,
  length of hair in the ears, and on the head. In body markings “Leo”
  would fall off, as his hair was so extremely long that the markings
  became somewhat confused.

  They have had some extremely fine brown tabbies in Maine. In the
  summer of 1900 I bought “Maxine” there—the mother of “Young Hamlet,”
  who won over his sire “Prince Rupert” the first year he was shown. She
  was, or is, very much the type of the “King Humbert” stock, though she
  has no pedigree whatever.

  It is one of Nature’s own secrets how they keep bringing forth—now and
  then, not always—these fine types.

  I have before me a most interesting letter from a Maine lady, one of
  my contemporaries.

  I will first explain that Maine at that time was one of the largest
  ship-building States in the Union, residents of the seaport towns and
  cities being often masters of their own floating palaces, taking their
  families with them to foreign countries, and having in many towns
  quite social sets, like the army set or official set in other
  sections.

  Mrs. Thomas, to whose letter I refer, was the daughter of the late
  Captain Stackpole, who commanded his own ship for many years, taking
  his wife and little daughter with him. That was before our Civil War.
  She says:—

  “I was always very fond of cats before they had to have a pedigree. In
  my younger days, _en route_ for California, we stopped at Juan
  Fernandez, and I got a little wild cat.

  “Later on, when in Europe, I got a Manx cat from the Isle of Man; it
  was a great curiosity, and not considered very handsome, with its
  bob-tail, and hind legs so much longer than the front ones. It came to
  an untimely end by running up a flue, and was smothered to death.

  “The wild cat did not flourish on condensed milk, and lived but a
  short time. Bad luck has followed me right along, but I keep right on
  like an old toper, and don’t know enough to stop.”

  In writing of her own cat, the mother of “Swampscott,” she says:—

  “I cannot tell you much about my cat’s pedigree—only that her
  great-grandfather was brought to Rockport, Maine, from France; he was
  a blue-eyed white.”

  This line of whites, while in the same locality, are quite distinct
  and unrelated to the first whites mentioned, of which “Dot” was given
  as a type.

  But her reference to her early exploits with Manx cats clears the air
  as to how these different varieties first got root in Maine. This
  instance is only one in many where pets of every variety were bought
  in foreign ports to amuse the children on shipboard; otherwise, as in
  one case I can call to mind, the children would make pets of the live
  stock carried to supply the captain’s table with fresh meals—chickens,
  lambs, etc.—until it would be impossible to eat the little dears after
  they were served by the cruel cook.

  Therefore birds of plumage and singers, cats, dogs, and even monkeys,
  found their way to nearly all the coast towns—many more in the past
  than at this time, when sailing vessels have passed their usefulness
  as money-making institutions, and those that do go out are not
  commanded by their owners; paid captains, as a rule, cannot take their
  families with them, and the supply of cats from that source has been
  cut off for many years, so those we find there now can safely be
  called natives.

  Up to this point I have been writing of the cats of the long, long
  ago, and perhaps only interesting to myself, being as full of plain
  facts as Gradgrind.

  Before coming down to some of the fine cats of the present day, I will
  say that I am told by an eye-witness that on a little island quite
  well off the coast which is inhabited by only three families, and
  where a few gentlemen have a quiet nook to fish in summer, they found
  pure white Persian cats with the most heavenly-blue eyes. So far as is
  known, no other cats are on the island. I had the promise of a pair
  last year, but cruel fate had visited them in their sheltered nook,
  and the kittens that year died. The promise still holds good, and I do
  not want to believe it a “fish story.” Time alone can finish it.

  I really know nothing of the cats that are said to be found on the
  islands; but no doubt they are much the same as those found all along
  the New England coast.

  For a long time the long-haired cats seemed to be confined mostly to
  the coast towns and cities; but the giving their best to “their
  sisters and their cousins and their aunts” have spread them inland, as
  well as scattered them over nearly every State in the Union. They
  thrive as well as any other long-haired cat. No doubt they do still
  better in Maine, but the difference comes from the fact that they have
  the freedom of living a natural life, without dopes or over-coddling.
  Their offspring are beautiful, because they are from their own
  choosing, and not from compulsory mating—often distasteful, no doubt.

[Illustration:

  “LEO.” BROWN TABBY.

  OWNED BY MRS. P. MARTIN.
  (_Photo: Hunton, Hallowell._)
]

  About 1895 or 1896 the cat fad struck the Middle West. The time was
  ripe for its development. The high, the low, the rich, the poor have
  all felt its force, as the real love of animal pets is no respecter of
  persons, and this fancy has made the whole world kin.

  A few people who had never seen a cat show in their native land “go
  across,” attend a cat show, or pick up a cat at a bargain on the
  streets of London; they “fetch” it home, and, lo! their neighbour has
  seen something very like it while at their summer home on the coast of
  Maine. The fad is contagious, and if they have the fever running _very
  high_ they send back east to their “handy-man” to get them a
  long-haired cat, and these cats become popular. Clubs are formed to
  discuss points and exchange knowledge, shows become a necessity, large
  premiums are offered, numerous valuable specials become a feature,
  cats must be found to fit them, the home market at a low figure is
  looked over, many Attic treasures are brought out, and have often
  tipped the scales in favour of the Yankee cat. We all turn green with
  envy. Before another show we must import a ready-made winner at any
  cost! In the meantime, the demand for the home-grown article is
  increasing, and prices are getting much inflated, the dealers in large
  cities keeping their buyers busy in the New England field during the
  fall and winter months. But the stock of kittens has been looked over
  by the summer residents or visitors; the real cream disappeared with
  the first frost to some winter homes in the big cities; the dealers
  get what is left at almost any price they please to pay, many of the
  specimens being indifferent, and some, no doubt, mongrels.

  In the last few years I have known less of the Maine cats, except
  through the shows and a few that I have owned myself, which have not
  been shown much or proved remarkable in any way; but among the gems
  that have shown out with more or less brilliancy when on the bench we
  find “Cosie,” a brown tabby, taking first and special for best cat in
  show in New York, 1895. Mrs. Lambert brings out “Patrique” in New York
  in 1896—blue, and a nice one.

[Illustration:

  “YELLOW H. 14TH BEAUTY.”

  OWNED BY MRS. STAPLES.
]

  “King Max”—first brought out by Mrs. Taylor—won in Boston first in
  1897–98–99, only to be beaten by his sire “Donald” in 1900.

  Mrs. Mix has shown a fine Persian type from Maine called the “Dairy
  Maid.” I believe she has also “Imogene,” from the same place—a
  tortoiseshell.

  Mrs. Julius Copperberg’s “Petronius,” of whom we all expected great
  things, was from a line of creams coming well down from a fine cream
  brought from some Mediterranean port by one Captain Condon about
  fifteen years ago. I have secured for friends several kittens from his
  cat’s descendants, which are now somewhat scattered, but all showing
  great strength, form, bone, and sinew.

  Mrs. Chapman’s “Cusie Maxine”—a fine type of brown tabby, dam of
  “Young Hamlet,” who won over his sire “Prince Rupert”—was also a Maine
  cat.

  Mr. Jones, of _The Cat Journal_, has from time to time had some fine
  brown tabbies of the Maine stock, winners at some of the larger shows.

  A fair representative of the whites, who has acquitted himself well at
  the various shows in competition with large classes, is “Swampscott,”
  owned by Mrs. F. E. Smith, of Chicago. He comes from Mrs. Georgia
  Thomas’s white cats at Camden, Maine, his maternal great-grandsire
  coming from France.

  “Midnight”—a younger black cat, winning second at Cincinnati to a cat
  from New Hampshire in better coat, and second in Chicago in 1901 in
  large classes—has since become a gelding and pet of Mrs. J. J. Hooker,
  of Cincinnati. He comes from a line of blacks owned by a retired
  sea-captain named Ryan, who had at one time four generations of black
  cats. They loved their cats like babies, and for years looked for
  people _suitable_ to give their kittens to. I have been the flattered
  recipient three times in the last dozen years of these beautiful black
  diamonds.

  “Antonio,” a gelding, now owned by Mrs. A. B. Thrasher, of Cincinnati,
  Ohio, is also a fine representative of this stock. _See_ photograph.

  In the last few years, since cats there are at such a premium and old
  age getting nearer every day, these good people have hardened their
  hearts, and now sell like others to the highest bidder.

  I can also think of “Peter the Great,” a neuter cream and white, owned
  by Mrs. Carl Schmidt, shown at Detroit, Michigan, 1901. Also “Black
  Patti”—originally owned by Miss Ives—and “Rufus,” both Maine cats, now
  owned in Detroit, and winners in some of the Middle West shows; and
  many, many other winners whose place of nativity is a sacred secret
  with their owners, which we will not wilfully expose to public gaze
  until our native cats have been accorded the place that is due to
  them.

  I would like to tell you of some of the handsome geldings in Maine. No
  cat is too good for a pet with them. They may be seen on nearly every
  lawn or stoop; but as that is a little out of the province of this
  story I will only describe one—a beautiful smoke owned by Dr. and Mrs.
  E. A. Wilson at their beautiful home in Belfast, Maine. He is now ten
  years old; his mask and feet are black, or nearly so; his hair is very
  dark, rather brownish at the tip, but as white as snow at the skin. I
  have begged them to show him at Boston or New York. The answer is
  always the same: “Not for any amount of money or prizes. ‘Tags’
  wouldn’t like it; he would be unhappy. Wouldn’t you, ‘Tagsie’?”

  The smokes have not been well developed there yet. In a letter lately
  received in regard to that variety, I am told that one of the regular
  agents said he found only about one in 200. The silvers and
  chinchillas are not common. The strong colours predominate, whites,
  blacks, blues, orange, and creams, tabbies also being well divided and
  distributed along the coast, and for quite a distance back, perhaps
  sixty miles or more; but I have not known of their appearing to any
  extent in the northern portion of the State, which is less thickly
  settled.

  Having had this fancy from my infancy and before it became a fashion,
  I took kindly to all the new developments. I have since had some
  experience with imported and kennel-bred cats, and from time to time
  had opportunities of seeing the best we have in our shows, and I fully
  believe that cats that have their freedom, as most of the Maine cats
  have for the greater part of their lives, are healthier than kennel
  cats can be. The cool climate and long winters, with clean air full of
  ozone, is what is needed to develop their best qualities, and, with a
  few years of careful breeding for types, they would be able to compete
  quite successfully in an international cat show.

                                                           F. R. PIERCE.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BAGSTER’S “DEMIDOFF.”

  (_Photo: Cassell & Company, Limited._)
]




[Illustration:

  A SNAPSHOT.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXIX.
                     CAT PHOTOGRAPHY FOR AMATEURS.


  All lovers of the cat who are also amateur photographers must have
  seen with envious admiration the lovely cat pictures by Madame Ronner,
  the more racy and amusing sketches by Louis Wain, and the many
  beautiful photographs which so greatly enhance the instructive and
  pictorial value of this “Book of the Cat.”

  To the amateur wishing to take up this fascinating, though somewhat
  difficult, branch of photographic art, I venture to offer a few
  suggestions.

  The subject naturally divides itself into two distinct branches—the
  commercial and the artistic. By the “commercial” I mean all
  photographs taken with the special aim of showing the shape and points
  of the cat from the fancier’s, owner’s, or purchaser’s point of view.
  In the “artistic,” I include all those pictures where the cat is used
  as a model only.

  In either kind of work almost any sort of camera and lens will do,
  providing it will yield a fair definition and admit of rapid
  exposures. If one possesses a portrait lens all the better. At all
  events use a lens which will give you good definition at a large
  aperture. A good make of roller-blind shutter is an important
  accessory, with a sufficient length of tubing to the pneumatic release
  to enable one to move about freely while holding the ball and to get
  close up to the cats while making either time or instantaneous
  exposures. The camera stand should be very firm and rigid.

  I like best to work in the open air, my studio being the small open
  run of my cattery. If the light is too direct or strong I diffuse it
  by stretching light blue art muslin curtains above the table or stand
  upon which the cats are arranged. These curtains run with rings upon
  cords stretched from the boundary walls on each side, so that they may
  be moved in any way the lighting may require. For background a dark
  plush curtain will be found useful. Avoid figured backgrounds, as they
  detract from the value and crispness of the cats and accessories. An
  example of what I mean will be seen in my picture on page 158 of the
  present work, where the feathers in the hat, one of the _motives_ of
  the composition, are almost lost in the scrolls of the curtain used
  for background.

  Three things are absolutely necessary to successful photography of
  cats for either commercial or artistic purposes—time, patience, and an
  unlimited number of good _quick_ plates. Of all animals the cat is
  possibly the most unsatisfactory sitter should we attempt by force to
  secure the pose we desire. By coaxing we can generally get what we
  wish. Patience is the keynote of success. Before commencing, make up
  your mind as to what points you wish to show; then pose your cat
  gently and wait patiently until the pose becomes easy. She may jump
  down or take a wrong pose or go to sleep a dozen times or more, but
  never mind, give plenty of time. It is here where patience tells. Wait
  and coax until you see just what you desire, then release the shutter
  and make the exposure. At this point never hesitate or think
  twice—especially with kittens—or the desired pose may be gone, and
  will possibly cost you hours of waiting again to secure it.

  Before photographing a cat for its general appearance or for any
  special points, it is essential to have it thoroughly groomed and got
  up as carefully as for show. Speaking generally, the coat of a
  long-haired cat should never be roughened; it altogether spoils the
  shape of the animal, and does not in any way improve the appearance of
  length, quality, or texture of the coat. In all cats where their
  markings are one of their chief points—such as tabbies and
  tortoiseshells, etc.—this roughening should be specially avoided.
  There is, possibly, one exception to this advice, and that is in the
  case of smokes, where it may be, and sometimes is, desirable to turn
  back a small patch of the fur to show the quality and purity of the
  silver under-coat. In such cases the turning back must be done only
  for this purpose, and in such a natural way as not to interfere with
  the general flow of the fur or the shape of the cat. In posing a cat,
  it is well to remember its faults as well as its good points, so that
  the former may be hidden as much as possible and the latter displayed
  to the best advantage. Let us take this somewhat extreme example: A
  friend has a domestic pet—a so-called Persian, but with weasel head,
  long back legs and tail, large ears, small eyes, short coat, but some
  slight pretence to a frill. What can we do? To take him in profile
  will result in a very sorry caricature of the noble Persian; so we
  coax pussy to bend her back by sitting on her hind legs, and so partly
  hiding them as well as apparently shortening her back, inducing her
  also to curl her long and scanty tail round her feet. We brush out the
  ear tufts, if she has any, and press up the fur at the base of the
  ears, for this will tend to make them look smaller. Having placed the
  camera well in front of and nearly on a level with the cat, so as to
  foreshorten the nose and head, while showing what frill there is, a
  sharp squeaking sound will make pussy open her eyes to their full
  extent; we press the ball, the exposure is made, and we have secured a
  fairly presentable photograph of our friend’s perchance charming pet,
  yet most indifferent Persian cat.

  A few good examples of cats taken for the purpose of showing points
  should prove useful, especially to the novice, and many such examples
  are to be found in this present work on the cat—for instance: p. 29,
  “Litter of Siamese Kittens”; p. 100, “Champion Jimmy”; p. 138, “Star
  Duvals”; p. 139, “Omar”; p. 145, “A Perfect Chinchilla”; and p. 150,
  “Dossie.” With these examples and the many others that are to be found
  scattered through the pages of “The Book of the Cat,” the would-be
  photographer of the cat for her show points should have little
  difficulty in setting up a standard to work to, and by patience and
  perseverance succeed in attaining it.

  “Turning now to the more artistic side of cat photography, we find our
  real difficulties begin, for in photographing for the showing of
  points we seldom have to deal with more than one cat at a time. It is
  when we attempt deliberately to pose two or more cats or kittens, to
  carry out a preconceived idea, that our real troubles begin, and also
  that the patient skill of the amateur wins its best reward. Looking
  through the pages of “The Book of the Cat,” we find many good examples
  of how the cat should be used in picture making. The reproductions of
  Madame Ronner’s charming pictures show how they may be handled with
  palette and brush; but, alas! here we photographers labour under an
  immense disadvantage. However artistic our taste, however good and
  pretty our intended composition may be, we cannot, as the artist with
  pencils and brushes can, make individual sketches of pussies in the
  different positions needed and bring them together in the finished
  picture. Whether we use two or more cats, they must each be kind
  enough to take the pose we desire simultaneously; hence our greater
  difficulty. However, the illustrations on pages 1, 37, 49, 88, 128,
  199, and many others indicate the wide field open to the photographer
  with a little taste and vast patience. In this class of photography it
  is of no use to go to work in a haphazard fashion, snapshotting our
  cats in all kinds of positions, trusting to mere luck to yield
  something worth keeping; then to give a sounding title to it, and so
  hope to make a picture. Accident does occasionally present us with
  something worth having, but far more often it offers us results only
  fit for the waste-paper basket.

[Illustration:

  AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHERS.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]

  Before commencing, be sure you have _an idea_ to work out in your
  picture, and of the lines you hope to follow in giving it expression.
  If possible, make a rough sketch—no matter how rough—of this idea,
  showing the position not only of the cats, but also of the accessories
  needed. Be careful to keep the composition simple and not to overcrowd
  it. This sketch will greatly assist you in arranging your picture and
  posing your cats. Before you attempt to pose the cats it is absolutely
  necessary that all accessories should be fixed so that they cannot be
  knocked over, or the cats will get frightened and be useless as
  sitters for a long time to come. That cats are nervous should never be
  forgotten, and any chance of startling them strictly guarded against.
  When your background, table, and accessories are all in their places,
  put your camera in position, arrange the picture on the ground-glass,
  and see that you get all well within the size of the plate; it is
  safer to have the picture on the ground-glass a little smaller than
  the plate will allow, as, if one tries to get it to its utmost size,
  one may find in developing that one of the models has moved back on
  the table an inch more, perhaps, than calculated upon, and as a result
  have half a cat on one side instead of a whole one. The background,
  however, should be large enough to fully cover the ground-glass. Focus
  the foreground and nearer accessories, stop down to F. 8, set the
  shutter to about ¹⁄₃₀ to ¹⁄₅₀ second (according to light and nature of
  subject), insert the slide containing the rapid plate, draw the flap
  _under_ the dark cloth, and if at all windy tie this last to the
  camera. Now you are ready for the cats and a suitable moment of light.

  As I have already remarked, I do my photographing out of doors. I
  therefore choose a bright warm day, when there are plenty of fleecy
  clouds about; so that by taking advantage of their position in front
  of the sun, and by the help afforded by my muslin curtains, I am able
  to modify the harsh contrasts incidental to working in broad daylight.

  “The Artist” (page 128) was, perhaps, one of the most difficult
  subjects I have attempted. Without apparent life and go such a subject
  would be worthless.

[Illustration:

  PLAYING AT WORK.

  _(Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke.)_
]

  The rough sketch of the cat in the basket was first prepared, and the
  brush attached to it in such a manner that it would move freely up and
  down for about an inch or so; then it and the rest of the accessories
  were _firmly_ arranged upon the table. The cat in the basket was then
  made to take her place, but keep in she would not; as soon as the
  brush moved to attract the artist paw, out she would jump; so for the
  time she was allowed to run, until the artist was posed and an
  endeavour made to infuse life into him by moving the brush. But it was
  “no go”; sit down he would, until the introduction of a feather woke
  him up. His companion was then slipped into the basket; but, alas!
  success was not yet. For about two hours we had to begin over and over
  again, when at last the pose of both kittens was obtained
  simultaneously and the picture taken in ¹⁄₅₀ of a second. Such a
  subject with the kitten tamely sitting at the handle of the brush
  would not in any way have realised my intention.

  I must again point out the great convenience, especially in this class
  of work, of the extra length of tubing, which allows you, while
  holding the release in one hand, to pose your models with the other,
  and then expose without the fatal loss of time that would be entailed
  by having to step back to the camera or by giving the word to an
  assistant.

  A subject suggestive of a picture will often turn up when least
  expected and, at the time, impossible to take. I always make a note of
  these, and they come as a basis for future use and to be worked out at
  leisure. “Thieves” (page 79) was suggested by noting the fondness of
  two of my kittens for melon, “Amateur Photographers” by a group of
  kittens playing round some photo frames put out to print, and
  “Mischief” (page 88) by a frolicsome kitten overturning a small bottle
  of ink and playing with the little black pool.

  Isochromatic plates should be used in all cases where there are mixed
  colours in the cats’ furs, as in tortoiseshells, brown tabbies, etc.;
  mixtures of red, black, and yellow cannot be truly rendered with
  ordinary plates. The only extra precaution necessary in their use is
  _absolute_ freedom from actinic light in the dark room. Double ruby
  glass in the window, or, if artificial light is used, an extra
  thickness of red tissue paper round the developing lamp, will answer
  the purpose and make everything safe. With this little extra care,
  nice crisp negatives are obtained, while the relative value of the
  red, yellow, and black seen in our furry friends are well defined in
  the resulting picture.

  Cats used as models should, if possible, be in the pink of
  condition—the prettier the model the more pleasant the picture. The
  best time to photograph a cat is about one hour after a light meal.
  Immediately after a meal most cats want to wash and sleep. A hungry
  cat or kitten makes the worst of sitters; its thoughts are too much
  turned towards the inner man. Never overtax your cats, give them
  plenty of rest during a sitting, and never lose your temper and
  attempt by force to secure a pose; it only frightens the cats, and can
  never result in satisfactory work. Time and patience should always in
  the end achieve what you desire.

  Artistic photography having been for some years a pleasant and
  recreative hobby with me, I can assure my friends who keep cats for
  pleasure, and those who find pleasure in the camera, that by uniting
  the two hobbies they will discover a field of enjoyment and artistic
  possibilities which neither pursuit alone can afford. To all such the
  preceding notes are offered as humble finger-posts, indicating rather
  than assuring the road to success.

                                                            LUCY CLARKE.

[Illustration:

  IN THE STUDIO.

  (_Photo: Mrs. S. F. Clarke._)
]




[Illustration:

  TABITHA’S AFTERNOON TEA.

  (_Photo: C. Reid, Wishaw, N.B._)
]




                              CHAPTER XXX.
                          REARING OF KITTENS.


  It may truly be said that the subject most interesting to cat fanciers
  is the successful rearing of kittens, and pages might be written on
  what to do and what not to do in order to bring up a family of kits in
  health and strength. Experience teaches us many things, and certainly
  during the number of years I have been breeding Persian kittens I have
  had ample opportunity of judging what food suited the little mites
  best, and which was the surest method of bringing up a wholesome
  litter of kittens. I am sure that in the olden days there was less
  delicacy amongst Persian kittens than at this present time.

  With the advent of the first family the anxieties of the novice begin.
  Perhaps a goodly sum has been risked in the purchase of a pedigree
  queen, or else with much carefulness and taking thought a valuable
  kitten has been reared to happy matronhood. So far well; the trouble
  has been slight, but the account book shows all on the debit side.
  Now, as we gaze upon the tiny blind bobbing atoms, over which the
  mother croons and purrs with pride, here is the investment that has to
  swell our credit column. And ignorance here spells loss.

  If a large number yearly are successfully raised, a still larger
  number sadly “pass out,” and might claim the baby’s plaintive epitaph:

                     “Since I am so quickly done for—
                     I wonder what I was begun for!”

  Neither does the comfortable law of the “survival of the fittest” seem
  to hold good here. At least, Nature and the exhibitor are at variance
  in their ideas of such, for always it is our choicest, our sure and
  certain champion, that slips our too eager grasp.

  Here is our experimental nest of champions; they are but two days old,
  and in this early stage of their existence the less they are handled
  and examined and the mother interfered with, the better.

  Attend to two things—_darkness_ and _fresh air_; and leave them alone
  till they introduce themselves of their own accord to your notice.

  Shift on to a clean nest the second day after birth. It is safer not
  to do so before, as I have known a belated kitten arrive twenty-four
  hours after the rest of the family, and in the case of an excitable or
  inexperienced mother she will by then be more composed, and can be
  coaxed out to feed while the change of bed is being made. Hay, short
  and sweet, is the best bedding—much better than blankets or cushions.
  Many fanciers use boxes turned on their sides and curtained. These,
  while giving the necessary darkness, are not sufficiently ventilated;
  the air in them cannot circulate freely, and becomes stuffy and foul,
  vapours ascend, and the wood becomes unsanitary in a very short time.

  Bad eyes follow as a matter of course, and the anxious, worried novice
  wonders “how they can _possibly_ have taken cold when they have been
  so guarded”—from fresh air!—and seals them up still more! If,
  therefore, a box is used, let there be holes for ventilation, or
  arrange for the covering to reach only partly over the top.

  In an outside cattery or attic or room guard against too much light
  and any draught, but let in the outside air by _keeping the window
  open_ during the day. If winter kittens are to be reared, heat the
  room to an average of 55 degrees, and have the window open, taking
  precautions naturally against rain or snow beating in.

  When the kittens reach the age of three weeks, they will require some
  food beyond that provided by the mother, who, if nursing a large
  family, is perhaps showing signs of wear. It is when the process of
  weaning begins that trouble generally arises.

  I am inclined to put down the growing delicacy of Persian kittens to
  the injudicious feeding with solids at too early a period of their
  existence. I never used to allow my kittens meat until they were about
  four or five months old, and during the period of weaning from their
  mothers it is most essential that all food given—such as Mellin’s,
  Ridge’s and Benger’s—should be made very thinly at first, so as not in
  any way to try the tender digestions of the little creatures.

[Illustration:

  A HAPPY MOTHER.
]

  I believe that most of the ills that kittens’ flesh is heir to,
  proceed from indigestion. The tendency in fanciers is to overload the
  stomach of the wee kittens, forgetting that it is not the amount of
  food eaten that nourishes the tiny creatures, but the quantity they
  are able to digest, and this must necessarily be small for some weeks
  after they have learnt to feed themselves. Another mistake that is
  made is giving milk that is too rich. In large towns we generally get
  our milk watered for us, but in the country the milk is richer, and
  needs mixing with warm water. It is not so important in the country as
  in London and other large towns to have the milk boiled, but it is at
  all times and in all places a wise precaution. In preference to
  risking the town dairy milk, flavoured with boracic, and most deadly
  to the systems of both kittens and babies, I advise a good brand of
  Swiss milk—such as Nestlé’s—being employed, or, better still, Plasmon
  powder, made to a jelly according to directions on packet, and one
  teaspoonful of this jelly thinned out with hot water and sweetened. Do
  not give raw meat till the teeth are fairly through and they can bite
  sharply; then give it _scraped_ with a blunt knife, not cut; and
  remember that _raw_ meat is three times as digestible and nourishing
  as _cooked_ meat—one tiny meal of meat a day, a teaspoonful per kitten
  to begin with. Do not give them fish while under three months old.

  Rice is a very _indigestible_ food for kittens, especially cold; but
  rice-water, strained from rice boiled to a pulp and given quite cold,
  is useful in checking diarrhœa. Melox is a most useful food for
  kittens of ten weeks old and upwards, soaked for an hour or two in a
  little good gravy, and given crumbly (not sloppy), and a little
  scraped raw meat mixed with it. For younger ones a tablespoonful of
  red gravy from a cooked joint, poured over some breadcrumbs, proves an
  appetising meal.

  Small meals at short intervals are infinitely better than heavy meals
  at long intervals, and if a young kitten is left for many hours till
  half famished, it will in all probability eat too much and suffer in
  consequence. From four to ten weeks six or seven meals in the
  twenty-four hours are none too many. I am presuming that till that age
  they will be with their mother at night, which will do away with the
  necessity of providing food between 9 p.m. (when the last meal should
  be given) and 8 a.m. Give always a light and _warm_ meal for the
  breakfast. After ten weeks lessen to five meals, after three months
  four, and give four till six months old, when they may be fed as
  adults, unless one should be delicate or has been through severe
  illness.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BONNY’S “DAME FORTUNE.”

  (_Photo: L. R. Stickells, Cranbrook._)
]

  The best test of a properly thriving kitten is its weight, and 1 lb.
  for each month of age is a fair average, occasionally exceeded by very
  big-boned and robust kittens. For young growing kittens a teaspoonful
  of lime-water added to a saucer of any liquid is very advisable, as it
  strengthens the limbs and forms bone. If a kitten under a month or six
  weeks old is unfortunate enough to have a severe illness, whether
  epidemic or accidental, my advice is to chloroform it. At so tender an
  age the constitution rarely recovers from the strain.

  Although this article has no intention of encroaching upon that
  treating specially of diseases, our aim and object being to rear such
  healthy sturdy families of kittens that they shall never have any
  diseases, yet, _en passant_, it might not be amiss to remark what a
  valuable medicine for the first symptoms of distemper is Pacita, a
  herbal medicine that can be obtained in both powder and pill form. The
  latter is to be preferred, as, the smell being very nasty, kittens
  rebel against it. Half of No. 1 size pill is sufficient for a kitten
  under three months, to be given fasting in the morning an hour before
  food for three mornings. It reduces fever and clears the system in a
  wonderful manner.

[Illustration:

  MRS. BONNY’S “DEREBIE.”

  (_Photo: L. R. Stickells, Cranbrook._)
]

  The question of outdoor exercise must now be discussed. I speak of
  summer kittens only. Winter kittens—viz. those born from November to
  February—are, I think, a mistake. Out of season, like forced green
  peas at Christmas, they have not a good start in life; the damp and
  darkness of those months is very deterrent upon young life. Nature’s
  plan of arranging for the new lives to come chiefly in the spring when
  days are lengthening and sunshine has power, is the wisest. They grow
  with the days, and have the summer to romp through and grow big and
  strong before the leaves fall. It is a mistaken policy—that of
  _exposing to risks_ under the intention of _hardening_. We must
  remember that the Persian cat is an exotic, and that the present
  system of breeding for coat and show points does not tend to make the
  race hardier; on the contrary, probably the constitution is more
  delicate than in its native country, imported cats invariably boasting
  a vigour and hardihood that our pedigree specimens sadly lack. It is
  not _cold_ that injures; frost and snow can be borne by grown-up
  Persians with impunity, and even enjoyment. It is the _damp_ that
  kills, and upon consideration we shall see that this is largely a
  question of _coat_.

  Look at your English sleekly groomed puss as she comes leaping across
  some dewy field in the early morning, pressing through a thick, wet
  hedge. She gives herself a shake; examine her fur: not a dewdrop has
  adhered, hardly are her pads damp. Now pick up your Persian gentleman
  who has taken a slight hunting stroll through the same ground: his
  stomach fur is _soaked_, clinging like wet linen to him; his
  “knickerbockers” are disreputable, his frill clammy; and it will take
  him a good hour to get himself clean and respectable once more. The
  soft woolly under-coat of the Persian holds water like a sponge, where
  the close short coat of the British cat shakes it off as from duck’s
  feathers. This is the true secret of the delicacy of the Persian. So
  in rearing kittens, let your first care be, _avoid damp_.

  A sick kitten generally forgets its manners, however carefully it has
  been trained to the use of the dry earth or sawdust box; it seems to
  feel too bad to care how it behaves, so due allowance must be made at
  the time; but in health, cleanly behaviour must be insisted upon from
  the time they begin to trot about their nursery. Begin by placing a
  _very_ shallow tray of nice dry _fine_ earth in one or two corners
  that the kittens seem to have a predilection for; it may even be
  necessary to put them in all _four_ corners for a little while to
  convince some obstinate or dullard member of the family.

  A cat’s confidence is harder to win than a dog’s, but once you have
  gained it the animal will trust you implicitly, and will bear pain or
  nasty dosing at your hands without resentment. I think kittens _should
  be handled_ from early days. I do not advocate a valuable kitten being
  sent up to a human nursery, to be hugged flat or carried head
  downwards by the too-adoring occupants; but kittens should be
  thoroughly accustomed to human society and to being picked up,
  caressed, and handled. It will make their subsequent show career far
  less of a terror, and greatly augment their chances of success; and in
  the case of all male cats, whether for stud or neuter, it is very
  convenient to train them to walk on a lead. Begin by using a light
  ribbon, and _two_ kittens led together on separate leads will come
  more willingly than one. The first lessons in walks might terminate at
  the feeding dish, so that the kits would quickly associate this new
  form of exercise with something to eat.

  It sometimes happens that young kittens are too early bereft of
  maternal care from some cause or other. Mr. A. Ward, of Manchester,
  has invented an artificial foster-mother (_see_ page 343). This
  consists of a glass vessel covered with flannel, and having
  indiarubber teats. This is filled with warm milk and water, and the
  kittens help themselves!

  It is only of comparatively recent date that any serious attention has
  been given to the successful breeding of Persian kittens.

  A demand has arisen for animals that approach perfection, according to
  a recognised standard of points, and it may not be unprofitable to
  devote a few pages to the consideration of how these can be best
  obtained.

  Formerly a long-haired cat was not much thought of unless he really
  deserved his name, but nowadays coat is rather at a discount on the
  show bench.

  Points, points, points—colour of eyes, colour of coat, shape,
  expression, and what not—these are all considered first, and length
  and beauty of coat are rather apt to be overlooked.

  The amateur cat lover should provide himself with a female cat or
  kitten of fine health and luxuriant coat, and treat it precisely like
  any other “well done by” domestic pussy. Probably by the time she is
  twelve months old she will have insisted on matrimony. This is worth a
  little consideration and trouble, but if the choice lies between a
  healthy, hardy long-haired tom at large in your own neighbourhood and
  a pedigreed prisoner at a distance, I should recommend the local
  monsieur.

[Illustration:

  A LITTER OF EIGHT, BELONGING TO MISS SAVERY.

  (_Photo: H. Warschawski, St. Leonards-on-Sea._)
]

  What you want is physique and a fine appearance, and you are more
  likely to get them in this way.

  Many owners of Persians have been quite content to rear saleable
  kittens of average merit, and trust for their show reputation to fine
  animals bought from others.

  To encourage breeders special prizes are offered at shows to those who
  win a first prize with a cat whose mother was in the exhibitor’s
  possession at the time of the kitten’s birth. They are very handsome
  trophies, and have to be won four times before becoming the property
  of the exhibitor.

  Over against the mistaken motto of “Haphazard” we must place the
  password of “Selection” if we would become successful breeders.
  Selection—clever, thoughtful, painstaking selection—lies beneath all
  real success. I am not denying that excellent results are obtained
  occasionally by accident, but these happy flukes want following up if
  any permanent good is to be effected.

  Having a queen of a given colour, you should, as a rule, mate her only
  with a cat of the same colouring, and be especially careful not to
  cross self colours with tabbies.

  Now selection, as too often understood, means just this: A male cat
  makes a great sensation at a show and wins many prizes. He is the
  right colour, therefore to him you will send your queen. What can be
  simpler? Why this fuss about the difficulty of breeding?

  But you are a novice, and know nothing of the value of the pedigree
  owned by the winning monsieur. It is not so much he himself as his
  inherited tendencies you have to consider, for assuredly they will
  reappear in his children. An old hand will tell you, “Yes, a grand
  head, but where he got it from is a miracle, with such parents”; or,
  “Colour? Yes, first-rate, but he was the only one clear from sandy in
  the litter.” Well, what can a bewildered novice do? Remember, you have
  to try to cap each of your queen’s defects with a corresponding virtue
  in her mate. If she is snipey in face, make head a chief point; if she
  fails in colour, lay great stress on colour; and so on. My advice is,
  do not send her to a new star who has but just arisen in the sky of
  the cat world until you know a little more about your business. Mark
  your catalogue at shows. Study the cats and kittens whose points
  please you and who are filling the prize lists, and then notice their
  sire’s name. When you find the same name repeated again and again, and
  always attached to animals of consistent merit, you will not do far
  wrong to choose the owner for your queen’s mate.

  But after having exercised all possible care in the selection of a
  male cat, we must not expect the litter of kittens to be perfection.
  All breeders know that there is, as a rule, one kitten in each litter
  which far surpasses its fellows in beauty.

[Illustration:

  “STAR OF THE SPHERES” AND “SON OF ROY.”

  BRED BY MISS E. A. CHAMBERLAYNE.
  (_Photo: Russell & Sons, Baker Street._)
]

  Perhaps one will possess the type of head you so covet, but the colour
  is inferior. Another has colour or markings to perfection, whilst the
  head is poor. Well, then, they must be mated with an eye to remedying
  these defects, and a near relative possessing these strong points will
  be likely to prove the most successful cross; for in-breeding—careful,
  cautious, and judicious—is another secret of the successful breeder.
  But one word of caution to the novice: Never be persuaded to breed
  from an unhealthy animal, be his or her points what they may, and
  never allow your queens to mate when thoroughly debilitated and out of
  health; for this lies at the bottom of the difficulty experienced in
  carrying out the next point we have to consider—_i.e._ the successful
  rearing of kittens. If cat fanciers could learn this lesson, we should
  hear far less of infant mortality.

  For the ordinary mode of kitten rearing it is essential to have proper
  outdoor quarters, and, if possible, quarters isolated from each other.
  There is nothing more suitable than the portable houses so readily
  obtained; but these must be on a dry foundation.

  Sunshine, fresh air, and wholesome food are the essentials of a kitten
  nursery. Moreover, there must never be many young things kept
  together. Otherwise, some unlucky day you will find a sad-faced kitten
  looking down its nose, and in two or three days more your whole tribe
  will be down with distemper and your hopes for the year shattered.

  I know it sounds brutal, but I cannot refrain from saying that
  sentiment is the ruin of successful kitten rearing. Some tiny morsel
  develops a skin trouble, has chronic diarrhœa, bad eyes or snuffles,
  and we tenderly nurse it for many weary weeks and perhaps save it.

  A victory? Yes, if the morsel were a gem of great value, one of the
  “surprise babies” in colour or shape that now and again visit every
  cattery, it may have been worth paying the cost. For pay we shall have
  to, make no doubt of that. Your kitten nursery will never be quite so
  healthy again, and in spite of all precautions you will very probably
  carry sickness to your other stock. I would never breed from unhealthy
  animals, and I would at once destroy a very sick kitten of tender age.

  Lethal boxes rob the act of inhumanity, and you will probably have one
  little tombstone to erect instead of a dozen!

  One great feature of success is the boarding-out system. Any woman
  really fond of cats who will take a kitten into the bosom of her
  family and rear it is a perfect boon. Of course, she must be well
  paid, but if she is successful you can afford to be liberal.

  In these cases it is better only to put out your choice specimens that
  you wish to attain some age before sale or to keep for stock. The
  others should be sold off at about eight to ten weeks old at moderate
  prices.

[Illustration:

  THE “FOSTER-MOTHER.”

  (_Photo: H. Glacier, Longsight._)
]

  Far more of the trouble with kittens comes from defective digestion
  than from any other cause, and I suspect we frequently overload their
  little interiors. When nature makes the small cat turn away from its
  dinner, we fall into a panic and pour beef essence down its throat.
  Probably a short fast was all that was required, and it is a mistake
  to force food until some hours have elapsed. In fact, healthy
  surroundings and common-sense treatment are the main secrets of
  successful kitten rearing.

[Illustration:

  THE “FOSTER-MOTHER” IN ACTION.

  (_Photo: H. Glacier, Longsight._)
]




[Illustration:

  “ARRIVED SAFELY.”

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]




                             CHAPTER XXXI.
                            COLOUR BREEDING.


  Colour breeding is a most fascinating pursuit; but, unfortunately, the
  average cat fancier lacks the patience to follow it out to a
  satisfactory conclusion.

  There is no doubt that by judicious cross-breeding new colours could
  be produced, and I think that they will be produced in time. I have
  seen a chocolate-brown cat and a yellow cat with black stripes, and no
  doubt they will appear again; also chestnut-brown cats and white cats
  striped with black may be bred.

  The point which I wish to discuss on this occasion is not so much the
  experimental cross as the cross which is desirable to improve existing
  colours. I do not consider that a white cat should be crossed with any
  other colour. There is no advantage to be gained in this case by
  crossing, as we already have white cats good in bone, substance, head,
  shape, etc., and no other colour of cat possesses blue eyes. I do not
  for a moment suggest that good white cats have not been bred from
  coloured parents, but this is unnecessary and undesirable, because
  there is a risk of introducing coloured patches and smudges and yellow
  or green eyes, and there is no corresponding advantage to be gained.
  In the same way I do not consider that it is a good thing to breed
  from white cats with yellow or odd eyes. Blue-eyed kittens have been
  bred from two yellow-eyed parents, and frequently when one parent has
  yellow or odd eyes the kittens are all blue-eyed, but this can in no
  way be depended upon.

  Black cats are a little more difficult to handle than whites, because
  a white is necessarily white, while there is sometimes a diversity of
  opinion where a black is concerned. The most important point to keep
  before us in black-breeding is the colour of eyes. Whatever we cross
  with we must be careful that we do not lose the orange eyes, for they
  are most elusive, and we are, therefore, somewhat limited in our
  selection of suitable crosses. A smoky or dirty black is an
  abomination, and for this reason I consider that from the point of
  view of the black cat all crosses with blues, smokes, or silvers
  should be avoided; in any case a _good_ silver would be impossible
  because of its green eyes. A rusty black is undesirable, but a rusty
  kitten usually makes a better-coloured cat than a smoky one, though
  there are notable exceptions to this rule. A good orange-eyed
  tortoiseshell or red tabby, or an orange, are all suitable mates for a
  black. A curious thing I have noticed is that the best blacks are bred
  from bright clear-coloured cats, and that dull colours, such as
  smokes, blues, and fawns, do not, as a rule, produce good-coloured
  kittens. For this reason I should prefer blacks bred from an
  orange-eyed silver tabby to those bred from a dark brown tabby. On the
  whole, a brightly coloured tortoiseshell will be found to throw the
  best blacks.

[Illustration:

  “PATRICIA,” BROWN TABBY.

  BRED BY MISS FANNY ELLIS, TORONTO.
]

  Of the crossing of blues with any other colour I do not approve,
  because we have many different blue strains, among which can be found
  all the different points which are desired. Comparisons are odious,
  but if I refer to the Bath show of 1903 I can explain what I mean.
  “Skellingthorpe Patrick” is a beautiful cat in all points except eyes,
  but “Don Carlos” and several other blue males in the class had
  glorious orange eyes. I have often heard that crossing a blue with a
  white will produce very pale blue kittens; I have not found this to be
  so, and it seems unlikely, for mate a black cat with a white one as
  often as you like, and you may wait a lifetime before they breed a
  blue kitten; therefore why should a dark blue and a white produce a
  pale blue kitten? Sometimes crossing with a black is recommended “to
  get the orange eyes,” but it must be remarked that the proportion of
  black cats with good orange eyes is quite as low as that of blues.
  When this cross is resorted to, let the black parent be the male, as
  otherwise the kittens may very likely all be black.

  It is the misfortune of the smoke cat that it has been
  indiscriminately and unintelligently crossed with the black and the
  silver tabby, and, worst of all, with the blue. Strangely enough,
  there seems to be some close affinity between the smoke and the silver
  tabby, and it should be our object, as far as possible, to keep them
  apart. To this connection is attributable the prevalence of green eyes
  and leg and face markings among smoke cats. In crossing smokes there
  are many difficulties to contend with. We must keep the light
  under-coat, but avoid markings; we must have the black face and legs
  and retain the light frill; and we must have orange eyes. All crosses
  with tabby must be avoided, or we shall never get rid of face
  pencillings; but _judicious_ crosses of black, blue, or (best of all)
  chinchilla may be of service. A black cross is better than blue
  because, though either endangers the under-coat, it will intensify the
  black mask and legs. The one advantage of a blue cross is that it
  will, sooner than any other, help to eliminate markings; but the blue
  kittens from such a cross must be sternly rejected, as their colour
  will never be satisfactory. The chinchilla is the best cross for the
  smoke so far as colour is concerned, and an orange-eyed chinchilla
  should be of service for breeding smokes with light frills and good
  under-coats. A cross of chinchilla may with advantage follow a black
  cross.

[Illustration:

  MISS GODDARD’S PAIR OF KITTENS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  We now get to the subject of chinchilla breeding; it is a matter of
  common knowledge that chinchillas were produced as the result of
  careful in-breeding, and, therefore, until the breed is more firmly
  established, any sudden out-cross is likely to cause a reversion to
  the barred ancestors. The idea, then, is to cross with whatever is
  least likely to introduce stripes—_i.e._ a self-coloured cat, or
  preferably a shaded one. Of course, any tinge of red or brown is to be
  avoided, and, therefore, the only shaded cat left to us is the smoke,
  and a green-eyed smoke is certainly the safest cross we can get, as it
  is sufficiently akin to the chinchilla to obviate the risk of a
  violent out-cross. The black is, I think, the next best cross, for it
  is just possible that the colours may not interfere with one another,
  and that we shall get pure black and clear silver kittens—of course, a
  green-eyed black must be used. Third on the list comes the white; but
  this cross makes for absence of markings, and therefore demands great
  caution, as thereby the black noses and eyelids which add so much to
  the charm of a chinchilla may be lost and the result be merely a
  dingy, dirty white cat. This animal, though not particularly
  attractive in itself, is, I need hardly say, invaluable for crossing
  again either with a clear-coloured chinchilla, a black, or even a
  blue.

  A blue cross is, as a rule, rather objectionable, because it seems to
  produce a muddy, dull colour, but there is no doubt that it may
  occasionally be resorted to with success. I should suggest that the
  blue parent (a green-eyed one, of course) should be the sire, as when
  the reverse is the case the kittens are frequently blue tabby.

  I do not think any colours besides those I have mentioned should be
  crossed with chinchillas, though I must confess that chinchilla
  kittens occasionally turn up most unexpectedly. I recollect a very
  pale one appearing in a litter whose sire was a cream of brown tabby
  and cream parentage, and whose dam was a pale blue bred from a blue
  and a blue tabby. There may have been silver tabby blood in the
  strain, but certainly no chinchilla. For all this I do not recommend a
  cream or tortoiseshell cross, as the chances are all against the
  kittens being any good, and it is laying up a store of disappointments
  in the next generation. We have all possessed cats which, though
  beautiful in themselves, never threw a kitten worth keeping. I had a
  little cat myself bred from two chinchilla parents. The dam was a
  well-known winner, and her ancestry was, I knew, irreproachable, and
  the sire’s appeared to be equally so, though I was told afterwards
  that he often sired brown tabby kittens. But my queen (herself a
  prize-winner), no matter how she was mated, invariably threw brown
  tabby kittens.

  We now come to the very fascinating subject of tabbies, and I may as
  well say at once that any amount of crossing is for the present
  desirable and even necessary, but it must be done systematically and
  under a careful and experienced eye. The novice is likely to fail
  because he does not understand the essential points of a tabby. Let
  him keep before his mind the fact that if two distinct black stripes
  run the whole length of the spine and if the chest markings are good
  there is not likely to be much wrong with his cat’s other markings.

[Illustration:

  “LOLLYPOP,” ONE OF LADY MARCUS BERESFORD’S SILVERS.

  (_Photo: E. Landor, Ealing._)
]

  In the brown tabby, the markings have become too heavy, they have run
  together and spread into a heavy black saddle; while the ground colour
  has lost warmth and white chins are prevalent. With the “sable” cat,
  be it understood, I have no fault to find; I can forgive him even his
  white chin, because he is such a magnificent animal; but he is not a
  tabby, and should not be shown as such.

  In the brown tabby we want dense black markings on a clear
  golden-brown ground. The black is there right enough, but it wants
  “breaking up.” A cross of strongly marked red tabby is the thing; not
  a “self-orange,” mind you—that would only make things worse—but the
  best-coloured red, with a dark chin, that can be found. When the
  markings want intensifying, as may be the case after the red cross, we
  must mate with a black; but I do not think this will be necessary, as
  brown tabbies rarely “wash out” as silvers do. It is curious to note
  that many years ago I bred quantities of beautifully marked silver
  tabbies and brown tabbies from a brown tabby sire and a sandy, silver
  tabby dam, both of unknown pedigree. The silvers were clear and pure
  in colour, with capital black markings, and the browns had good rich
  colouring. This is a cross I should certainly hesitate to recommend,
  but there are possibilities concealed therein, and it is worth an
  occasional experiment with the sole object of rescuing the degenerate
  tabby markings.

  It is a curious fact that while the tabby is supposed to be the common
  ancestor of all our cats, the tabby markings should be the most
  difficult point to retain in the pedigree cat.

  A brown tabby cat with a good-coloured chin should always be retained
  to breed from, even if it fails in some other points.

  It is, I know, the general opinion that the craze for chinchillas has
  ruined the silver tabby, but I do not feel convinced that this is so.
  I am of the opinion that the constant breeding of silver tabby to
  silver tabby will eventually result in the production of poorly marked
  cats. Let me give an example: “Felix Mottisford” was a very heavily
  barred son of “Champion Felix,” and “Patz” was also heavily barred and
  bred from silver tabbies. Two of their kittens were “Silver Midget”
  and “My Fairy.” “Midget” was a prettily marked silver tabby, but much
  lighter than her parents, and showed a strong tendency to throw
  unmarked kittens. “Fairy” was certainly a silver tabby, but her
  markings were entirely on the surface, and as she grew older faded
  away until she was more shaded than barred. Mated with a blue, she
  produced four chinchilla kittens; mated with “Lord Southampton,” there
  were two well-marked silver tabbies and two chinchillas (this litter
  included “Dimity” and “Abbess of Broomholme”); mated with “Silver
  Lambkin,” there was one chinchilla kitten—“Fitz Eustace”—and the rest
  were silver tabbies; by “Tuan,” a much more marked cat, the kittens
  were all chinchillas (“Tuan,” I may mention, was a distant cousin of
  “Fairy”); by “Silver Lustre” there were two chinchillas and two silver
  tabbies. I then parted with her, and she afterwards had, by “Silver
  Chieftain,” a litter of silver tabbies and chinchillas, including
  “Silver Tangle” and “Silver Sprite.” After that date I have no record
  of her doings, but it can be seen that she certainly showed an
  inclination on her own account towards chinchilla kittens, and this, I
  take it, was the result of the continued mating together of silver
  tabby cats. I do not consider any other cross than black is admissible
  in a silver tabby strain, but the introduction of black blood is
  necessary from time to time if markings are to be retained. I go so
  far as to say that a cross of green-eyed black in every third
  generation would be a wise precaution.

[Illustration:

  THREE LITTLE AMERICANS.
]

  The red tabby, the orange, and the tortoiseshell are rather hopelessly
  mixed up at present. The self-orange (so-called) did not exist a few
  years ago, but of late a premium has been put on absence of marking,
  and a lot of cats with self-coloured or shaded bodies and striped
  faces appear in the orange classes and win all the prizes. I have no
  fault to find with the shade of colour of these cats; they are a
  beautiful bright clear orange, but if they are to be self-coloured the
  face markings must go. Crossing with blue gets over this difficulty,
  but we immediately lose brightness of colour and get dull yellows and
  fawns. Tortoiseshell is a safe cross, but the ancestry of the
  tortoiseshell must be carefully inquired into, and one bred from black
  and tortoiseshell is best, or we can go direct to the black. Tabby
  cats or any of a blue or grey colour should be avoided in this
  connection.

  Clear, pale yellow creams may be bred from oranges and tortoiseshells;
  but these must not be confounded with the fawn-coloured cats, often
  called creams, which are more common and easy to breed. Though creams
  and fawns occasionally appear in the same litter this is generally the
  fault of their ancestors, and can be accounted for if the pedigree is
  known on both sides. As a matter of fact, I have never seen one of
  these clear yellow creams which was not descended, however remotely,
  from Mrs. Kinchant’s strain. Examples of the colour I mean are “Cupid
  Bassanio,” “Zoroaster,” “Dairy Maid,” “Mistletoe,” and a few of their
  descendants.

[Illustration:

  “HOLMLEA THISTLEDOWN.”

  OWNED BY MRS. KEEP, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
]

  To breed fawn creams is, comparatively, a simple matter, as a cross of
  blue and orange will almost invariably produce some fawn kittens,
  especially if the dam is blue. When the dam is orange or tortoiseshell
  there will often be a number of blue tortoiseshell kittens which are
  valueless. Some people like them to breed fawn creams from, but I have
  never found them more useful for this purpose than a correctly
  coloured tortoiseshell.

  Tortoiseshells are entirely neglected by fanciers nowadays, and are
  only used as a stepping-stone to more fashionable colours. There is no
  doubt that a tortoiseshell can be got to breed anything! I knew a
  queen which bred magnificent blacks, blues, creams, oranges, fawns,
  and smokes, whether mated to a blue, a cream, or a smoke, and I
  believe she also threw chinchilla kittens to a chinchilla sire. To
  breed tortoiseshells for the show pen we must not indulge in any
  haphazard matings. The fault of the tortoiseshells is, as a rule, that
  the red and yellow has run all over the black, and instead of having a
  clear patchwork of red, yellow, and black, we have a blur containing a
  preponderance of yellow. The obvious remedy is our old friend the
  black. All the best tortoiseshells are bred from blacks, and a black
  and a red tabby or orange will generally throw some good
  tortoiseshells. To produce tortoiseshell-and-whites cross a
  tortoiseshell with a black-and-white rather than with a white, but
  avoid red tabby, as a tortoiseshell-and-white cat frequently shows
  tabby markings for this breeding.

  The red tabby has nearly died out among long-haired cats, though it
  flourishes in the short-haired variety, but by crossing a brown tabby
  with an orange it might be revived. No doubt there would be a few
  mismarked kittens in the litter, but the chances would be in favour of
  a good red tabby, and the colour could then be preserved by crossing
  with black and tortoiseshell only.

  Of course, it is no use trying experiments in cross-breeding in the
  hope of obtaining definite results unless we are satisfied as to the
  pedigree of the cats employed for at least two generations, or all our
  calculations may be upset. For example, when breeding for chinchillas,
  if we used a black bred from a brown tabby mother the results would be
  disastrous.

  A point to be carefully noted in cross-breeding is to select a cat
  with eyes of a colour desired in the breed which he is destined to
  improve, whether those eyes would be correct in his own family or not.
  This suggests a use for our rejected green-eyed blues and blacks and
  our orange-eyed silvers.

  My notes, as may be observed, are on the subject of long-haired cats,
  but they will be found equally applicable to short-hairs.

                                                         HESTER COCHRAN.




                             CHAPTER XXXII.
THE CAT’S PLACE IN NATURE: ITS ANCESTRY, CLASSIFICATION, STRUCTURE, AND
                             DISTRIBUTION.


  At a very remote period in the history of animal life when the
  struggle for existence was rife, the carnivorous and predaceous
  animals (to which the existing cat belongs) occupied a position in the
  scale of creation as important as the one they hold to-day. We find
  locked up in the rocks of the tertiary and recent pleistocene
  formations the bones and teeth of these ancient cats along with those
  of the animals upon which they lived.

  These ancestors of our cat had a tolerably wide geographical
  distribution, and they apparently differed considerably in size, as do
  the different members of the existing cat family. The crested cat (_F.
  crestata_) was probably as large as a tiger—more recent remains having
  a closer affinity to existing cats are found plentifully in caves and
  in the deeper beds of rivers and lakes almost all over the British
  Islands.

  Probably the most remarkable of these extinct cat-like creatures is
  the Machœrodus, the skulls of which (Fig. II.), with portions of its
  skeleton, associated with the bones of other animals, have been found
  in the cave deposits in Brazil, North and South America, India,
  Persia, many parts of Europe, as well as in the British Islands—viz.
  Kent’s Cavern, Creswell bone caves, and other places. The skull, which
  is very typical and cat-like in form, is remarkable for the
  extraordinary development of the upper canine teeth, which in some
  species exceed seven inches in length. The Machœrodus was about the
  size of a lion.

  The ancestors of our cat were certainly more specialised in parts of
  their organisation. The nearer we approach the recent forms a greater
  uniformity in structure prevails, until we get in the existing
  cat-like group (_Felis_) probably the most consolidated and uniform of
  all the generic mammalia.

[Illustration:

  FIG. I.—BRAIN OF CAT.

  A, Right hemisphere of cerebrum; B, Cerebellum; C, Medulla oblongata;
    D, Olfactory bulb (nerve of smell); E, Convolution, or Gyrus; F,
    Fissure.
]


                        FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS.

  Under the generic title of _Felis_ are included over fifty-one
  distinct species, of which the lion, tiger, leopard, puma, and our
  common domesticated cat may be taken as representative. They inhabit
  every region on the earth’s surface, except the extreme northern
  latitudes, and vary in size from the tiger and lion to the little
  red-spotted cat of India, which does not exceed fifteen or sixteen
  inches in length. But it is, as already indicated, very uniform in
  order as regards structural points. All have well-developed,
  retractile claws, the only exception being the cheetah, whose claws
  are only partially retractile; all have five toes on the fore feet,
  and four on the hind feet; all the teeth are cusped, or pointed, and
  specialised for flesh-eating, as well as for aggressive purposes. The
  incisors in front of the upper and lower jaws are small, the four
  canines well grown and long, with a cutting edge on the inner side;
  the molars, or cheek teeth, have one to five cusps, points, or lobes.
  All the members of the family are _digitigrade_ (_i.e._ use only the
  extremity of the toes in walking); the tympanic bulla, or ear-bone, is
  large and prominent; the general form of the skull is rounded and
  broad across the orbits, or eye-sockets (the latter are, with two
  exceptions, open or incomplete behind); the clavicle, or collar-bone,
  is reduced to a short, curved, splint-like bone; in many species it is
  absent.

  The stomach is always simple, intestines relatively short, tongue
  covered with minute spines. In many species the pupil of the eye
  contracts in one direction only, thus giving it a _linear_ and upright
  form. The majority of the species are nocturnal; the habits of the
  genus are very diverse. The lion apparently prefers the drier, sandy
  areas covered with short, scrubby vegetation; others prefer the dense
  forests, and live much in the trees. Many species are found at
  considerable altitudes, the snow leopard being found at 18,000 feet.
  All the members of the group can swim, and several species (_i.e._ the
  fishing cat of India and Southern China) are adepts at catching fish,
  but immersion is invariably avoided.

  The colours of the different members of the genus _Felis_ vary
  considerably. It may be a uniform, tawny, pale brown, or a grey—as in
  the lion, puma, eyra. The tiger is striped transversely; the ocelot
  has bands or rows of more or less fused spots; the serval and several
  other species have solid black spots; the leopard, clusters of spots,
  forming a kind of star; the jaguar has the spots arranged in an open
  ring. In the clouded leopard of Southern India the markings are
  composed of irregular groups of lines and spots, merging into the
  ground colour of the animal’s coat. A black variety of the common
  leopard is occasionally found in a wild state. Albinos, or white
  forms, are extremely rare in nature, though quite common in the
  domesticated cat.


                     GENERAL STRUCTURE OF THE CAT.

  The natural food of all the cat tribe in a state of nature is
  carnivorous, and the whole organisation of the group is specialised
  and adapted for aggressive or, if need be, defensive purposes. The
  body is compressed laterally, and has a considerable amount of
  flexibility in it as a whole.

  The bony framework or _skeleton_ is light, and, for the purpose of an
  elementary description, is readily divisible into three parts—viz. (1)
  the skull; (2) the axial skeleton, comprising the bones of the neck,
  thorax, loins, and tail; (3) the appendicular skeleton or limbs. The
  skull is short, rounded, and broad across the orbits or eye-sockets,
  which are large in proportion to the skull. The posterior rim of the
  orbit is, with three exceptions, out of the fifty-one species—viz. the
  fishing cat (_F. voverrina_), the rusty spotted cat (_F. rubiginosa_),
  and the flat-headed cat (_F. planiceps_)—incomplete or open. The
  _teeth_ of the fully adult cat should be thirty in number—sixteen in
  the upper jaw and fourteen in the lower. They are divided by the
  comparative anatomist into three sets or groups—viz. incisors,
  canines, premolars, and molars—their number and position being
  concisely expressed by a dental formula thus:—1 ³⁄₃, C. ¹⁄₁, P.M. ⅔,
  M. ¹⁄₁. The six incisors in the upper and lower jaw are small,
  simple-pointed teeth, with a simple fang or root. Then we have a long
  canine or flesh tooth CC.’, the most important functional tooth the
  cat has, for with it and its fellow the living, struggling prey is
  seized, retained, and killed.

[Illustration:

  FIG. II.—SKULL OF THE GREAT SABRE-TOOTHED CAT.

  FROM THE CAVES OF BRAZIL. (_Machœrodus Neogœus._)
]

  In the upper jaw, immediately after the canine, are three premolars
  PM. These are the second or permanent series, and succeed the kitten’s
  milk-teeth. The first one is very small, and has only a single cusp;
  the second is larger, and has two cusps; the third is the largest, and
  is sometimes called the “sectorial” tooth. It has three pointed cusps
  and three fangs, or roots. Immediately behind it, and placed somewhat
  transversely, is the single _true_ molar. It is a small tooth, of
  obtuse form, and indefinitely cusped; it has no predecessor in the
  kitten’s milk set.

[Illustration:

  FIG. III.—SUPERFICIAL FLEXOR TENDONS OF THE CAT’S LEFT FORE-FOOT

  A, Perforatus, or _flexor sub-digitorum_; B, Perforans, or _flexor
    profundus digitorum_.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. IV.—BONES AND PRINCIPAL LIGAMENTS OF A CAT’S TOE, SHOWING
    MECHANISM OF RETRACTILE CLAW.

  A, Distal or terminal phalanx; B, Middle; C, Proximal; D, Perforatus
    tendon; E, Perforans tendon; F, Elastic ligament.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. V.—PADS OF CAT’S LEFT FORE-FOOT.

  A, Plantar pad; B, Digital pad; C, Pisiform pad.
]

  In the lower jaw, immediately after the canine tooth, there are only
  two premolars (PM. PM’.) in the permanent set which have predecessors,
  the last tooth (M.) being the only true molar, and having no
  predecessor in the milk set. Occasionally, in the lower jaw there is a
  small premolar corresponding to the first premolar of the upper jaw.
  In the kitten from about six or seven weeks to about five months old,
  there are only twenty-six teeth, the number and form being very
  similar to the adult set. The two permanent molars in the upper and
  lower jaw are absent.

  The _Axial Skeleton_ (_see_ p. 354) consists of the bones forming the
  neck, thorax, loins, and tail. The neck is relatively short, and
  consists of seven bones—a number almost constant throughout the animal
  kingdom, the giraffe, the hippopotamus, and the whale having the same
  number. Succeeding these are the _dorsal_, or _thoracic_, vertebræ
  (thirteen in number), each one supporting two ribs—one on each side.
  Then follow the seven vertebræ composing the _lumbar_ region. They are
  stout, thick bones, with long, transverse processes for the attachment
  of certain muscles supporting the body cavity, etc. No ribs are
  attached to these bones. Immediately behind are three smaller bones
  forming the _sacrum_, to which the pelvis, or hip-bones, are
  articulated. The terminal bones of the axial skeleton are the tail, or
  caudal, and vary from nineteen to twenty-one.

  The _Ribs_ (thirteen on each side) are extremely light, elastic, and
  slender. Nine of these on each side join the sternum or breast-bone
  directly, and are called true ribs; the remainder are free, and
  terminate in cartilaginous points, which are adherent to the true rib
  terminations, for support.

  The _Sternum_, or breast-bone, consists of eight bones, from each
  joint of which springs a rib-like costal cartilage, to which the true
  ribs are articulated. The cat’s collar-bone or clavicle is very short
  and rudimentary; it has a slight attachment to the acromion process of
  the scapula, the other end terminating in the muscles of the chest. It
  is often absent.

  The _Appendicular Skeleton_ includes the fore and hind limbs. The fore
  limb in the cat, as in the majority of mammals (_see_ plate, p. 355),
  is a subtriangular flat bone, with a ridge on the outer side for the
  attachment of certain muscles moving the leg.

  In a small hollow on the posterior or lower border is articulated the
  head of the _humerus_ (4), or arm-bone; its lower or distal end is
  expanded, and receives the end of the _ulna_ (10), which with the
  _radius_ (9) forms the bones of the forearm. The wrist or carpal bones
  (8) include seven small bones, the upper row being attached to the
  radius, the lower row to the five phalanges of the toes (7); to these
  latter are articulated the bones of the digits, or fingers.

  The terminal bones of the cat’s foot are encased by powerful hooked
  claws (Fig. III.). When at rest, the claw is brought to the outer side
  of the middle phalanx by the elastic ligament F, the flexor tendons
  being relaxed. When the cat is on the point of seizing its prey, the
  greater power of the flexor tendons stretches the weaker elastic
  ligament, the claw is brought down, and so a powerful grip is
  obtained. The under-surface of the cat’s fore and hind feet is
  protected by certain hardened pads of subcutaneous and fibrous
  tissue—viz. the plantar pad, giving chief support to the leg, and the
  digital pads protecting the claws, etc. These pads are, of course, of
  additional use in aiding the cat’s noiseless and stealthy progression.

[Illustration:

  FIG. VI._a._—CAT’S SKULL, VIEW FROM ABOVE.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. VI._b._—CAT’S SKULL, SIDE VIEW, WITH LOWER JAW IN PLACE.
]

[Illustration:

  FIG. VI._c._—CAT’S SKULL FROM BELOW, WITHOUT LOWER JAW, SHOWING
    PALATAL SURFACE.
]

  The cat’s hind limb is articulated by a ball and socket joint to the
  hip-bone or pelvis (20), which is again firmly united to the three
  bones forming the sacrum D. The thigh-bone or femur (19) sustains the
  whole body, and has many powerful muscles attached to it concerned in
  the springing movements so characteristic of the animal; to its lower
  end is articulated the principal bone of the lower leg, the tibia
  (13). At the union of these two bones on the anterior side is the
  knee-cap, or patella (12). On the outer aspect of the tibia is a
  slender bone, the fibula (18), its outer end being attached to a
  prominence on the tibia, the lower end to one of the large bones (the
  astragalus) which form the tarsus of the foot.

  The _Tarsal_ bones (14) consist of seven bones, the largest of which
  is the os calcis (17), or heel-bone, to which powerful muscles are
  attached. Succeeding the tarsal bones are the four bones forming the
  metatarsal bones (the fifth or inner toe being absent, though often
  present in the dog). To these are attached the phalanges of the toes,
  with the claws, etc., similar to the fore-foot.

[Illustration:

  FIG. VII.—SUPERFICIAL MUSCLES OF A CAT.
]

    1.— Maxillaris.

    2.— Caninus, or Nasalis.

    3.— Orbicularis.

    4.— Temporalis.

    5.— Mastoideus.

    6.— Cephalo-humeral.

    7.— Posterior and anterior portions of Trapezius.

    8.— Infraspinatus.

    9.— Latissimus dorsi.

   10.— Great Oblique.

   11.— Prominence of Hip-bone.

   12.— Gluteus medius.

   13.— Prominence of Thigh-bone, or Femur.

   14.— Gluteus maximus.

   15.— Muscles concerned in the movements of the Tail.

   16.— Fascia lata covering deeper muscles.

   17.— Biceps femoralis.

   18.— Semi-tendinosus.

   19.— Gastrocnemius.

   20.— External Saphenous Vein.

   21.— Point of Heel, or Os Calcis.

   22.— Plantar or Flexor Tendons of Sole of Foot.

   23.— Extensor Tendons of Toes.

   24.— Internal or Inner Saphenous.

   25.— Sartorius.

   26.— Rectus abdominis.

   27.— Serratus magnus.

   28.— Pectoralis major.

   29.— Elbow, or Olecranon Process of Ulna.

   30.— Flexor carpi ulnaris.

   31.— Superficial Extensors of Toes.

   32.— Annular or Wrist Ligament.

   33.— Extensor communis digitorum.

   34.— Flexor carpi radialis.

   35.— Extensor carpi radialis.

   36.— Triceps.

   37.— Scapular deltoid.

   38.— Acromion deltoid.

   39.— Mastoideus.

   40.— Sterno-hyoid.

   41.— Parotid Gland.

   42.— Masseter Muscle.

   43.— External Maxillary Vein.

   44.— Zigomaticus.

   45.— Zigomaticus labialis.

  A better idea of the superficial muscles of the cat is obtained from
  an examination of the plate than by any technical description. It will
  be seen that for its size the cat’s muscles are well developed; its
  kin, the lion and tiger, are known for their prodigious strength in
  bearing away young oxen, deer, antelopes, etc., upon which they live,
  as well as for their leaping powers and agility and courage.

  Although the cat’s muscles are identical with those of its more
  powerful relatives, it lives too much in the lap of luxury for them to
  attain to a proportionate development.

  A well-known writer has estimated that there are 500 muscles concerned
  in the movements of the cat’s body.

  The cavity of the cat’s body is separated into two unequal
  compartments by a muscular partition called the midriff or diaphragm.
  In the anterior or foremost cavity are the two lungs, and the heart
  and its blood-vessels; in the larger or most posterior compartment is
  the stomach, intestines, liver, kidneys, etc. Without a considerable
  number of diagrams it is difficult to convey in a popular manner some
  peculiarities of these internal organs. The cat’s tongue (Fig. X.) is,
  however, very characteristic of the order, and is easily observed. It
  is supplied with the usual glands common to all mammals—viz. tonsils
  (B), flattened soft papillæ (C), four circumvallate papillæ (D),
  conical papillæ (E), and the more minute fungiform papillæ (F). The
  peculiarity of the cat’s tongue is that the conical papillæ are
  specialised into horny processes or hooks, as shown in E F, and are of
  value not only in assisting to clear the flesh from bones, but are of
  undoubted use in cleaning the animal’s fur. The cat also has the
  parotid, sublingual, and other glands concerned in the preparation of
  the food for primary digestion.

[Illustration:

  FIG. VIII.—SKELETON OF A CAT.

  _A._ CERVICAL OR NECK BONES (7 in number). _B._ DORSAL OR THORACIC
    BONES (13 in number, each bearing a rib). _C._ LUMBAR BONES (7 in
    number). _D._ SACRAL BONES (3 in number). _E._ CAUDAL OR TAIL BONES
    (19 to 21 in number).
]

    1.— Cranium, or Skull.

    2.— Scapula, or Shoulder-blade.

    3.— Clavicle, or Collar-bone.

    4.— Humerus.

    5.— Sternum, or Breast-bone.

    6.— Phalanges of the Toes.

    7.— Metacarpal Bones.

    8.— Carpal or Wrist-bones.

    9.— Radius.

   10.— Ulna.

   11.— Costal cartilages, uniting ends of Ribs to Sternum.

   12.— Patella, or Knee-cap.

   13.— Tibia.

   14.— Tarsal Bones.

   15.— Metatarsal Bones.

   16.— Phalanges of Hind Toes.

   17.— Heel-bone, or “Calcis.”

   18.— Fibula.

   19.— Femur, or Thigh-bone.

   20.— Pelvis, or Hip-bone.

  The cat’s liver is mainly on its right side; it is divided into
  several lobes, which give it a complicated appearance as compared with
  the simpler livers of other animals. The gallbladder is present in the
  usual position. The cat’s heart is somewhat small for the size of the
  animal, and is not so pointed at its apex as in other animals; the
  veins entering the heart, and the branching of the arteries leaving
  it, are nearly identical with those of closely allied animals. The
  time required for the complete circulation of the blood throughout the
  body of the cat is fourteen to sixteen seconds. The pulse, each beat
  of which corresponds to one contraction of the left ventricle of the
  heart, may easily be felt on the inner side of the fore-paw, about an
  inch above the prominence of the radius; it may also be felt at the
  same place as the horse’s pulse—on the inner side of the lower jaw.
  There are two other situations on the cat’s body where it may be felt,
  but to find the exact point requires some intimate anatomical
  knowledge. The temperature, or normal heat, of the body of the cat is
  100° F.; it may, however, be slightly above or below this.

  The brain of the cat, following the general structure of the higher
  mammals, is divided into very similar areas or divisions. The larger
  or more anterior portion is called the cerebrum (Fig. I., A), and is
  divided into right and left hemispheres. Its surface is divided into
  convolutions or gyri (E) by certain shallow fissures, which have
  received specific names. Very intimately attached to the under-surface
  of this part of the brain are the olfactory lobes (D), in which are
  situated certain nerves concerned in the sense of smell. The hinder
  and smaller part of the brain is called the cerebellum (B), and is
  much darker in colour than the cerebrum. Its surface is made up of
  numerous small foldings of its substance, which, on section, look like
  the branches of a small tree; these branches finally fuse and
  terminate on the under-side of the base of the brain.

  Intimately associated in a most complex manner with the cerebrum and
  cerebellum is the medulla oblongata (C), an enlarged part of the
  spinal cord. The brain of the cat, it may be remarked, is not nearly
  so highly organised as that of the dog.

[Illustration:

  FIG. best-marked.—THE CAT’S EYE.
]

      AT DAY-TIME.      │    AT NIGHT-TIME.     │
 A.—Contracted linear   │A.—Expanded and nearly │
   pupil.               │  circular pupil.      │
 B.—Iris.               │B.—Iris.               │
                        │                       │C.—Cat’s eye, showing
 C.—Nictitating membrane│C.—Nictitating         │  the third eyelid or
   (Plica semilunaris). │  membrane.            │  nictitating membrane
                        │                       │  fully extended.
 D.—Opening of the      │D.—Opening of Harderian│
   Harderian Gland Duct.│  Duct.                │

  In all the higher mammals the eye can accommodate itself to the
  varying influence of light. This is mainly done by means of the
  central black part or pupil (Fig. IX., A). The pupil is merely a hole
  in the iris, or coloured part of the eyeball (B), and it is by its
  contraction or expansion that the exact amount of light necessary is
  admitted to act upon the sensitive retina at the back of the eye. The
  form of the pupil varies considerably in different animals. In the
  cat’s eye during bright sunshine it is reduced to a thin vertical
  line; at dusk it expands to a nearly circular form. This vertical
  reduction is by no means common to the entire cat family. In very many
  species the pupil retains a rounded form even when contracted to its
  minimum.

  On the inner angle of the cat’s eye there is a curious
  semi-transparent fold of skin, called by naturalists the plica
  semilunaris, or nictitating membrane. In reptiles and birds this is a
  very important factor in the preservation of the eye from external
  injuries, and it acts also as a regulator of the admission of light.
  It is well developed in nocturnal reptiles and birds, and as the cat’s
  ancestors were doubtless more nocturnal than they are now, it probably
  was in active use. It is, however, useless now, the cat having no
  control over it. It is one of many interesting vestigial structures
  the cat carries about with it of its former ancestry from a
  lower-organised animal.


                  THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE CAT FAMILY.

  Long-continued and systematic study of the habits of living animals
  has led to the division of the surface of the world into specific
  areas, called Zoogeographical regions, of which there are six—viz. (1)
  Palæarctic region; (2) Ethiopian or African region; (3) Oriental or
  Indian region; (4) Australian region; (5) Nearctic or North American
  region; and (6) Neotropical or South American region. The cats of the
  Old World and of the New World are, with the exception of the
  debatable northern lynx, specifically distinct. No native cats exist
  in Australia.

[Illustration:

  FIG. X.—SURFACE OF THE CAT’S TONGUE.

  A.—Epiglottis or upper cartilage of windpipe.
  B.—Tonsil.
  C.—Flattened or soft papillæ.
  D.—Circumvallate papillæ.
  E.—Horny conical papillæ.
  E. 1.—The same enlarged.
  F.—Fungiform papillæ.
]

  The Palæarctic region comprises the whole of Europe, part of North
  Africa, and extends eastward to Kamtchatka, and includes the islands
  of Japan. There are about twenty-one known species of the cat family
  inhabiting this extensive area, the best-known being the tiger, which
  is found in Mongolia; the common leopard, widely distributed in
  Southern Siberia; the snow leopard, wild cats, the lynx, and many
  others. The Ethiopian or African region includes the whole of the
  continent of Africa up to the tropic of Cancer, and the greater part
  of Arabia and Madagascar. About nine species are known to inhabit this
  region. The best-known are the lion, leopard, serval, Egyptian cat,
  caracal lynx, and cheetah. The Oriental or Indian region includes a
  strip of southern Persia, the whole of India, China, and the Malay
  peninsula, Borneo, and other islands of the East Indian Archipelago.
  There are about sixteen species inhabiting this region. The best-known
  examples of the cat family here are the lion (inhabiting the southern
  portions of Persia), tiger, leopard, cheetah, clouded leopard, and a
  great variety of the smaller species.

  The Nearctic or North American region includes Greenland and the whole
  of the continent of North America down to Mexico City and Vera Cruz.
  There are only seven indigenous species of the cat family, the
  best-known being the puma, which also extends into the neotropical
  region, the northern and the bay lynx.

  The Neotropical or South American region extends from Vera Cruz in
  Central America, through the whole of South America to Patagonia.
  About thirteen well-marked species of the cat family inhabit this
  region. The better-known species are the puma, jaguar, ocelot, margay,
  pampas cat, and the curious eeyra.

                                                         ROBERT HOLDING.




               THE DISEASES OF CATS, AND THEIR TREATMENT.

                       _By HENRY GRAY, M.R.C.V.S._


                      ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICINE.

[Illustration:

  GIVING MEDICINE.
]

  In the treatment of the diseases of the cat, the correct method of
  administering whatever medicaments are deemed necessary is a most
  important consideration. To the uninitiated and timid the task is
  generally a difficult one, and may, in some cases, appear almost
  impossible; but with a little practice, aided by courage and
  determination, the difficulties can nearly always be overcome. The
  administration of medicine, however, is seldom so easy in the case of
  the cat as in that of the dog.

  Some cats are so gentle that the mouth can easily be opened by means
  of the index finger and thumb of the left hand acting as a wedge
  between the jaws. The palm of the hand rests on the top of the head,
  while the finger and thumb gently but firmly press the cheeks at the
  angle of the jaws inwards, until they intervene between the finger and
  thumb of the operator and the posterior teeth of the patient.

  The jaws being thus kept open, and the head at the same time raised,
  the right hand of the operator drops the pill or powder at the back of
  the mouth between the tongue and palate. This having been
  accomplished, the right hand is passed under the lower jaw, so as to
  keep the head raised until the animal swallows, while the left hand is
  withdrawn from its previous position and the jaws allowed to close,
  thus facilitating the act of swallowing.

  For the administration of liquid medicine it is not necessary to open
  the mouth. The operator grasps the head with his left hand, and taking
  the spoon in his right he slowly and carefully drops the liquid
  between the teeth, or into the space between the cheek and teeth, at
  the angle of the mouth. For the cat, a coffee-spoon is preferable to a
  tea-spoon, and care must be taken that too much is not poured into the
  mouth at once. The dose should be administered drop by drop, and time
  allowed for swallowing.


                        DISEASES OF THE STOMACH.

  =Vomiting=, though a symptom common to many diseases, may be quite
  natural in some instances, such as over feeding or during the weaning
  period, when the mother cat eats a lot of animal food and then brings
  it home and vomits it up for her young kittens to feed upon.

  The act consists of ejecting the contents of the stomach up through
  the gullet and then out of the mouth.

  The causes of vomition are various: Worms travelling from the bowel
  into the stomach, emetics, expectorants, poisons, foreign bodies (as
  hair, cork, pins, etc.); bad or altered food, blood poisoning,
  distemper, gastritis, tumours, tuberculosis, jaundice, diseases of the
  kidneys, etc., may produce it.

  It may also occur from parasites in the ear, foreign bodies in the
  mouth, and as a symptom of brain disease, such as meningitis.

  _Treatment._—This depends upon the cause, which should be removed if
  possible. When due to foreign bodies or altered food, an emetic
  (especially the hypodermic injection of ¹⁄₄₀ to ¹⁄₂₀ grain of
  apomorphine hydrochloride) would most likely remove the source of
  trouble. If the foreign body cannot be removed by simple means, an
  operation may be deemed necessary. If due to inflammation of the
  stomach, bismuth and aërated soda-water are of great value. Ice and
  cocaine or chloretone are occasionally useful when these have failed.
  Sometimes it is necessary to wash the stomach out with mild
  antiseptics. If of nervous origin, a hypodermic injection of ¹⁄₁₂ to ⅛
  grain of morphine, or five-minim doses of tincture of opium or bromide
  of potassium, given by the mouth, may prove successful. When resulting
  from tumours or tuberculosis, humanity dictates that the lethal
  chamber should be called into requisition and the animal put out of
  its misery. Easily assimilable and non-irritating food only should be
  given for a few days. Aërated soda-water forms the best drinking
  fluid.

  =Gastritis=, or inflammation of the stomach, is sometimes called
  gastric fever, and when of a mild type, gastric catarrh. Its causes
  are variable. It may be due to altered or decomposed food, distemper,
  microbes of various kinds, large doses of emetics or aperients,
  mineral poisons, chills, absorption of dressing applied to the skin,
  or licking the same off. It is also caused by worms, especially the
  broad-necked tapeworm (_Tænia crassicollis_), travelling into the
  stomach and setting up irritation. Again, diseases of the uterus,
  liver, kidneys, and other organs give rise to gastritis. It frequently
  rages as an epizöotic, causing considerable mortality in some
  catteries, especially after cat shows.

  _Symptoms._—The disease is ushered in by sudden vomiting of the food,
  followed by the repeated rejection of ropy mucus, and then, if the
  case is severe, this is succeeded by a thin, clear, greenish-yellow or
  bloody fluid; saliva flows from the mouth, the thirst is great,
  especially for cold water, which is generally expelled almost as soon
  as taken; there is a distressed appearance, restlessness, or a
  frequent shifting of the posture. As a rule, the animal prefers to lie
  on its belly full length, with its limbs resting on cold objects.

  Pressure on the region of the stomach causes moaning and sometimes
  vomiting. After the lapse of some time, when a fatal termination is
  advancing, the eyes appear sunken, the pupils become dilated, the
  expression is sad, the animal becomes cold and indifferent to his
  surroundings, the mouth gives off an offensive odour, and the coat is
  dull, open, and lustreless. The animal dies either in a comatose state
  or from sudden failure of the heart during a fit of vomiting.

  _Treatment._—If recognised early, an emetic is sometimes very useful
  in cutting short the complaint. No food or ordinary water should be
  allowed until twenty-four to forty-eight hours have elapsed since the
  last vomiting; but a teaspoonful of Brand’s essence of beef jelly and
  two to four teaspoonfuls of aërated water should be given every four
  hours. Bismuth subnitrate or carbonate in five-grain doses may be
  shaken on the tongue an hour before these two latter are administered.

  If this means of treatment should prove ineffectual after twenty-four
  hours, one may conclude that the disease is of a severe type, and in
  this case one to five minims of the liquid extract of opium in a
  little mucilage, or chloretone, ½ to 2½ grains, should be given every
  three hours. Feeding by means of rectal suppositories, or injection of
  an ounce of milk containing a little common salt, may be attempted.
  Finally, if this fail, washing out the stomach with borax or boracic
  acid, or chinosol and warm water, and a hypodermic injection of
  bullock’s or sheep’s serum might be tried. In gastric inflammation due
  to infection the hypodermic injection of quinine hydrochloride or
  trichloride of iodine will sometimes answer when everything else has
  failed. Cocaine and orthoform have no advantage over opiates,
  especially the denarcotised preparations, in soothing the stomach. Ice
  in small pieces pushed down the throat sometimes answers in assuaging
  the thirst when the soda-water does not. In the chronic form, doses of
  ⅛ to ½ grain of calomel or mercury with chalk given with bismuth three
  times a day are beneficial in many instances.

  =Enteritis=, or inflammation of the intestines or bowels, frequently
  co-exists with gastritis, and then the disease takes on the term of
  _gastro-enteritis_. The causes, like those of gastritis, are various.
  It may be due to infection, bad food, drugs, foreign bodies, chills,
  distemper, intussusception or irritating enemas, etc. There also seems
  to be a special contagious type of this disease which frequently
  causes great mortality in catteries, especially with kittens.
  Generally the small intestine forms the seat of the disease, which may
  in rare cases, however, extend the whole length of the bowel, which is
  sometimes lined with a croupy or diphtheritic membrane.

  The _symptoms_ are restlessness, great pain, frequent crying or
  moaning, offensive and profuse and frequent diarrhœa, the dejections
  varying in colour and consistence and frequently containing blood, and
  sometimes vomiting, especially when the stomach is implicated; thirst
  is intense, food is refused, the animal is cold, haggard, and
  depressed; its fur is dull, open, and lustreless, and becomes soiled,
  giving off an abominable odour. When the abdomen is manipulated, the
  animal cries or moans from the pain caused. If the pupils are dilated
  and the expression has an anxious appearance, and emaciation is rapid,
  a fatal termination may be anticipated.

  The _treatment_ varies according to the cause. If the case is seen in
  the early stage a tea- to a dessert-spoonful of castor-oil containing
  1 to 2½ minims of liquid extract of opium may be given at once, to
  clear out any irritating material from the bowels and also to allay
  pain and irritation; or morphine in ¹⁄₁₅ to ¹⁄₁₂ grain doses may be
  injected under the skin every four hours. Bismuth salicylate, in
  five-grain doses, should be dropped on the tongue about the same time.
  Starch enemas containing liquid extract of opium may also be
  administered. Boiled milk containing bicarbonate of soda should be
  given in small and repeated quantities.

  Turpentine stupes frequently applied to the abdomen are recommended,
  but, where this is objected to, the floor of the abdomen may be
  painted with tincture of capsicum, or tincture of iodine, until
  soreness is produced, the hair being first clipped off.

  In those cases of epizöotic nature, isolation is called for. The food
  and surroundings should be changed, and the catteries and utensils
  thoroughly cleansed and disinfected. In the chronic form a powder
  composed of bismuth salicylate 2 to 5 grains, and β-naphthol 1 to 2½
  grains, should be shaken on the tongue three times a day. Milk and
  rice form the best diet.

  =Diarrhœa=, like vomiting, is not a disease of itself, but an
  expression of many different affections. It may be salutary or
  otherwise. It may be due to aperients, irritating or indigestible
  food, microbes, diseases of the bowels, kidneys, and liver. It
  frequently results from distemper or gastro-enteritis, tuberculosis,
  intestinal catarrh, and from licking applications put on the skin in
  the treatment of skin affections. Sour milk, tainted milk or fish, and
  chills will also induce it. In kittens improper food, especially
  during hot weather, is a common cause.

  The _symptoms_ are a looseness of the dejections from the bowels,
  which are passed several times a day. The stools vary in colour
  according to the food taken by the animal, or according to the
  severity of the cause; they are generally of a very offensive odour,
  and may contain blood.

  _Treatment._—If the cause of the diarrhœa is due to irritating food, a
  dose of castor-oil will be beneficial. When due to catarrh of the
  bowels, the carbonate, subnitrate, or salicylate of bismuth, in
  five-grain doses, two or three times a day, is the most appropriate
  treatment. If it is associated with distemper or typhus, the bismuth
  salts mentioned above, or tannablin or tannigen, in 2½- to 5-grain
  doses, are suitable. For chronic diarrhœa, 2½ to 5 grains of
  salicylate of bismuth, with 1 to 5 grains of β-naphthol, given three
  times a day on the food, is generally followed by recovery.

  Failing this, a mixture composed of dilute sulphuric acid,
  concentrated infusion of cloves, and concentrated infusion of
  hæmatoxylin should be tried.

  When the diarrhœa is due to irritation of the so-called large or
  posterior bowel, injections containing starch, laudanum, and tannic
  acid should be used.

  As long as the diarrhœa lasts, no meat or meat infusions should be
  given, but milk, rice-pudding, bread and milk, and such-like food are
  suitable.

  =Constipation= is an impaction of fæces in the hind bowel, and is
  generally due to weakness of this portion of gut, or results from a
  cleanly animal having no place to evacuate its fæces in. Sometimes it
  is due to a ball of fur, and occasionally foreign bodies, such as
  cat’s-meat skewers, being swallowed along with the meat by a greedy
  animal. When due to paralysis of the bowel, which is occasionally seen
  in young cats, the abdomen becomes distended by the fæces in the
  bowel. It also occurs as a symptom of spinal paralysis. The
  non-passage of fæces seen in cats when not well and not taking solid
  food must not be confounded with constipation.

  The _symptoms_, as a rule, are the non-passage of fæces for some time,
  distension of the abdomen, and impaction of the bowel with fæces which
  can be felt by manipulating the abdomen.

  _Treatment._—A dose of castor-oil and an enema of soapy water or
  glycerine will generally put matters right. If these means do not
  succeed, massage or kneading of the bowels, by grasping the abdomen
  with the hand and alternately compressing and relaxing the grasp, will
  assist to stimulate the intestines to force on their contents. Of
  course, this only applies when impaction is due to soft material and
  not hard foreign bodies, which, in this latter case, should be removed
  by the fingers or forceps. If any irritation of the mucous membrane,
  evidenced by frequent straining as if to pass fæces, remains after the
  bowels have been relieved, an enema of warm salad oil, containing a
  few drops of liquid extract of opium, will allay it, and prevent
  straining. In case of the bowel remaining weakened or paralysed so as
  to bring about a recurrence of the constipation, pills containing ¹⁄₁₆
  grain of the alcoholic extract of nux vomica should be administered
  morning, noon, and night _after_ food.


                  WORMS, OR INTERNAL ANIMAL PARASITES.

  Cats, like all other animals, are liable to be infested with worms,
  which may not cause any disturbance, unless in great numbers or when
  another disease is in existence.

  The =Common Round-worm= is very prevalent in young kittens, generally
  when they are living on milk, upon which these worms thrive.

  Their natural residence in the cat is in the small intestine, but
  sometimes they wander from here into the stomach, and set up vomiting
  and occasionally convulsions.

  _Treatment._—The worms should be expelled and the animal fed on
  nutritious and stimulating food, such as raw fish, raw meat, and fresh
  birds. The milk, to which is added a pinch of salt, should be boiled.
  The best remedy to expel these worms is santonin given along with or
  followed by an aperient. The following is a convenient formula:—

                           Santonin 1 grain.
                           Calomel  ½   „

  This powder is to be dropped on the back of the tongue of an adult cat
  after fasting twelve hours, every other morning, until four doses have
  been given. Half this quantity is suitable for a cat three or four
  months old, and a quarter for a kitten of a month to six weeks of age.

  The commonest =Tapeworm= of the cat is the _Tænia elliptica vel
  felis_, with which fifty per cent. or more are affected. It is caused
  by fleas, lice, and mange-mites which have at some time or another
  infested the cat.

  They do not seem to cause much harm, even when numbering hundreds. In
  one case that I encountered the cat was in the pink of condition, and
  yet I found 700 of these worms.

  It is a delicate tapeworm with joints resembling a cucumber in
  outline. The ripe joints, which are often of a reddish tint,
  frequently become detached, and pass with the fæces, on which they are
  seen. They are generally termed by fanciers _maw-worms_.

  _Treatment._—The worms should be expelled, and fleas, lice, or
  mange-mites destroyed, so as to prevent a recurrence of the trouble.

  Another tapeworm of the cat is the _Tænia crassicollis_, or
  broad-necked species. It is seen only in cats that kill and eat rats
  and mice, in the liver of which the larval form of this parasite
  resides.

  It is a big, coarse tapeworm, measuring eighteen to thirty inches in
  length, and having no well defined neck.

  _Treatment._—For the expulsion of tapeworms there are many remedies,
  the best of which are areca nut, kamala, oil of male fern,
  pomegranate, and kousso, but as the dose of these in the crude is
  generally too bulky for the cat, it is advisable to give either of
  them, with the exception of the male fern, in their alkaloidal form,
  as:—

                      Koussein     ½ to 2 grains.
                      Kamalin      ½ to 2   „
                      Arecoline    ¼ to ½ grain.
                      Pelletierine ¼ to ½   „

  Any one of these may be given either in pill or tabloid form, or
  rubbed up with milk sugar, as a powder on an empty stomach after the
  animal has fasted at least twelve hours, and repeated every third or
  fourth morning. A dose of castor-oil or jalap should be given an hour
  after. The oil of male fern is best administered in a capsule.
  Powdered pumpkin seed may be sprinkled on the food.


                        DISEASES OF THE KIDNEYS.

  Diseases of the kidneys, such as degeneration, fatty degeneration,
  parasitic disease, tuberculosis, cancer, acute and chronic Bright’s
  disease, and calculi are not rare, but, as the space at our command is
  limited, we only mention them.

  =Incontinence=, or the involuntary passage of urine, is usually due to
  weakness of the bladder, brought about by over-distension. It
  sometimes results from injury to the spine and calculi.

  The _treatment_ that is best suited for this is the administration of
  ¹⁄₁₆ grain of the alcoholic extract of nux vomica and ½ grain of
  quinine in a pill three times a day. If there be irritability of the
  bladder, soda bicarbonate 2 grains and extract of henbane ⅛ grain in a
  pill should be given.

  Retention of urine is generally caused by a calculus or chalky
  material blocking up the urethra or canal leading from the bladder,
  and preventing the exit of the fluid. If relief is not given to the
  bladder—that is, if the obstruction is not immediately removed—the
  urine decomposes and then sets up inflammation of the bladder, and
  death takes place from uræmic poisoning.

  _Symptoms._—The cat seems in pain, and makes ineffectual attempts to
  pass its urine; it strains to no purpose; it seems restless, getting
  up, lying down, rolling on its side, swishing its tail, looking
  towards its side, and crying. After a time the animal becomes drowsy
  and indifferent. If the abdomen is manipulated, the bladder will be
  felt to be distended, hard, and painful.

  _Treatment._—The only rational treatment is to remove the obstruction
  and pass the catheter immediately, a special silver catheter, half the
  size of the smallest human catheter, being required for this purpose.
  If the urine is bloody, it may be necessary to wash out the bladder
  with a warm solution of boracic acid and alkalis and sedatives, but no
  meat or meat extracts should be given.


                  DISEASES OF AIR PASSAGES AND LUNGS.

  =A Common Cold=, or coryza, or acute nasal catarrh, or cold in the
  head, is caused by exposing the cat to the inclement weather, or
  washing it and not thoroughly drying afterwards. It may also be due to
  the irritating vapours of chloroform or ether used by inhalation to
  produce anæsthesia. Letting a cat out in the cold and wet after it has
  been used to a warm, dry dwelling sometimes results in a cold. It is
  not contagious, but is frequently mistaken for distemper.

  _Symptoms._—There is frequent sneezing, and sometimes a cough; a clear
  watery discharge trickles from the corner of the eyelids and nostrils.
  After a time this discharge becomes gluey, thick, and yellowish or
  greenish; the eyelids become partially closed, and the haw protrudes
  over the front of the eyeball; food is refused, or sparingly eaten;
  the fur is dull and open; warm or dark corners are sought for; the
  animal trembles and seems miserable. If the throat is sore, there is a
  cough; the breathing is wheezy, and a discharge may issue from the
  angles of the mouth. These symptoms generally pass away in a few days.

  _Treatment._—Where many cats are kept, an animal suffering from “a
  cold” should be isolated from the rest as soon as possible, as it is
  difficult to distinguish a simple case of “catarrh” from the early
  stage of a case of distemper. A warm place, well ventilated, but free
  from draughts, is essential.

  Raw meat, scraped and given three times a day, is the best diet. Fish,
  milk, bread and milk, or rice-pudding should be offered.

  A small pilule of half a grain of quinine sulphate should be dropped
  at the back of the mouth three times a day. The nostrils and eyelids
  should be sponged with a warm solution of boric acid, containing eight
  grains to the ounce of water, and afterwards smeared with a little
  white vaseline three times a day. Sanitas or turpentine should be
  sprinkled on the floor of the room. Great relief is often given by
  inhaling the fumes of eucalyptus oil dropped into a jug of boiling
  water.

  =Chronic Nasal Catarrh=, sometimes called “feline glanders,” differs
  from the preceding complaint, inasmuch as it runs a longer and more
  persistent course; it may, however, follow on simple catarrh which has
  been neglected. Distemper is one of the commonest causes of it, but it
  is also seen after diphtheria. It may occur as a symptom of
  tuberculosis, foreign bodies in the nasal channels, malignant growths,
  such as sarcoma or cancer attacking the turbinated bones, diseased
  bone, or teeth, etc.

  When neglected, it may last for months or even years, and is
  frequently incurable.

  _Symptoms._—There is a persistent gluey, odourless, or sometimes fœtid
  discharge either of a gelatinous or yellowish appearance, with or
  without streaks of blood from the nostrils, the outsides of which are
  sometimes ulcerated. The throat may be swollen; the appetite and
  general condition of the animal are often preserved. Sometimes there
  is an abscess in the inner corner of the eye.

  _Treatment._—In those cases that are due to malignant tumours or
  tuberculosis, and, in consequence, incurable, merciful destruction of
  the animal is called for. If due to foreign bodies—as fish-bones,
  pieces of grass, or food, or to diseased teeth—they should be removed.

  Syringing the nostrils, so as to wash the diseased lining membrane of
  the nasal channels, with some mild antiseptic is the only means to
  insure success. The mode of procedure is this: A skilled assistant
  must firmly secure the animal between his hands—that is, he holds the
  limbs firmly—then the operator grasps the head with his left hand,
  taking care to keep the mouth shut by means of the thumb and index
  finger, and steadies it on the table; and with the right hand he
  carefully and gently passes the pipe of the syringe up one of the
  nasal channels and then presses out the fluid. When this is finished,
  the other nostril is served the same.

  The following is a suitable formula for the solution to be injected:—

                 Alum                        30 grains.
                 Boric Acid                  2 drachms.
                 Liquid Extract of Hydrastis 2   „
                 Warm Water                  ½ pint.

  This should be used every other day until some benefit is derived from
  it. If the disease is not amenable after a fortnight’s adoption of
  this treatment, the following should be substituted:—

                 Tincture of Iodine (B. P.) 10 minims.
                 Glycerine                  6 ounces.
                 Warm Water                 1 ounce.

  Pills of iron, quinine, arsenic, and such-like, as well as plenty of
  flesh food along with cod-liver oil, should be given. Fresh air is
  invigorating, and a change to the seaside sometimes does miracles.
  Eucalyptus sprinkled about the cat’s box is useful, because it acts
  not only as an antiseptic, but as a stimulant to the mucous membrane
  of the nostrils.

  =Bronchitis=, or inflammation of the bronchial or air tubes, may occur
  as a sequel to catarrh or during its course, and may also accompany
  distemper. It is also due to small worms in the tubes; washing
  followed by exposure to draughts; medicine, especially light powders,
  going down the windpipe, etc. It is frequently due to tuberculosis.

  _Symptoms._—There is a frequent cough, the breathing is wheezy, and
  sometimes quickened or difficult. The desire for warmth is great;
  there is shivering, and perhaps a discharge from the eyes and nose. On
  listening to the chest by means of the stethoscope, wheezing or
  hissing or bubbling sounds will be heard.

  _Treatment._—The animal should be kept in a constant temperature of
  60° F., and have warm milk and beef administered to it. The throat and
  sides should be rubbed with oil of mustard. Inhalations of steam are
  useful when expectoration seems difficult. Kermes mineral (two grains)
  and powdered squill (one grain) should be given.

  =Pneumonia=, or inflammation of the substance of the lungs, may be due
  to various causes, such as exposure to cold, chills after washing,
  medicines passing down the windpipe, foreign bodies, blood-poisoning,
  small worms, and principally distemper or tuberculosis. It may be
  associated with pleurisy or bronchitis, and is then termed
  pleuropneumonia or bronchopneumonia respectively; and also sometimes
  with a purulent collection or tuberculosis, and then it receives the
  names septic pneumonia or tubercular pneumonia, or phthisis.

  _Symptoms._—At first there is intense shivering, a great desire for
  warmth, loss of appetite, dull appearance, dull cough, sickness,
  difficulty of breathing, which after some days becomes laboured or
  panting. On auscultation of the chest the characteristic sounds may be
  heard. At first fine crepitations, then a day or two after the tubular
  or blowing sounds, and when convalescence sets in the fine crackling
  or crepitating sounds are heard again. The cough becomes more frequent
  and the appetite increases. On the other hand, if there be no
  improvement, the coat becomes dull and open, the eyes sunken, and the
  pupils dilated; the flanks move up and down like a pump-handle, and
  the breath becomes fœtid; food is totally refused, and diarrhœa sets
  in, a fatal termination is to be anticipated.

  _Treatment._—The animal should be kept in a temperature of 60° F., and
  fresh air, but no draughts, allowed. The sides are to be rubbed with
  oil of mustard, or painted with tincture of iodine, or an ointment
  composed of one part of tartar emetic to eight of lard. Quinine
  sulphate, ½ grain; alcoholic extract of nux vomica, ¹⁄₁₆ grain; and
  extract of digitalis, ⅛ grain, in a pill, may be administered every
  four hours, and nourishing food given. In the case of tubercular
  pneumonia, which is generally chronic, the animal should be destroyed.

  =Pleurisy=, or inflammation of the covering of the lungs or internal
  lining of the chest cavity, in the cat as well as in the dog, is
  chiefly due to tuberculosis. It may, however, result from pneumonia,
  abscess in the lung, cancer, parasites, injuries, foreign bodies,
  gunshot wounds, cold, etc. It is generally accompanied with a dirty
  sanious, or clear amber-tinted, or port-wine-coloured fluid, sometimes
  containing yellowish white strings of lymph floating in it in the
  chest cavity. One or both sides may be affected. It is usually fatal.

  _Symptoms._—The cat has an anxious, painful facial expression, and
  moans, or rather grunts, and sometimes attempts to bite when the chest
  is touched or made to move; the abdomen is retracted, and the
  breathing, which is short and jerky, seems to be performed by the
  flanks. There is a slight or suppressed cough, but this is often
  absent. The animal wastes away, the coat becomes dull and open and
  lustreless, and the hairs are easily pulled out. The creature hides
  under the furniture and refuses its food, and when a fatal termination
  is at hand, the flanks move up and down like a pump-handle, the
  breathing becomes difficult and suffocative, the mouth, which is
  offensive, being opened at every inspiratory and expiratory effort;
  the tongue becomes purplish, the elbows turn out, the cat assumes a
  squatting position on all fours, and a fœtid diarrhœa sets in.

  _Treatment._—Although generally fatal, treatment may be desired to be
  attempted. The chest should be painted with tincture of iodine or oil
  of mustard; if there be much pain, a hypodermic injection of morphine
  will prove useful, and a pill composed of ¼ grain powdered digitalis
  leaves, ½ grain sulphate of quinine, and 1 grain of iodide of
  potassium, administered three times a day. When the breathing becomes
  difficult in consequence of the accumulation of fluid in the chest
  cavity, it may be deemed advisable to draw the fluid off by means of a
  trocar. Nourishing liquid food, such as milk, Mosquera’s beef jelly,
  or eggs, should be given, little and often.


                               DISTEMPER.

  Distemper is a contagious, inoculable fever, due to a specific microbe
  (the cocco-bacillus, or pasteurella of Lignières), and is similar, if
  not identical, to that causing distemper in the dog. Krajewsky,
  Laosson, Lignières, and others have experimentally demonstrated its
  identity, but I have never observed the cat naturally giving the dog
  distemper, nor _vice versâ_, and I believe this is the experience of
  most veterinary surgeons in this country.

  The microbe of distemper—which belongs to the same class of
  micro-organisms, the pasteurella, that causes influenza in the horse,
  fowl cholera, swine-fever, guineapig distemper, etc.—is generally
  found in the blood, which it alters to such a degree as to make so
  profound an impression on the system as to diminish its natural
  resistance to the ordinary germs, which become, in consequence,
  increased in virulence, and cause the various phenomena by which we
  know the disease. It is difficult to detect in the body after about a
  week.

  The disease varies in severity according to the degree of virulence of
  the microbe. If this is very virulent, it causes a _very acute_ or
  _septic disease_, as is observed in the typhus or gastro-enteric
  outbreak, which kills off a large number of animals within a few days
  or even hours. If it is of a milder strength, we get the _subacute
  form with localisations_, such as we usually see in distemper. There
  is also a _chronic form_, which lasts a long time, and which tries the
  patience of the owner as well as the vitality of the sufferer.
  Finally, a _chronic wasting_ or _cachectic form_ is sometimes
  observed; it resembles the “going light” in birds and other animals,
  and may be mistaken for starvation, which it simulates very much.

  The microbe may exist in a healthy cat’s body for weeks without
  causing it any disturbance until, perhaps, the animal catches cold, or
  is depressed in some other manner. However, an apparently healthy
  animal with this microbe in it may be infective for other cats.

  _Period of Incubation._—This varies according to the degree of
  virulence of the microbe and the state of the cat’s system and the
  surroundings in which it is kept. A very virulent infection has a much
  shorter period of incubation than a mild infection. Whereas the former
  may cause distemper in from two to five days, the latter takes from
  one to three weeks. It seems doubtful whether the specific microbe
  causes the symptoms we usually see in distemper, or if these are due
  to a secondary infection resulting from the invasion of the normal
  microbes of the body, which have become virulent, and prey upon their
  hosts.

  _Duration of the Disease._—This, like the period of incubation, varies
  also according to the degree of virulence of the virus. A very
  virulent virus kills in a few days or even hours, or the animal
  recovers very quickly. It is not so with a virus of a milder degree of
  virulence, which may cause symptoms that take from one to five or six
  weeks to disappear, if the animal recover. In other cases the disease
  shows itself in so mild a form that it appears like an ordinary
  catarrh, and recovery is established within a few days.

  In a few instances death takes place suddenly before any premonitory
  symptoms have had time to develop.

  The principal _sources of propagation_ of the infection are cat shows,
  catteries (especially those belonging to people who exhibit), homes
  for lost and stray cats, and institutions that take in these animals
  as boarders. The cat dealer’s shop is not free from blame—many newly
  purchased kittens develop distemper a few days after purchase,
  contracted, no doubt, at the dealer’s. Many cases have been traced to
  the cattery where the female has been sent to stud. Hampers, cages,
  and persons coming from infected catteries are so many media of
  contagion. Even if a cat has apparently recovered from the disease, it
  may still give off infection and contaminate other cats for a variable
  but uncertain period.

  Although the disease may be seen at all times of the year, it is most
  prevalent during spring and autumn, especially if the weather is
  changeable and wet.

  Moisture of the atmosphere favours the increase of distemper. Wet,
  following very dry weather, continuous dampness and rain, all
  predispose an animal to the disease. Where catteries or homes for lost
  and strays are continuously being washed out and not properly dried,
  especially in damp weather, before the cats are allowed into the
  rooms, distemper is very prevalent.

  Where too many cats are crowded into a given space, especially if the
  place is badly lighted and not very well ventilated, this is
  favourable for the contamination of the inmates.

  The _mortality_ varies according to the breed of the animal, its
  surroundings, and the degree of virulence of the infection. Seasons
  and periods have also some bearing on it. Commonbred cats allowed to
  roam out in the open at their will are more likely to recover from the
  disease, but if confined to cages or in catteries, or in the house,
  the mortality is quite twenty-five per cent. The long-haired cats are
  less resistant against it, and as many as fifty percent. die. In the
  Siamese breed of cats, the fatality is as high as ninety out of every
  hundred. The younger the animals, the greater the deathrate; yet, on
  the other hand, if old animals are very fat or anæmic from want of
  fresh air and exercise, the mortality is just as high.

  Many cats are resistant at one time against the infection, others have
  it in a mild form, and yet others have it severely; but this does not
  always prevent them from having it again at some future period. My
  experience is that a cat may frequently have a recurrence of distemper
  at least two or three times, and then succumb to it.

  One season it may appear as a contagious catarrh, another season as an
  infectious sore throat, and at other times as a bronchitis or
  pneumonia, and, lastly, as a contagious gastritis or gastro-enteritis.
  Frequently all these forms may co-exist in a single outbreak, and
  often a single animal exhibits the whole of these manifestations. For
  the convenience of description of the symptoms of this multiform
  malady we divide it into five principal forms, as follow:—


    1. The _Catarrhal_, attacking chiefly the eyes and nostrils.

    2. The _Pharyngeal_ or _Tonsillar_, affecting the region of the
    throat.

    3. The _Pulmonary_ or _Chest_ form.

    4. The _Abdominal_ or _Gastro-enteric_.

    5. The _Cachectic_ or _Wasting_.


  The _Catarrhal_ form of distemper is that which is generally seen in
  the cat, and is the least fatal of any. The first _symptoms_ noticed
  are a watery discharge from one and sometimes both eyes, the lids of
  which may be partially or completely closed, so as to hide the front
  of the eye, and a frequent licking of the upper lip and nose as if
  they were parched and burning. After a day or so the inner lining of
  the eyelids may be very much reddened, swollen, and giving rise to a
  yellow-white or greenish-white thick discharge, which adheres to the
  lids and seals them together. There may also be shivering fits, a dull
  open coat, and a great desire for warmth (this being so intense in
  some cases that the animal frequently gets under the grate when a fire
  is in it). There is sneezing, followed by a snuffling kind of
  breathing; the nostrils discharge a thick, ropy, whitish or greenish
  matter, which clings to their openings, and very often closes them up.
  When the pharynx or larynx is the seat of catarrh there are frequent
  fits of coughing. The appetite is diminished or absent, but thirst is,
  as a rule, great. There may also be seen at times vomiting, diarrhœa,
  or constipation. Emaciation is gradual and slight, or rapid and great,
  varying according to the severity of the symptoms.

  The breathing is not much altered in the majority of cases, but in a
  few instances it becomes frequent. The temperature rises a few
  degrees, but this is variable, and it is sometimes normal. The body
  and limbs feel cold to the touch, and sometimes give off an offensive
  odour. The tongue, lips, hard and soft palates, and gums (especially
  around the teeth) are occasionally ulcerated. Now and again the eyes
  become the seat of ulceration, which on rare occasions becomes
  perforated; at other times they become affected with a severe
  inflammation, which extends to the whole eyeball and destroys this
  organ. There is at times dulness or drowsiness, and the animal seeks
  dark corners or gets under the furniture. Many cats from sheer
  nervousness, especially in strange places, avoid the fire and seek
  obscure or lofty positions. Recovery generally takes place within a
  fortnight or three weeks, but death may take place within twenty-four
  to forty-eight hours from the commencement of the attack.

  The _Pharyngeal_, _Tonsillar_, or _Throat_ form is the most deadly
  manifestation of distemper. The first _symptom_ to attract attention
  is the drivelling of clear, ropy albuminous saliva from the corners of
  the mouth. The animal crouches upon all four of its limbs; there is a
  frequent gulping movement, and a sound is emitted from the throat as
  if there was an attempt to swallow the thick ropy saliva which clings
  about the mouth and pharynx; the swallowing seems difficult or
  impossible; food is refused, but thirst is constant, although the
  animal seems incapable of swallowing; there is a great dulness or
  depression, and the cat appears indifferent to its surroundings.

  On examination of the outside of the throat it is found swollen and
  painful, the glands are enlarged, and there appears to be a gurgling
  noise at each inspiration and expiration. On inspection of the mouth
  and back of the throat, the tongue and pharynx are found to be covered
  with a thick, ropy, bubbling saliva, the mucous membrane is swollen
  and congested, and the soft palate is of a pinkish or even dark
  reddish arborescent appearance, due to the congested state of the
  small blood-vessels. Sometimes ulcers appear on the hard and soft
  palates. After a day or so the depression increases, there is a
  discharge from the eyes and nostrils, which appears at first as a
  clear viscid fluid, and afterwards becomes yellowish or dirty green in
  colour, and, if the animal lives long enough, ultimately bloody, in
  consequence of it irritating the mucous membranes and surrounding skin
  of the eyes and nose. There may also be a catarrhal or purulent fœtid
  discharge from one or both ears, but this is quite exceptional, and is
  mostly seen in cases having a fatal termination.

  If the prostration is very great, and there is rapid loss of weight
  and condition, and the discharge from the mouth, nostrils, and eyes
  becomes fœtid, coupled with total loss of appetite, and no abatement
  of the other symptoms, a fatal termination is to be anticipated. Late
  in the complaint the pharyngeal mucus may become of a dirty colour or
  sanious; purple spots appear on the tongue, gums, and lips, and there
  is a moan or cry emitted at each respiratory effort; convulsive
  movements of the muscles of the temples, shoulders, and thighs set in,
  and death takes place from intoxication. The temperature rises at
  first, but when a fatal termination is to be anticipated it falls
  below the normal.

  The _Pulmonary_ or _Chest_ form, although not so frequently seen in
  the cat as in the dog, may appear from the outset as a distinct
  localisation, or follow or intervene during an attack of the other
  forms as a complication. It may or may not be ushered in by shivering
  fits; the coat becomes dull and open, there is sneezing or coughing,
  or both; tears run from the eyes, and mucus issues from the nostrils,
  and there is a great desire for warmth. The temperature is elevated,
  and varies from 102.5° to 106°, but rarely running a typical course.
  The cough, when present, is frequent and rattling or harsh, and
  sometimes dull. On listening to the chest wheezing, rattling, or
  blowing, or rubbing, or splashing sounds may be heard. Emaciation is
  either gradual or rapid, thirst is generally great, but the appetite
  is diminished or absent.

  The breathing is either quickened or the inspiratory and expiratory
  efforts may be prolonged and accompanied or not with a moan or grunt,
  which is sometimes associated with fluid in the chest cavity, which is
  known by the pumping or lifting action of the flanks, this effusion in
  one or both of the pleural sacs being either of a clear greenish or
  amber-tinted or bloody or dirty yellowish appearance, and sometimes of
  a fœtid odour. Besides pleurisy, which is only occasionally
  encountered, there may be pneumonia, bronchopneumonia, or bronchitis,
  according to the structure of lung involved in this form of distemper.
  (For a description of these localisations or complications, _see_
  under their respective headings.)

  The lesions of the lungs may be slight, and yet the symptoms may be
  severe; on the contrary, the lesions may be extensive, and the
  resulting symptoms comparatively slight. If the fever remains high,
  the appetite abolished, the pupils dilated, the breathing plaintive
  and very rapid, and prostration great, death soon takes place from
  failure of the heart due to intoxication. In many cases, though, the
  fever is not intense, and yet death supervenes.

  The _Abdominal_, _Gastric_, or _Gastro-enteric_ form of distemper is
  oftener seen than either the pharyngeal or pulmonary form, and may
  occur as a very acute and rapidly fatal manifestation, or as a chronic
  disease. It frequently accompanies the other forms. In _acute_ cases
  there is sudden vomiting of food, quickly followed by a frequently
  repeated ejection of thick, slimy, and frothy mucus, and ultimately by
  a thin, watery, serous fluid, which is of an olive-green or yellowish
  appearance. The thirst is intense, and no sooner is water sipped than
  it is expelled. There is frequent diarrhœa; the stools at first seem
  fluid, then become watery, sometimes bloody, and very fœtid. The
  appetite is suppressed, and the animal becomes cold and indifferent to
  its surroundings, the facial expression is pinched, the eyes are
  semi-closed; the coat is dull and open, and on pressure over the
  region of the stomach pain is evinced by a moan or cry, and death
  usually takes place in a few hours. There is not as a rule any
  discharge from the eyes and nostrils.

  In the _subacute_ cases, beyond a slight catarrhal discharge from the
  eyes and nostrils, there may be either vomiting or diarrhœa—often
  both—and at other instances vomiting and constipation. When the bowels
  are the principal seat of the disease, vomiting is rare, but diarrhœa
  is generally persistent. Thirst is great, and food is refused or taken
  sparingly. The animal is dull, cries if moved or if the abdomen is
  manipulated; emaciation is rapid, and the animal dies in a state of
  exhaustion.

  In the _chronic_ cases there may or may not be any catarrhal symptoms,
  but there is a chronic and persistent diarrhœa, and sometimes
  vomiting. The appetite is capricious or sometimes ravenous, thirst
  moderate, and emaciation gradual, and liquid fæces may be expelled on
  the least effort, as by coughing; the fur or pelage around the tail
  becomes soiled, and, in consequence, the animal gives off an offensive
  odour.

  In some instances the breath becomes fœtid; the teeth, gums, tongue,
  and lips are covered with a dirty brown or greenish slimy material;
  and frequently the gum around the neck of the teeth is spongy, and
  bleeds on the slightest touch. Occasionally the bone into which the
  teeth are inserted becomes exposed, ulcerated, or necrosed. Ulcers are
  at times seen on the lips and tongue.

  The _Chronic Cachectic_ or _Wasting_ form is sometimes encountered as
  a chronic wasting malady, not showing many symptoms beyond gradual
  emaciation, great weakness, intense thirst, ravenous or capricious
  appetite, and occasionally diarrhœa. At other times the animal goes
  off its appetite, sits about in a mopish manner, has a staring and
  dull coat, the mucous membranes are pallid, the haw protruding over
  the front of the inner portion of the eyeballs, and becomes light in
  weight.

  It very occasionally happens in these wasting cases that the skin
  becomes the seat of parasitic mange, and, in consequence, gives off an
  offensive mousy or mouldy odour. If treatment is not skilfully and
  early adopted, death takes place, and on _post-mortem_ examination the
  remains simulate those of an animal having died from starvation. It
  may follow on the other forms of manifestation.

  _Skin eruptions_ are rarely noticed in distemper of the cat, but
  sometimes one sees on kittens a scabby eruption resembling ecthyma,
  the discharge of which mats the hairs in these young creatures.
  _Female cats_, when pregnant, frequently _abort_—in fact, nearly every
  cat in this condition in a cattery affected with distemper will
  miscarry, making it appear as if it were a special contagious disease.

  The _ears_ occasionally become the seat of acute catarrh or
  ulceration, and give rise to an offensive discharge. This complication
  is mostly associated with the pharyngeal form.

  The _cornea_ of the eye is sometimes the seat of ulceration, which
  generally disappears as the animal recovers. The whole eyeball
  occasionally partakes of inflammation, which destroys it.

  When the _eyes of young kittens_ become the seat of catarrh, the eye
  is generally destroyed, and consequently the sight is lost. The
  _nervous_ type, showing itself as excitement, convulsions, chorea,
  meningitis, or paralysis, although seen, is somewhat rare in this
  creature.

  _Death_ may occur either suddenly from convulsions, or rapidly from
  intoxication, or slowly from exhaustion.

  When due to intoxication, clonic, convulsive, or twitching movements
  of the muscles of the temples, shoulders, and hind limbs precede, and
  are even seen shortly after, death. Frequently death takes place
  without any symptoms of the disease having been noticed. In this case
  it appears to be due to the rapidity of the formation of the toxin or
  poison of the microbe, which causes intense shock to the system.

  _Diagnosis._—In many instances this disease is mistaken for a simple
  catarrh, diarrhœa, or sore throat—a mistake unfortunate where other
  cats are concerned. It is true that the first stage of distemper
  frequently resembles either of these simple complaints, which are not
  contagious, and generally only affect one out of several animals kept
  together, and run their course in a few days; whereas in distemper the
  disease usually runs a prolonged course, is very prostrating, and in
  many instances fatal, and, beyond all, contagious. On the other hand,
  it may resemble diphtheria, which is contagious, but has false
  membranes on the soft palate, pharynx, larynx, and tonsils, which are
  absent in distemper.

  _Prognosis._—Distemper is a most treacherous disease, and one of which
  even an expert cannot foretell the result. Many instances occur in
  which an animal appears to be on the right road towards recovery, when
  a relapse suddenly sets in and carries off the poor creature. If the
  appetite is moderate, the emaciation not rapid or great, the diarrhœa
  not intense or too frequent, and no complications set in after the end
  of the first week, recovery may be anticipated. On the other hand, if
  the weakness be progressive and prolonged, emaciation rapid and great,
  an offensive odour is given off from the body, eyes sunken in their
  orbits, pupils dilated, and the facial expression is haggard, death is
  to be expected. Again, relapses (which are commonly encountered),
  early youth, obesity, complications, the breed of the animal (such as
  Siamese and long-haired varieties, especially light-coloured animals),
  are generally unfavourable towards a certain recovery.

  Chronic nasal catarrh, chronic pneumonia or phthisis, and persistent
  diarrhœa may also give trouble after the distemper has run its
  ordinary course, and will have to be reckoned with.

  _Treatment._—An old maxim is, “Prevention is better than cure,” and
  ought to be carried out as far as possible by isolating all those
  animals that have been in contact with the infection.

  Animals coming from homes for lost and stray cats, cat shows, dealers
  in cats, should be kept apart from those in the cattery for at least a
  fortnight, to see if they develop the complaint. The place of
  isolation should have no communication with the building or house in
  which the majority of healthy cats are kept. The baskets, cages,
  clothing, etc., should be thoroughly washed and disinfected before
  they are used again for sound cats. It ought not to be forgotten that
  persons who have been in contact with sick animals may carry the
  infection on their hands or clothes.

  When distemper has declared itself in a cattery and the inmates have
  recovered, the place should be _thoroughly_ scrubbed, disinfected, and
  afterwards lime-washed or repainted. Boiling water and soda, used with
  the aid of a scrubbing-brush, is much more reliable to remove
  infection than many of the so-called disinfectants, which frequently
  do not destroy the virus, but often injure the cats. After the
  habitation has been _scrupulously cleansed_, it may be well to
  disinfect it with chlorinated lime (1 lb. to the gallon of cold
  water), which should be brushed all over the floor, walls, partitions,
  etc. Baskets, hampers, etc., should be served likewise. Metal and
  earthenware utensils may be boiled in strong soda-water.

  Before any cats are again put into the place, the doors and windows
  should be opened for at least a week, and fresh air and daylight
  admitted, as they are the best destructors of micro-organisms.

  Where valuable cats are kept and the risk of distemper is great, it
  would be advisable for the owner to have the cats _immunised_, or
  _rendered proof_ against the disease, by means of the Pasteurian
  system of vaccination with the attenuated microbe of distemper, as
  introduced into practice by Professor Lignières and Dr. Phisalix.
  Several degrees of strength of the vaccine are used. The animal is at
  first vaccinated or inoculated with a mild degree of virus, and
  afterwards with vaccine of gradually increased virulence, so that the
  most virulent virus (which would quickly kill, or cause the disease in
  a severe form in an animal not previously inoculated with the milder
  vaccines) would not produce any disturbance in the vaccinated
  creature.

  _Medical or Curative Treatment._—The sick animal should be kept in a
  well-lighted and well ventilated but not draughty room, which ought to
  be dry, and kept at a temperature of about 60°. The floor should be
  covered with a thick layer of fresh pine sawdust, heaps of which
  should be placed in tins, boxes, or old coal-scuttles for the
  convenience of the animals.

  If the cat is seen in the first stage of the disease, an emetic of ¼
  to ½ grain of tartar emetic in a teaspoonful of warm water may be
  given to clear out the stomach and bronchial tubes. In place of this
  drug, ¹⁄₃₀ to ¹⁄₂₀ grain of hydrochloride of apomorphine in tabloid
  form may be injected under the skin. After the emetic has passed off,
  easily digested and nourishing food, such as milk, should be offered,
  and, if refused, forced upon the animal. When the appetite is fairly
  good, ⅛ to ¼ grain of calomel may be given twice a day, but must be
  stopped as soon as it causes vomiting or intense diarrhœa.

  When the appetite is bad, quinine sulphate (½ grain) given three times
  a day for a lengthened period may be useful in remedying it.

  The _eyes_ and _nostrils_ should be bathed three times a day with the
  following lotion:

                         Chinosol   3½ grains,
                         Rose-water 8  ounces;

  and then smeared with an ointment composed of—

                        Boracic Acid ½ drachm,
                        Cold Cream   4 drachms.

  When the _throat_ is very much inflamed, it should be painted on the
  outside, after all the hair is clipped off from ear to ear, with
  tincture of iodine or the ætherial tincture of capsicum, three times a
  day, until soreness is produced. As it is a difficult job to paint the
  inside of the cat’s throat, the following powder dropped on the tongue
  will act in a similar manner:—

                      Quinine sulphate ½ grain,
                      Borax            2½ grains.
                      _To be given morning, noon,
                              and night._

  If there is either _pleurisy_ or _pneumonia_, or both combined, the
  hair should be cut off over the ribs, and the skin painted with a
  solution of tartar emetic (composed of 1 drachm of the drug to an
  ounce of spirit), and then wrapped up with a binder, under which a
  layer of cotton-wool is placed.

  In case there is _repeated vomiting_, a powder composed of—

                    Bismuth carbonate     5 grains,
                    Cocaine hydrochloride ⅛ grain,

  should be shaken on the tongue every four hours until twenty-four
  hours have elapsed since the last vomiting took place. If there should
  be a persistent and _profuse diarrhœa_, it must be moderated, but not
  suppressed, by means of 2½ grains of tannigen given morning, noon, and
  night. When there are any _convulsions_ or much _pain_, ⅙ to ¼ grain
  of extract of opium in pill should be administered morning and night.

  Light and easily digested food—such as peptonised milk, Mosquera’s
  beef jelly, Benger’s peptonised food, etc.—should be given in small
  and repeated quantities during the earlier or active stages of the
  disease. Later on, in the convalescent stage, scraped raw beef, boiled
  fish, rice-pudding, etc., may be offered.

  Parrish’s chemical food and cod-liver oil, given by some cat-owners
  during the acute stage of distemper when there is no appetite, are
  harmful and cruel remedies.


                          DISEASES OF THE EAR.

  The external ear in the cat is short, upright, triangular, pointed,
  and opens in front. Its apex in some cats—especially Persians—has a
  tuft of hair growing from the inside. In the outer margin the ear
  doubles on itself, forming a pouch, in which lumps of dirt, ear-mites,
  etc., frequently accumulate.

  A =Serous Cyst=, or abscess, forms between the skin and cartilage of
  the inside, and sometimes also of the outside, of the ear or ears.

  The ear is swollen, feels tense, has a bluish or reddish tint, but is
  not very painful. The contents of this swelling are a thin, reddish
  fluid and a blood clot, which separate the skin from the cartilage and
  its covering.

  It is always associated with ear-mites, and generally results in the
  ear shrinking and becoming drawn down, which, when both ears are
  affected, give the animal a peculiar appearance, resembling some wild
  variety of the cat tribe that usually carries these organs in a
  semi-pendulous manner.

  _Treatment._—It can be prevented by keeping the cat’s ears clean and
  free from ear-mites. When it is present, the cyst should be freely
  opened (which can be done painlessly by previously injecting a few
  drops of a 4 per cent. solution of cocaine), the blood clot carefully
  removed, and the inner surface of the cavity washed out with a 5 per
  cent. solution of chinosol. The ear must be gently pulled every day to
  prevent shrinking, and, consequently, deformity.

  =True Canker= is an inflammation of the deeper part of the cavity of
  the ear, accompanied with a chronic fœtid, whitish, cheesy, or gluey
  discharge, and sometimes ulceration, and, rarely, warty-looking
  growths. It usually runs a long course, unless skilfully treated, and
  is liable to recur.

  _Treatment._—The ear should be carefully washed out with tincture of
  calendula, and then well dried with cotton-wool, and afterwards have
  _finely_ sifted boracic powder blown down the cavity. This treatment
  should be carried out at least every other day until recovery takes
  place.

  Quite 90 per cent. of long-haired varieties and cross-breeds suffer
  from =Parasitic Canker=. It is seen in kittens a month old, as well as
  in aged cats, and is conveyable to the dog. The ferret also is liable
  to it.

  It is due to the ear-mite called _Symbiotes auricularum_, which was
  first found in the ear of the dog by Professor Hering, of Stuttgart,
  in 1834, and in the cat by Huber, of Memingen, in 1860.

  It resembles the mange and cheese mites in general characters, and is
  only with difficulty seen with the naked eye. When viewed in strong
  sunlight, it appears as a small whitish or cinnamon-coloured woolly
  speck, resembling a grain of meal or flour crawling about on the
  brownish dirt in the ears. These mites nearly always collect together
  in large colonies.

  There is frequent scratching of the ears with the hind limb. The cat
  suddenly stops, sits down, inclines its head to one side, and
  scratches away as if it gave it great pleasure to do so. In some
  cases, however, it becomes quite frantic, and swears. Frequently there
  is an abrasion of the skin behind the ears due to this scratching, and
  occasionally the flap of the ear becomes the seat of a serous abscess,
  which I have described.

  When the mite wanders over the drum of the ear, especially in warm
  weather, some cats are seized with convulsions, others become
  delirious, and many reel about as if intoxicated.

  _Treatment._—The ears should be washed out with warm soap and water,
  and then well dried with cotton-wool, and afterwards have a liniment
  composed of oil of stavesacre (2 drachms) and almond oil (6 drachms),
  mixed together, and poured in every day until all signs of irritation
  have passed away, care being taken to wipe off the superfluous
  dressing from the ears after each dressing.


                          DISEASES OF THE EYE.

  In certain respects the eye of the cat differs from that of the other
  domesticated animals. It resembles the eye of the dog in its shape,
  which is somewhat rounded and globular. The _membrana nictitans_,
  _haw_, or _third eyelid_, is not so well developed as in some other
  animals, as the cat is able to protect the eye with the paw to a
  considerable extent. The _tapetum lucidum_ is of a brilliant metallic
  golden yellow or greenish (in Siamese and albino cats pinkish colour),
  and is so well developed that it probably enables the animal to see
  better at night, by reflecting the rays of light a second time through
  the retina.

  It is also the cause of the well-known glare of the cat’s eyes in the
  dark.

  The _iris_, or _curtain_, is yellowish-green, orange, or golden in
  most cats; sometimes it is amber-coloured, and in other cases golden,
  with a tinge of metallic green around the pupillary circumference.
  Some cats, especially white cats, have the iris of one of the eyes of
  a bluish white appearance, and the other a golden, amber, or greenish
  golden colour.

  The Siamese cat and many white cats have pale blue or bluish eyes. The
  shade of the iris generally varies with the colour of the cat’s fur,
  and is taken into consideration in the judging of points at shows.

  The _pupil_, or opening in the centre of the iris, when widely
  dilated, is circular in shape, but when contracted it becomes
  vertically elliptical, and may become so narrow as to appear as a mere
  thin perpendicular slit.

  The _optic disc_, or entrance of the optic nerve before it expands in
  the cavity of the eyeball to form the retina, is small, round, and
  cupped, and of a clear grey colour, and the veins in it can be
  distinguished from the arteries which radiate from the optic disc. The
  choroidal vessels are rarely seen, but in the Siamese cat they are
  seen in the red peripheral zone.

  Kittens, like puppies, are, as a rule, born with the eyelids closed,
  and this condition lasts usually from nine to twelve days, when the
  membrane joining the two lids together wastes and finally gives way.
  Sometimes, however, the eyelids do not become separated, or only
  become so at one part, so that surgical intervention may be necessary
  to separate the partially or completely closed lids.

  I have, on several occasions, seen kittens born with their eyes open,
  but have not been able to satisfy myself if the condition was due to
  any prolongation of the period of uterogestation.

  The eyelids are sometimes the seat of =ringworm=, =mange=, =follicular
  scabies=, or =eczema=, and as these affections are usually present in
  other parts of the body, they can easily be diagnosed by means of the
  naked eye or the microscope. The best remedy for any of these
  diseases, when situated on the eyelids, is:—

                   Yellow oxide of mercury 4 grains.
                   White vaseline          1 ounce.

  These ingredients are to be well mixed by a competent chemist, and a
  small piece, about the size of a pea, is to be well rubbed on the
  affected part or parts every morning. Care must be taken that no
  superfluous ointment is left on the hairs, as most cats will rub it
  off with their paws, which they will immediately lick, and so may
  become poisoned.

  The eyelids occasionally become turned inwards, so that the hairs
  covering it rub on the glassy portion of the eyeball, and frequently
  set up irritation, inflammation, and opacity, and a copious discharge
  of tears. This is termed =entropium=, and requires an operation. When
  the eyelid is turned outwards from the eyeball, the condition takes
  the name of _ectropium_, which rarely calls for any interference, as
  it does not injure the animal, even if it is unsightly. A very rare
  anomaly of the eyelid in the cat is when the hairs of it take an
  unusual direction, and rub on the glassy portion of the eyeball, and,
  like entropium, set up irritation, inflammation, and smokiness of it.
  This is termed _trichiasis_, and requires an operation to remedy it.

  The eyelids are also subject to =wounds=, =bruises=, =abscesses=,
  =warts=, and =Meibomian cysts=, which do not call for special
  attention. The _third eyelid_, _haw_, or _membrana nictitans_—though,
  as before stated, it is not so well developed in the cat as in some
  other animals—is liable, in debilitating diseases, such as distemper,
  anæmia, etc., to protrude persistently over the inner part of the
  front of the eyeball. It will, however, resume its normal position as
  the cat regains strength, and should, therefore, on _no account_ be
  removed. It frequently becomes inflamed during distemper, catarrh, or
  ophthalmia, or from injuries, but should not in these cases be
  removed, as if it were a foreign body or new growth; a simple
  soothing, antiseptic lotion will put it right as the original disease
  abates and strength is regained.

  Frequently in the cat, as in the dog, just below the inner angle of
  the eye socket an _abscess_ forms. This is due to pus in the cavity of
  the jaw bones, called also the antrum of highmore, above the teeth,
  and is generally caused by some disturbance or disease of the tooth.
  When the tooth immediately below the abscess is removed, and the
  abscess cavity is washed out with some astringent, recovery usually
  takes place. It should, however, be borne in mind that the teeth below
  the eye are frequently diseased, and no abscess is caused by them.

  A =fistula= may form immediately below the inner angle of the eyelids.
  It results from an abscess which opens, and then heals up, to break
  out again. This process goes on until a permanent opening or fistula
  remains, from which a discharge of matter issues. This is connected
  with some disturbance, or even disease, of the tooth or teeth
  immediately below it. When the tooth or teeth are removed, and the
  opening occasionally well washed out with some astringent, it heals
  up, and no further trouble is seen. However, it is sometimes due to
  tuberculosis, and the mere removal of teeth does not do away with the
  fistula. It is mostly mistaken for a lachrymal fistula.

  Sometimes the conjunctiva, or the pinkish membrane lining the inner
  surface of the eyelids and the front of the eyeball, becomes the seat
  of disease.

  A non-inflammatory swelling of it is seen, due to an infiltration of
  serum. This is called _chemosis_. It has the appearance of a palish
  pink swelling all round the eye, which seems sunken in the orbit but
  does not seem inflamed or painful. It may quickly disappear on
  dropping a few minims of a 4 per cent. solution of cocaine
  hydrochloride into the eye. It is liable to recur at some future time.

  =Conjunctivitis=, or inflammation of the membrane covering the inner
  lining of the eyes and the front of the eyeball, is also termed
  external or simple ophthalmia. It is frequently seen in the cat during
  distemper, diphtheria, catarrh, or from an injury to, or presence of a
  foreign body in, the eye.

  The animal evidently dreads the light, as the eyelids are partially
  closed, and the haw is drawn a little way over the front of the
  eyeball. Tears run down the face, and, if the eyelids are separated,
  and the internal lining thus exposed, it will be found that it is
  swollen and reddened from the distension of the small blood-vessels.
  After a day or two, the discharge alters in character, and instead of
  being watery, as before, appears as yellowish white thick matter,
  flowing from or sticking to the inner corner of the eye. The lining
  membrane may become so swollen that it laps over the lids, and the
  eyeball seems to have sunk into its orbit.

  Sometimes it is associated with the presence on the conjunctiva of
  small, round, pinkish bodies, the size of a pin’s head, which
  completely disappear as the affection passes off, leaving the mucous
  membrane as they found it. Frequently, there are reddish-yellow
  granulations or greyish-white, semi-transparent, or glistening bodies,
  of the size of a rape-seed or less, scattered over the conjunctival
  membrane, or protruding from it.

  To these two latter varieties of conjunctivitis the terms of
  _follicular_ and _granular_ are respectively applied. They both seem
  contagious.

  _Treatment._—If the catarrh of the eyes is due to a foreign body, it
  must be removed. The cat should be kept in a dark, warm place, free
  from draughts and away from the fire, and the eye bathed with a warm
  lotion composed of the following ingredients:—

                    Boracic acid          8 grains.
                    Cocaine hydrochloride 8   „
                    Rose-water            1 ounce.

  If there are any granules on the conjunctiva, the lining membrane of
  the lids should be everted, after the eye has been cocainised, and
  painted with a 10 per cent. solution of nitrate of silver or rubbed
  with a stick of copper sulphate, care being taken that the superfluous
  material is afterwards washed off with warm water.

  The =Purulent Ophthalmia of the New-born= is seen in young kittens as
  soon as their eyes are opened, or even before, and is a very serious
  complaint, as it generally attacks the eyeball, which it destroys, and
  consequently the sight is lost. This disease seems contagious.

  There is a bulging of the eyelids, which are glued together. When
  these are separated, a thick, yellowish matter flows out, the eyes are
  ulcerated and perforated, the inner surfaces of the eyelids are
  inflamed, and soon after the contents of the eye protrude as a fleshy
  mass.

  _Treatment._—If the eyes are destroyed, the animal should be put into
  the lethal chamber at once. On the other hand, if there is no
  ulceration of the eyeball, the eyelids should be separated and the
  eyes and under-surface of the eyelids constantly irrigated for a
  quarter of an hour at a time with a warm solution of chinosol. The
  eyelids must not be allowed to become sealed up, else matter will
  collect and press on the delicate eyeballs and destroy them. It may be
  advisable to paint the inside of the eyelids with a 10 per cent.
  solution of nitrate of silver.

  The _cornea_, or clear, glassy transparent membrane of the front of
  the eyeball, is frequently involved in the disease just described, or
  it may become inflamed or ulcerated independent of it.

  Inflammation of the cornea, termed =Corneitis=, _keratitis_, or
  _external_ ophthalmia, may result from conjunctivitis, injuries,
  distemper, diphtheria, or disease of the brain or nerves, sunstroke,
  etc.

  It is very prevalent during the cold winds of spring, and in the
  majority of instances seems to be contagious. It appears in the form
  of patchy congestion or inflammation, or at a later stage as
  ulceration.

  One or both eyes may be affected. There is a dread of light, a
  continual flow of tears, and frequent winking of the eyelids, or
  almost complete closure of them. The cornea, usually glassy and
  transparent, becomes clouded by a smoky or milky white film, which has
  a rounded or irregular form.

  Blood-vessels, which in the normal state are absent, appear on the
  cornea, spreading from a part or all round the circumference towards
  the centre of the eye. If the inflammation is intense and prolonged,
  the eyeball perforated, and the contents bulge outwards and become
  rough, dirty, and leathery in appearance, this condition is generally
  seen either as the result of an injury, or from improper treatment, or
  neglect of a simple affection of the eye. In distemper the
  inflammation usually expends itself on some particular spot or spots
  in one or both eyes. These spots may appear as mere milky white
  patches, or they may present an appearance which might lead an
  ordinary observer to the conclusion that a small piece had been dug
  out of the eye. They may occur either in the centre of the cornea, or
  a little above it, or sometimes a little towards the outer angle of
  the eye.

  At the outset the cornea at the particular spot or spots in which the
  inflammation is localised becomes softened, then bulges, and finally
  gives way, so that a depression or ulcer is left on the eye. Some time
  after this ulcer becomes filled up with granulations of a dirty red
  colour, which afterwards become absorbed, when the cure is complete.
  Frequently two ulcers appear side by side.

  Sometimes, when these ulcerations are improperly treated or neglected,
  or associated with great debility or anæmia, the white speck remains
  as a permanent blemish, or in the more serious cases the ulcer
  perforates the eye, and the contents of which bulge and cause what is
  termed a _staphyloma_, from its resemblance to a grape, or the whole
  eye may become involved in the inflammation and be totally destroyed.
  In these cases of the destroyed or “_lost_” _eyes_, the whole eyeball
  has a greenish-white appearance, and seems to bulge out from the
  socket in consequence of the general swelling of the organ. It may
  give way or become ulcerated, giving rise to a continual discharge,
  and if not removed causes great pain and exhaustion.

  _Treatment._—The cat should be kept in the dark, and soothing
  antiseptics applied to the eye.

  The solution recommended for conjunctivitis is also very serviceable
  here. If the eye affection is due to distemper or any other general
  disease, it is, of course, necessary to treat this disease, in
  addition to the local applications to the eye. When ulceration takes
  place, the following drops are recommended:—

                     Eserine salicylate ½ grain.
                     Distilled water    2 drachms.

  To be instilled between the eyelids, by means of an eye-dropper, two
  or three times a day. If, however, there is much vascularity, the
  following drops are advisable:—

                    Atrophine sulphate    ½ grain.
                    Cocaine hydrochloride 6 grains.
                    Distilled water       2 drachms.

  After all the acute symptoms have passed away, the indolent
  granulations may require treatment. A suitable application for this
  purpose is:—

                         Chinosol   3½ grains.
                         Rose-water 8 ounces.

  To bathe the eye, by means of allowing the lotion to drop by squeezing
  a piece of lint saturated with it between the eyelids several times a
  day.

  When the eye is irretrievably lost, and suppuration commences in the
  interior of the eye, it is necessary to remove the whole eyeball.
  However, this should not be performed in the case of distemper until
  after the original disease abates, else removal of one eye will
  probably end in destruction of the other.

  _General Remarks on the Eye._—In all affections of the eyes, a careful
  examination of them should be made by an experienced qualified
  veterinary surgeon. As, however, in some out-of-the-way places
  professional aid is difficult, if not impossible, to obtain, a few
  brief hints as to general treatment should be useful. Many amateurs,
  in their anxiety to effect a speedy and complete cure, attempt too
  much, use powerful and irritating drugs (often also in improper
  proportions), and frequently, with the best intentions in the world,
  succeed in permanently injuring or even destroying the sight. It is
  therefore better, in the absence of professional aid, and especially
  in the earlier stages of inflammation of the eyes, to trust to mild
  and palliative treatment, and to “give nature a chance.”

  In all cases of recent inflammation, soothing applications should be
  used, such as warm infusion of poppy-heads or camomile flowers, warm
  milk, cocaine drops, etc. If the inflammation is associated with
  increased tension of the eyeball, due to an excessive quantity of
  fluid within it, or is accompanied by deep ulceration, the increased
  tension should be reduced by means of the eserine drops.

  Lotions containing either _lead_ or _silver nitrate_ should not be
  used in inflammation of the cornea associated with ulceration, as the
  former is apt to leave a white spot or patch, and the latter a brown
  or blackish stain.

  Last, but by no means least, animals affected with disturbance of the
  eyes should be kept in the dark, or at any rate away from the fire or
  from any glaring light, and should be shielded from draughts. The
  general health should also be looked to, and nourishing food given.


                         DISEASES OF THE SKIN.

  The cat is very fortunately free from many of the skin complaints that
  affect the dog. Nevertheless, domestication and improper
  surroundings—the curses of health—demand a few victims now and again,
  and hence the much-maligned cat is not exempt from this bane.

  The diseases are either _contagious_ and conveyable from one cat to
  another, or _simple_ and not spread by contact.

  The contagious skin diseases are due either to an animal parasite (as
  in mange) or to a vegetable parasite (as in ringworm).

  =Sarcoptic Mange= is a contagious skin disease of the cat due to an
  animal parasite or mange-mite, termed _Sarcoptes minor_, var. _cati_.

  It generally attacks ill-fed, neglected, and badly housed cats which
  are allowed to stray, and is seen chiefly in the autumn. It frequently
  occurs as an epizöotic, and where no attention is bestowed on the
  victims it is very fatal.

  The adult or mature mite has an almost circular body. When viewed
  under the microscope, its limbs seem to be under its body. It has
  eight pairs of legs in the adult and six in the larval stage. In the
  female the hind legs are provided at the extremities with bristles
  only; but in the male the central pair of hind legs are provided with
  suckers, although the outer pair have bristles. It does not excavate a
  subcutaneous gallery, or burrow, like the mange-mites of other
  animals, but makes a simple nest, that appears as a minute eminence.
  The larvæ, nymphæ, and males wander in the midst of the crusts.

  It is capable of being transmitted to man, and to the dog, rat, horse,
  and ox.

  Whatever part of the body it first touches, it always goes to the head
  to do its injurious work. At first small reddish pimples, no larger
  than a pin’s head or a turnip-seed, appear; these exude a yellowish
  fluid which dries and forms crusts. The animal scratches, the hair
  falls off, numerous other scales appear, and become thicker and
  thicker, until the whole head and ears become encased in a cast of
  dirty yellowish crusts. The crusts may be absent in young kittens or
  cats, but slightly adherent scales are seen instead.

  After a time the disease spreads to the neck and shoulders, elbows and
  thighs, or even to the whole body. In kittens or young cats the
  complaint is more likely to spread to various parts of the body, but
  in older animals it is generally confined to the head, or head and
  neck, but may, as in young cats, spread to the other parts or to the
  whole body, the skin of which, after some time, becomes wrinkled, and
  gives off a musty odour.

  The nostrils and eyes may be blocked up by the thickened crusts, so
  that the animal can see, or breathe through the nostrils, only with
  difficulty. The cat hides or strays away, it mopes and seems sad; it
  becomes emaciated, and indifferent to its surroundings, and finally
  succumbs to exhaustion or some concurrent disease. It may be
  associated with ringworm or parasitic ear canker; it is nearly always
  accompanied by the elliptical tapeworm.

  It quickly kills within five or six weeks if no treatment or attention
  is bestowed on the cat, especially if young; but where it is partially
  treated, it may linger for months, even years. Cold weather retards
  its progress, but its energy is renewed in the following spring. It
  spreads slowly on well-cared-for cats.

  _Treatment._—The mangy cat should be kept isolated from the healthy
  animals, and kept away from children. Its basket, bedding, or cage
  should be boiled, burnt, or thoroughly disinfected. The cat must be
  carefully dressed with sulphurated lime lotion, which should be
  applied by means of a piece of lint every day, taking care that the
  animal is kept warm and well fed.

  =Follicular Mange= is due to a caterpillar-shaped mite—the _Demodex_
  or _Acarus folliculorum_, var. _cati_—which inhabits the sebaceous
  follicles of the skin. It is sometimes found in the ears, nose, and
  head of the cat, but rarely causes severe itchiness. It produces
  pimples and scabs, which are only of short duration, and seldom
  occasions trouble. It is frequently associated with sarcoptic mange.
  The parasite is a quarter smaller than that of the dog.

  _Treatment._—A lotion composed of sulphurated potash (1 drachm),
  glycerine (½ oz. to 6 parts of rose-water), applied by means of lint
  to the affected part once a day, generally suffices to cause its
  disappearance.

  =Grey Ringworm=, or _Tinea tonsurans_, is not a common affection of
  the cat. It is due to a vegetable parasite or mould, termed the
  _Trichophyton felineum_, which attacks the hairs, these becoming much
  altered and broken, and their ends split up and frayed like a brush.
  There will be noticed circular or oval bald patches, covered with an
  abundance of scales, which are of a slaty or greyish appearance, and
  vary according to the colour of the animal. These are seen on the head
  and limbs and round the eyelids and mouth, but also on other parts of
  the body. They may run into one another, and form large patches. There
  may be itchiness and scratching; and in this latter case the crusts
  may be covered with blood and resemble eczema.

  _Treatment._—As this disease is conveyable to other cats, to the
  horse, ox, dog, and children, the affected animal should be isolated
  and the patches dressed with tincture of perchloride of iron once
  every third day. (Whole families, and even a whole school, have been
  known to become affected with ringworm from a cat.)

  =Yellow Ringworm=, or _Tinea favosa_, or _favus_, also termed
  “honeycomb ringworm,” is a commoner disease in the cat than grey
  ringworm. It is due to a vegetable parasite named _Achorion
  Quinckeanum_, which causes at first yellow-coloured crusts that are
  arranged as cup-shaped masses, which disturb the hairs so that they
  are shed. These cup-shaped masses resemble a honeycomb in appearance,
  hence its name. The sulphur-yellow colour after a time changes to a
  dirty yellow or grey. The patches may be circular or zigzag, and
  raised above the skin, but the centre is depressed so as to give them
  a cup-shaped appearance. They vary in size from a pin’s head to a
  shilling, or larger. They may run into one another, so that the
  circular form is no longer present. The hairs are stiff and
  lustreless, and can be easily pulled out. They seem to grow in the
  centre of the “cups.” After a time the parasite loosens the hair in
  the follicle, so that it is shed.

  It prefers to affect the root of the claws, or the belly, sides of the
  chest, elbows, head, base of ears, nose, and then spreads all over the
  body. When it attacks the head, it ensheaths the face and scalp as if
  clay had been moulded to the parts, so that the eyes become hidden
  from view.

  The cat hides itself, or strays away; it moans or mews, crouches on
  all fours, and seems utterly miserable. The skin gives off an
  abominable odour, which resembles mouldy decaying wood in a damp, dark
  building, or a mousy smell. When the disease is in an advanced stage,
  the animal dies from exhaustion or some concurrent disease.

  It affects old cats as well as young ones, and it is said they
  contract it from mice and rats, which become affected behind the ears.
  A week or a fortnight elapses before any symptom appears after
  infection. Young animals are easily infected, but older ones may
  resist it. It is transmissible to _children and adults_, from cat to
  cat, from man to cat, and from rats and mice to man and cat. It may be
  associated with mange and parasitic ear canker.

  _Treatment._—The cat affected with yellow ringworm should be kept away
  from children and other cats: the affected patches may be painted with
  the following:—

                      Salicylic acid 1   drachm.
                      Ether          2   drachms.
                      Spirit of wine ½ ounce.
                      Glycerine      4   drachms.
                      Camphor-water  to 3 ounces.

  The term =Eczema= is given to all those skin eruptions that are
  characterised by pimples and vesicles followed by scabs and scales,
  and accompanied with great itchiness.

  It is said to be non-contagious, and as far as the cat is concerned
  this seems to me to be true. On the other hand, in the dog some of the
  varieties of eczema appear to be spread by contact. It very often runs
  a chronic course, and frequently recurs.

  It generally affects the back, loins, root of tail, and back of the
  thighs, although any part of the body may be attacked. There is great
  itchiness, the animal bites or licks itself, the skin becomes red,
  pimples the size of a head of a millet seed, or even a small pea,
  appear; these, after a time, burst, and a fluid issues from them and
  dries, forming scabs. Sometimes the itchiness is so intense as to
  cause the animal to bite or lick itself until the skin becomes raw and
  bleeding. In rare instances it produces a kind of mania for licking,
  which is followed by epileptiform seizures. The hair falls off,
  leaving bare patches, or it becomes matted together by the gluey
  discharge and ultimately sheds itself.

  In _suckling cats_, after sudden deprivation of their offspring, an
  eczematous eruption may appear on the belly, back, and loins, but it
  is not, as a rule, severe.

  The _she-cat_, especially of the light-coloured variety, when not
  allowed to breed, is often troubled with a scattered vesicular
  eruption, which is too difficult to eradicate, and is very liable to
  recur.

  In the _castrated_ male cat it is very common to find a papular and
  vesicular eruption, which breaks out every spring and autumn.

  The causes of eczema in the cat are an unnatural, sedentary life and
  an abundance of rich food without any compensatory or sufficient
  exercise in the fresh air. Hot weather, especially when accompanied by
  wet, predisposes to it, but the affection is seen also in the cold
  months of the year.

  _Treatment._—The animal suffering from eczema should be allowed as
  much exercise of its functions in the open air as possible. Grass or
  freshly boiled green vegetables, or asparagus, should be put within
  its reach. Raw meat, uncooked fish with the bones in, or birds with
  the feathers on, or bullock’s liver are suitable as ordinary food.
  Rice-pudding, oatmeal, and milk should not be given.

  The treatment of the skin is chiefly local. The itchiness must be
  allayed. This can be obtained by applying precipitated sulphur (2
  drachms), zinc oxide (2 drachms), mixed in olive oil (2 ounces) twice
  a day to the affected parts. If the eruptions are spread over a wide
  area, the hair should be cut off close to the skin before applying the
  dressing. For internal treatment a powder composed of calomel (⅛ to ¼
  grain) and bicarbonate of sodium (2½ to 5 grains) should be given
  twice a day. If the disease runs a chronic course, arsenic bromide or
  iodide (¹⁄₁₀₀ grain in a pilule) should be given three times a day.


                       EXTERNAL ANIMAL PARASITES.

  The =Cat Flea= (_Pulex serraticeps_, var. _cati_).—The cat flea is
  identical with, but rather smaller than, that of the dog. It differs
  from the flea of mankind (_Pulex irritans_) by having black, blunt
  spines, seven to nine in number, arranged as the teeth of a comb, at
  the posterior border of the prothorax and at the inferior border of
  the head. It is a troublesome pest by irritating and disturbing rest.
  It prefers to attack the cat when she is suckling.

  The flea plays an important part in the evolution of the elliptical
  tapeworm (_Tæma elliptica_) by harbouring the intermediary
  cysticercus, the ingestion of which gives rise to the development of
  this tapeworm in the intestine.

  _Treatment._—The cat should have powdered pyrethrum well rubbed into
  its skin, and then combed out, care to be taken that the combings are
  burnt. The crevices or corners of the cat’s house should be sprinkled
  with oil of turpentine, or Sanitas powder.

  Fortunately for the cat, it is affected with only one variety of
  louse, the =Cat Louse= (_Trichodectes subrostratus_), which differs
  from the flea in being wingless and not jumping from but only quitting
  the cat by accident. It has three-articled antennæ; the head has five
  sides to it; the body is oval, and in the female notched behind. Its
  colour is yellowish-brown.

  It is not a blood-sucker, but attacks the hair and eats the epidermis,
  preferably that of the head, neck, back, and limbs, where it causes
  intense itching. It develops rapidly upon poorly fed, weak, or
  debilitated animals. There is, besides itchiness, loss of hair,
  scurfiness, and nits (eggs) in more or less large numbers, which by
  their presence indicate that the skin has not received sufficient
  attention. The nits, or eggs, are attached to the hair.

  _Treatment._—The hair may be sprayed with equal parts of vinegar and
  concentrated infusion of quassia. Moreover, should the animal lick
  itself after this dressing is applied, it will act as a tonic. Raw
  meat, or fish, cod-liver oil, etc., should be given.


                     PAINLESS DESTRUCTION OF CATS.

  A knowledge of how painlessly to destroy a cat’s life is very
  important to the owner of a cat who is not in reach of a veterinary
  surgeon—the proper person to undertake this duty under ordinary
  circumstances.

  The most humane method is to place the animal in a small air-tight
  box, into which has been placed previously two to four drachms of
  _chloroform_ on a sponge or piece of lint or cotton-wool, which
  produces at first anæsthesia or painless sleep, and afterwards death
  from failure of the respiration and heart. It does not cause a
  suffocative feeling or sensation like coal gas, or spasm, as does
  prussic acid. Care must be taken not to take the cat out of the box
  too soon, or else life, not quite extinct, may return.




                                 INDEX.


                                    A

  Abscess of the Ear, 369;
    of the Eye, 371

  Abyssinian Cats, 297, 301

  Albinos, 351

  Alice in Wonderland, 15

  Alice through the Looking-glass, 15

  Amateur Cat Photography, 332

  America: Cat Fancy, 30, 303;
    “Any Other Colour” Persians in, 235;
    Brown Tabby Persians, 227, 229;
    Cats’ Homes in, 33;
    Difficulties of Showing, 324;
    Fanciers, 304;
    Judging, 317;
    Literature, 31;
    Short-haired Cats, 286;
    Shows, 327;
    Smoke Persians, 184;
    Stud Cats, 305;
    Stud Cats’ Register, 309;
    Wild Cats at Shows, 322

  American Cat Clubs, 30

  Anæsthetics, 257

  Anatomy of Cat, 351

  Ancestry of Cat, 350

  Angora Cats, 98

  Animal Worship, 2

  “Any Other Colour” Persians, 233;
    in America, 235;
    Fanciers, 234;
    Mating, 233

  Appendicular Skeleton of Cat, 353

  Archangel Cats, 275, 279

  Armitage, Miss, on Siamese Cats, 260

  Armorial Bearings and Cats, 13

  Arnold, Matthew, 11

  Art, The Cat in, 15

  Artificial Foods for Kittens, 338

  Artificial Foster-mother, 340

  Artificial Heat in Cattery, 54

  Asphalt Floor for Cattery, 51

  Assam, 122

  Atab, 215

  Atlantic Cat Club, 27, 304;
    Silver Tabby Winners, 176

  Australia, Origin of Cats in, 300;
    Wild Cats, 323

  Axial Skeleton of Cat, 352


                                    B

  Backgrounds in Cat Photography, 332

  Balding, Mrs., on Chinchilla Persians, 144

  Barker, Mr. E. M., on Brown Tabby Persians, 227

  Basalt Cat Statues, 5

  Battersea Dogs’ Home, 19

  Beal, Miss, on Cream Persians, 206;
    on Tortoiseshell Persians, 210

  Bedding, 52;
    at Shows, 80

  Beds for Queens in Kit, 40

  Bennet, Mrs., 68

  Bentham, J., 11

  Beresford Cat Club, Chicago, 27, 30;
    Blue Short-hairs Classification, 280;
    Neuters, 239;
    Stud Book, 309

  Beresford, Lady Marcus, 28;
    Cattery, 101;
    on Siamese Cats, 261

  Berlin Museum, 5

  Bible, Reference to Cat in, 2

  Black Persians, 112;
    Coats, 113, 117;
    Colour Breeding, 345;
    Eyes, 112, 116;
    Mr. R. Little on, 117;
    Mating, 115, 344;
    Dr. Roper on, 115

  Black Short-haired Cats, 289

  Black-and-White Club, 26, 117

  Black-and-White Persians, 233

  Bladder, Distension of the, 361

  Blue Persian Cat Society, 26, 30;
    Objects, 129;
    Pedigree Form, 87

  Blue Persians, 125;
    Catteries, 131;
    Mrs. Clarke on, 107;
    Eyes, 127;
    Fanciers, 128, 131;
    Kittens, 110, 127;
    Mr. T. B. Mason on, 127;
    Mating, 107, 126;
    Points, 126, 130

  Blue Short-haired Cats, 275;
    British, 276;
    Mrs. Carew Cox on, 278;
    Coat, 279;
    Fanciers, 277;
    Canon Girdlestone’s Breed, 279;
    Mrs. James on, 265;
    Mating, 279;
    Place of Origin, 288;
    Points, 277, 281;
    Russian, 276, 291

  Blue Smokes, 126

  Blue-and-White Persians, 233

  Board School Essay on Cats, 25

  Boarding Houses for Cats, 195

  Body of Cat, 351

  Bolton, Mr. G., on Manx Cats, 245

  Bones and Principal Ligaments of Cat’s Toe, 352

  Bones in Structure of Cat, 352

  Bonny, Mrs., on Short-haired Cats, 285

  Bordeaux Museum, 6

  Boston, U.S., Cats’ Home, 34

  Botanic Gardens National Cat Club Shows, 27

  Bougeant, Father, 12

  Boulak Museum, 3

  Brain of Cat, 350, 356

  Brand’s Essence, 45

  Breast-bone of Cat, 353

  Breeding, 38, 347;
    in America, 316, 324;
    “Any Other Colours”, 233;
    Black Persians, 112, 115;
    Blue Persians, 107, 126;
    Blue Short-hairs, 279;
    Brown Tabby Persians, 228;
    Chinchillas, 152, 160;
    Colour, 344, 349;
    Cream Persians, 204;
    Darwin on, 152;
    Financial Aspect, 26;
    Manx Cats, 250;
    Markings, 74;
    Orange Persians, 190;
    Pedigree Cats, 152;
    Red Tabby Short-hairs, 288;
    Short-hairs, 284, 291, 294;
    Siamese Cats, 256, 258;
    Silver Persians, 144;
    Silver and Chinchillas, 143;
    Silver Tabbies, 169, 172;
    Smoke Persians, 182;
    Tortoiseshells, 209, 295;
    White Persians, 119

  Brighton, Massachusetts, Cats’ Home, 34

  Brindled Cat, 216

  British Cat Club, 27, 274

  British Museum, 5

  Broken Colours, 30, 231

  Bromide, 46

  Bronchitis, 363

  Brooke, Mr. H. C., on Manx Cats, 250

  Brooklyn Cattery, 306

  Brough, Mrs. Parker, on Siamese Cats, 263

  Brown, Mrs. Peter, 68

  Brown Tabby Persians, 215;
    in America, 227, 229;
    Mrs. Barker on, 227;
    Classification, 217;
    Colour Breeding, 347;
    Mrs. Drury on, 222;
    Kittens, 225;
    Markings, 216;
    Mating, 228;
    Points, 228;
    Sables, 217, 224, 229;
    Miss Southam on, 218;
    White Lip, 224;
    Miss Whitney on, 224

  Brown Tabby Short-haired Cats, 288, 291

  Bubastes, 3

  Bull, Messrs., Travelling Basket, 60

  Bunny Cat, 301

  Burial Customs, 6

  Burma, 300

  Burmese Cats, 300

  Buying and Selling Cats, 86


                                    C

  Caffre Cat, 297

  Cairo, Cats’ Home, 35

  California, Cat Fancy, 316

  Cambyses Tradition, 5

  Cameras, Photographic, in Cat Photography, 332

  Camphaleyne, 55

  Canada, Cat Fancy, 315

  Canadian Cats, 315

  Canker, 369

  Carbonate of Soda, 45

  Carroll, Lewis, 14

  Castor-oil, 360

  Cat Club, The, 26;
    Annual Shows, 95, 163;
    Foundation, 28;
    Medal, 133;
    Register, 78;
    Registration, 29, 62;
    Stud Book, 29

  Cat Clubs and Societies, List of, 26

  Cat Family, The, 350

  Cat Fancy, 25, 90

  “Cat Journal,” American Paper, 89, 306

  Cat louse, 376

  Cat-o’-nine-tails, 19

  Cat Photography, 332;
    Grouping, 334;
    Isochromatic Plates, 336;
    Length of Exposure, 335

  Cats, 1, 18;
    Action of the Claws, 353;
    Amateur Photography, 338;
    Anatomy, 351, 354;
    Ancestry, 350;
    on Armorial Bearings, 13;
    in Art, 15;
    Average Age at Death, 20;
    Black, 114;
    Brain of, 350;
    Buying and Selling, 86;
    Care and Management, 37;
    Catteries, 50;
    of Celebrated People, 10;
    Classification, 350;
    “Cold Storage” Breed, 24;
    Common Brown Tabby, 229;
    Dentition, 99, 352;
    Diseases, 358;
    Domesticated, 6;
    Earliest Egyptian Representation, 5;
    in Egypt, 2, 297;
    Emblem of Moon, 4;
    Exhibiting, 61;
    Feeding in Illness, 358;
    Foreign Names for, 18;
    Friendships with Dogs, 322;
    Generic Family Name, 350;
    Geographical Distribution, 350;
    Head on Pasht, 3;
    in Heraldry, 12;
    in history, 8;
    Homeless in London, 32;
    Household, 19;
    Housing of, 49;
    Insurance, 66;
    Intelligence, 18, 20;
    Judging, 70;
    Longevity, 20;
    Long-haired Foreign, 17;
    Mating, 38;
    Medical Treatment, 31, 271, 373;
    in Middle Ages, 8;
    the Hon. Mrs. McLaren Morrison on, 105;
    Mummy, 1;
    Neckbones, 352;
    in Nursery Rhymes, 14;
    Painless Destruction, 376;
    Pedigree, 27;
    Performing, 24;
    Place in Nature, 350;
    Points, 96;
    in Public Offices, 22;
    Reproduced in Ware, 16;
    Ribs, 352;
    Senses of Smell and Hearing, 20;
    Short-haired English, 17;
    Skeleton, 355;
    Stray, 33;
    Structure, 350;
    Superstitions, 13, 115;
    Toy, in British Museum, 5;
    Utility of, 22;
    Vertebræ, 352;
    Washing, 37;
    when Travelling, 58;
    Worship in Egypt, 2

  Cats’ Home, Dublin, 33

  Cats’-meat, 24

  Catteries, 49, 101, 131;
    American, 304;
    Appliances, 55;
    at Battersea Home, 33;
    Lady Marcus Beresford’s, 102;
    Miss Beal’s, 206;
    Breeding Rooms, 52;
    Brooklyn, 306;
    Miss Cartmell’s, 192;
    Cazenovia, 307;
    Cleanliness, 44, 55;
    Mrs. Collingwood’s, 105;
    Lady Decies’, 101;
    Disinfectants, 55;
    Distemper, 364, 368;
    Drainage, 51;
    Earth Tins, 57;
    Feeding in, 37;
    Feeding Utensils, 56;
    Flooring, 51;
    Hart Park, Staten Island, 307;
    Mrs. Hawkins’, 262;
    Heating, 54, 57;
    Mrs. Herring’s, 106;
    Mrs. James’, 180;
    Miss A. Leake’s, 170;
    Lethal Box, 56;
    Littering Nests, 52;
    Linden, Indianapolis, 315;
    Millerton, New York, 307;
    Mrs. Neate’s, 195;
    Old Ford, 305;
    Dr. Ottolengui’s, 305;
    Owena, 313;
    Photographing in, 332;
    Pioneer, Toronto, 315;
    Plan of, 51;
    Playing Room, 52;
    Portable, 55;
    Ridgefield, New Jersey, 306;
    Runs, 54;
    Sleeping Boxes, 52;
    Siamese Cats, 261;
    Miss Southam’s, 220;
    Mrs. Spencer’s, 261;
    Mrs. McKenzie Stewart’s, 104;
    Stud Houses, 54;
    Treatment of Kittens in 338;
    Ventilation, 52;
    Mrs. G. Walker’s, 159;
    Worcester, Mass., 306

  Cazenovia, U.S., 307

  Cement Floor for Cattery, 51

  Challenge Trophy for Chinchilla Kittens, 151

  Champfleury, M., on Cats of Egypt, 5;
    on Cats in Heraldry, 13;
    in Nursery Rhymes, 14

  Charity, Cat Shows in Aid of, 28

  Cheeks of Cat, 96

  Cheetah, The, 350

  Chemosis, 371

  Chest of Cat, 96

  Chesterfield, 11

  Chicago Cat Club, 27, 30, 309;
    on Hairless Cats, 298

  Chicago Cat Fanciers, 310;
    Home, 34, 313;
    Shows, 312

  China, 6, 300

  Chinaware, 16

  Chinchilla Cat Club, The, 26, 30, 151;
    Standard of Points, 154

  Chinchilla Persians, 137;
    Mrs. Balding on, 144;
    Colour, 154, 346;
    Eyes, 346;
    Mating, 143, 160;
    Points, 141, 154, 160;
    Show Cats, 147

  Chinese Cat, 300

  Chintz Cats, 210, 212

  Chocolate Siamese Cat, 256

  Christmas Cards, Cats on, 25

  Chronic Nasal Catarrh, 362

  Cincinnati Cat Shows, 314

  Clan Chattan, 13

  Clarke, Mrs. S. F., on Breeding Blue Persians, 107

  Classes, Definition of, 28

  Classification at Shows, 78

  Clavicle of Cat, 351

  Claws of Cat, 350, 353

  Cleanliness in Catteries, 44

  Cleveland Shows, 314

  Clouded Leopard, 351

  Coat of Cats, 37, 98, 113, 340;
    Abyssinian Cat, 301;
    Black Persian, 117;
    Chinchilla, 154;
    Cream Persian, 201;
    in Exhibiting, 61, 62;
    in Illness, 45;
    in Judging Long-haired Classes, 72;
    Manx Cat, 245, 251;
    Neuters, 238;
    Orange Persian, 190;
    Preparing for Photography, 333;
    Short-hairs, 270, 282, 289;
    Silver Persians, 140, 165, 174;
    Smoke Persians, 178, 184;
    Stud Cats, 47;
    White Persians, 118, 124

  Cochran, Miss H., on “Any Other Colour” Persians, 233;
    on Cream Persians, 205;
    on Neuters, 239;
    on Siamese Cats, 265

  Cod-liver Oil, 39, 261

  Cold Storage Breed of Cats, 24

  Collar-bone of Cat, 351

  Collingwood, Mrs., 105

  Colour Breeding, 344;
    Black Cats, 345;
    Chinchillas, 346;
    Crossing for, 344;
    Eyes, 345;
    Smokes, 346;
    White Cats, 354

  Colour of Eyes, 96

  Common Cold, 362

  Common Round-worm, 361

  “Concerning Cats,” by H. Winslow, 34

  Condition, Importance of, 97

  Conjunctivitis, 371

  Connecticut Cat Fancy, 308

  Constipation, 40, 360

  Cope, Miss, on Silver Tabbies, 173

  Cornea, Inflammation of the, 372

  Corneitis, 372

  Cougar, The, 322

  Cough 362

  Cowper, 11

  Cox, Mrs. Carew, on Blue Short-hairs, 278;
    on Siamese Cats, 266

  Cream or Fawn Persians, 201;
    Miss H. Cochran on, 205;
    Colour Breeding, 348;
    Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard on, 204;
    Markings, 201;
    Mating, 204, 207;
    Mr. Norris on, 203;
    Noted Cats, 203;
    Points, 201

  Cremation, 32

  Crested Cat, 350

  Crossing (_see_ Breeding _and_ Mating)

  Crystal Palace National Cat Club Shows, 27

  Cusp of Tooth, 352

  Cyprus Cat, 8, 216


                                    D

  Darwin, 152, 211

  D’Aveunes, M. P., 13

  Deafness, 118, 121

  Dental Formula for Cat, 321

  Dentition, 99

  Detroit Cat Fancy, 313

  Devil as Black Cat, 8

  Diagrams: Bones and Principal Ligaments of Cat’s Toe, 352;
    Brain of Cat, 350;
    Eye, 356;
    Pad of Cat’s Left Fore-foot, 352;
    Points of Cat, 96;
    Skeleton of Cat, 355;
    Skull of Cat, 353;
    Skull of Machœrodus Neogœus, 351;
    Superficial Flexor Tendons of Cat’s Left Foot, 352;
    Superficial Muscles of Cat, 354;
    Surface of Cat’s Tongue, 357

  Diana, Goddess, 6

  Diarrhœa, 39, 42, 360;
    in Enteritis, 358;
    in Kittens, 46;
    in Pneumonia, 363;
    Rice-water to Check, 339

  Dibdin, 13

  Diet, 37, 39;
    in Illness, 373

  Diphtheria, 362

  Diseases: of the Ear, 369;
    Eye, 370;
    Kidneys, 361;
    Skin, 373

  Disinfectants, 55

  Distemper, 339, 362;
    Curative Treatment, 368;
    Diagnosis and Prognosis, 368;
    Mortality from, 365;
    Various Forms, 365

  Distension of the Bladder, 361

  Dogs’ Cemetery, 35

  Drainage of Catteries, 51

  Dublin Cats’ Home, 33

  Dumas, 11

  Dyer, Thistleton, 19


                                    E

  Ear: of Cat, 96;
    Abyssinian Cat, 298;
    Blue Short-hairs, 278;
    Chinese Cats, 300;
    Diseases, 369

  Ear-bone of Cat, 350

  Ear-Mites, 370

  Ear tufts, 96;
    in Chinchillas, 154;
    Silver Tabbies, 172;
    Smoke Persians, 178

  Ectropium, 371

  Eczema, 46, 375

  Egypt, 1;
    Animal Worship, 2;
    Cat-faced Goddess, 3;
    Earliest Cat Representations, 5;
    Home for Cats, 35;
    Mahommedan Cat Cult, 4;
    Mummies, 2;
    Old Cat Pictures, 5;
    Modern Cats in, 34;
    Symbolic Eye in Cat Images, 5

  Egyptian Cat, 297

  Electricity in Black Cats, 114

  Ellen M. Gifford’s Sheltering Home for Animals, 34

  Enemas, 360

  Enteritis, 358;
    Treatment for, 360

  Entropium, 371

  Epilepsy, 8

  Evacuations in Illness, 45, 364

  Exhibiting, 61

  Eye: of Cat, 96, 344, 351;
    Black Persian, 112, 116;
    Blue Persian, 126;
    Blue Short-hairs, 278;
    Brown Tabby Persian, 216;
    Chinchillas, 154;
    Cream Persians, 201;
    Colour Breeding, 345;
    Diseases of the, 370;
    in Distemper, 365, 367;
    General Remarks, 373;
    Horopollo on, 4;
    Illustrated, 356;
    in Judging, 74;
    Kittens, 42, 338;
    Maltese Cats, 320;
    Manx Cats, 245;
    Orange Persians, 189, 199;
    Siamese Cats, 257, 267;
    Silver Persians, 139, 166, 172, 174;
    Smokes, 180, 183;
    Tabby Short-hairs, 294;
    Tortoiseshells, 210;
    White Persians, 118;
    White Short-hairs, 289

  Eyelids, Diseases of the, 371


                                    F

  Face and Nose of Cat, 96

  Faking, 66, 323

  Fanciers, 27;
    in America, 304;
    “Any Other Class,” 234;
    Blue Persian, 123;
    Blue Short-hairs, 277;
    Brown Tabby Persian, 217;
    in California, 310;
    in Canada, 315;
    in Chicago, 309, 313;
    in Detroit, 313;
    Maine Cats, 330;
    Manx Cats, 247;
    Neuters, 240;
    in New York, 306;
    in Ohio, 314;
    Orange Persians, 191;
    Short-hairs, 285, 293;
    Siamese Cats, 256, 258;
    Silvers, 143, 168, 288;
    Smokes, 180;
    Tortoiseshell, 287;
    White Persians, 119

  Fawe Strain, 115

  Feeding of Cats, 24, 37;
    Utensils, 56

  Feet of Cat, 353

  _Felis_, Generic Title, 350

  Female Cats, 38;
    Eczema in, 375;
    Splaying, 47, 237

  “Field and Fancy”: on Brown Tabbies, 229;
    on Orange Persians, 109;
    on Smokes, 185

  Fish as Food, 37;
    for Kittens, 338

  Fishing Cat, 351

  Fistula of Eyelids, 371

  Fits in Kittens, 46

  Flea, The Cat, 44, 376;
    Cause of Tapeworm, 361

  Flooring for Cattery, 51

  Folk-lore, 13, 114, 115

  Follicular Mange, 374

  Food, 37, 39, 373

  Foreign Cats, 297;
    Judging, 301

  Fore-limb of Cat, 353

  Forestier-Walker, Miss, on Siamese Cats, 257, 267

  Fossil Cat Remains, 350

  Foster-mother, 42, 157;
    Dosing, 158;
    for Siamese Kittens, 268;
    Mr. Ward’s Artificial, 340

  France, Cat in, 6;
    on Signboards, 13

  Freeman’s Scientific Food, 37

  Frill of Persians, 178, 189

  Fur of Cat, 7, 40;
    Condition, 97;
    in Exhibiting, 62;
    in Illness, 45;
    of Neuters, 47;
    of Persians, 96, 98, 138

  “Fur and Feather”: on Eyes, 141;
    on Neuters, 239;
    on Showing, 90;
    on Siamese Cats, 256


                                    G

  Gall-bladder of Cat, 356

  Gastritis, 358

  Gastro-enteritis, 358

  Gautier, Bon, 11

  Gelded Cats, 237

  Gelding, 47, 237

  Geoffroy’s Cat, 297, 302

  Geographical Distribution of Cat Family, 350

  Gestation, 38

  Gloss on Coat, 97

  Goethe, 11

  Gordon Cottage, 32

  Gotwalts, Mrs., 307

  Government Cats, 22

  Gowanda, U.S., 304

  Grass, Necessity of, 108

  Great Britain, Cats in, 6

  Greeks and Cats, 6

  Grey Ringworm, 374

  Graymalkin, 216


                                    H

  Hairless Cats, 298

  Hana, 5

  Hardy, Mrs. P.: Travelling Basket Designed by, 58;
    on Treatment of Cats in Illness, 134

  Hart Park, New Brighton, 307

  Hawkins, Mrs., 232;
    on Siamese Cats, 262

  Hay as Bedding, 338

  Heart of Cat, 356

  Heating Cattery, 54

  Heliopolis, 4

  Heraldry, Cats in, 12

  Herring, Mrs., 106

  Hildyard, Mrs. D’Arcy, on Cream Persians, 204;
    on Orange Persians, 198

  Hind limb of Cat, 353

  Homes for Stray and Starving Cats, 32;
    Boarding, 35;
    in Chicago, 313;
    in Dublin, 33

  Homing Instinct, 21

  Hooker, Mrs. J. J., 330

  Horseflesh, 24, 37

  Hot-water Bottle, 39, 57

  House, Mr. C. A.:
    on Judging, 74;
    on Silver Breeding, 143;
    on Silver Tabbies, 175

  Housing of Cats, 49

  Howel the Good, 6

  Hugo, Victor, 11

  Hunt, Miss M., on White Persians, 121

  Hyde Park, Dogs’ Cemetery, 35


                                    I

  Ice in Sickness, 358

  Illness, Symptoms of, 44

  In-breeding, 90, 156, 184, 341, 348

  India: Domestic Cats, 298;
    Fables of, 6

  Indianapolis, 314

  Inflammation of the Stomach, 358

  Inoculation for Distemper, 368

  Instinct, 21

  Insurance, 66

  Iris of Cat’s Eye, 370

  Isle of Man, 245, 249

  Isochromatic Plates in Photography, 336

  Italy, 6


                                    J

  James, Mrs. H. V., on Blue Short-hairs, 276;
    on Smokes, 180

  Japan, 300;
    Tailless Cats of, 246

  Japanese Cats, 300

  Jay, Miss, on Judging, 132

  Jennings, Mr. J., on Classification, 99;
    on Russian Cats, 275

  Johnson, Dr., 11

  Jones, Mr., Brown Tabbies of, 330

  Judge, 180

  Judging, 68;
    in America, 317;
    Blue Persians, 126, 131;
    Blue Short-hairs, 277;
    Foreign Cats, 301;
    Mr. House on, 74;
    Miss Jay on, 132;
    Long-haired Classes, 71;
    Mr. T. B. Mason on, 74;
    Neuters, 242;
    Points to Note, 70;
    Self Colours, 72;
    Siamese Cats, 265;
    Silver Persians, 162;
    Tabbies, 72, 295

  Jung, Mr. H. E., 286


                                    K

  Katzen Family, 13

  Kidneys, Diseases of the, 361

  King, His Most Gracious Majesty the, 219, 240

  King James of Scotland, 8

  Kircher, A., 6

  Kittens, 38, 40, 122, 175, 337;
    Black Persian, 116;
    Blue Persians, 110, 127, 345;
    Blue Short-hairs, 276, 279;
    Boarding-out System, 343;
    Breeding, 340;
    Brown Tabbies, 216, 225;
    Chinchilla, 346;
    Chinchilla Challenge Trophy, 151;
    Cleanliness, 44, 340;
    Colour Breeding, 345;
    Danger of Damp to, 340;
    Defective Digestion, 343;
    Destruction of Sickly, 341;
    Distemper, 367;
    Eyes, 42, 370;
    Feeding, 42, 158, 338, 339;
    Foster-mothers, 268, 340;
    Fur, 99;
    Handling, 340;
    Illness, 45;
    Insects in, 44;
    Maltese, 320;
    Manx, 249;
    Mismarked, 234;
    Orange Persian, 190, 194, 199;
    Outdoor Exercise, 339;
    Pairs at Shows, 65;
    Persian, 337;
    Photographing, 333;
    Purulent Ophthalmia, 372;
    Sale of, 46, 343;
    Selection, 91;
    Show, Northern Club, 93;
    Siamese, 257;
    Silvers, 140, 155, 173;
    Smokes, 179, 346;
    Teeth, 352;
    Treatment after Birth, 40, 337;
    Weaning, 44, 159;
    Weight, 339;
    White Persian, 121


                                    L

  Label for Travelling Basket, 60

  Labour, Treatment during, 41

  Ladies Kennel Association, 93

  Lady Decies’ Cattery, 101

  Lambert, M. Eugène, 16

  Landor, Mr., 88

  Leake, Miss A., on Silver Tabbies, 170

  Lebrun, Mme., 15

  Leopard, The, 350

  “Les Chats,” 5

  Lesdiguières, Mme. de, 10

  Lethal Boxes and Chambers, 19, 32, 343, 376

  “Lettres sur les Chats,” 11

  Lice, 361

  Lignières, Prof., 368

  Lime-water, 158, 339

  Lion, The, 350, 351;
    and Cat in Legend, 1;
    Colour, 351

  Liston, R., 11

  Literature on Cats, 31

  Litter Classes, 68

  Little, Mr. R., on Black Persians, 117

  Liver, of Cat, 356

  Locke, Mrs. C., on White Persians, 123

  London Institution, Camden Town, 32

  Long-haired Cats, 98

  Lord Mayor’s Chain, 216;
    in Silver Tabbies, 170, 174

  Louisville Cat Club, 27

  Louvre, The, 5

  Lusus, 6

  Lynx, The, 322


                                    M

  Maau, 5

  Machœrodus, 350

  Maine Cats, 321, 325, 328;
    Brown Tabbies, 328;
    Fanciers, 330;
    Neuters, 331;
    Shows, 303

  Male Cats, 47;
    Training on Leads, 340

  Maltese Cats, 275, 320;
    Kittens, 320;
    Markings, 20;
    Points, 321

  Mange, 374

  Mange Mites, 361, 374

  Manx Cat Club, 27, 30, 249

  Manx Cats, 244;
    Mr. G. Bolton on, 245;
    Mr. H. C. Brooke on, 250;
    Coat, 245;
    Fanciers, 247;
    Kittens, 249;
    Mating, 250;
    Origin, 251;
    Points, 245, 250;
    Types, 246;
    Verses on, 252

  Markings of Coats, 74, 319;
    in Brown Tabbies, 228;
    Maltese, 320;
    Orange Persians, 187;
    Short-hairs, 283, 288, 290, 295;
    Siamese Cats, 257;
    Silver Persians, 138, 165, 169

  Martin, Mrs., on Silver Persians, 160

  Mason, Mr. T. B.:
    on Blue Persians, 127;
    on Judging, 74;
    on Short-hairs, 290

  Maternal Instinct in Cat, 22

  Mating, 38, 316;
    “Any Other Colours,” 233;
    Best Age for Queens, 109;
    Black Persians, 112, 115;
    Blue Persians, 107, 126;
    Blue Short-hairs, 279;
    Brown Tabbies, 228;
    Chinchillas, 152, 160;
    Cross-breeding, 334;
    Diet during, 38;
    Hints on, 91;
    Manx Cats, 250;
    Orange Persians, 190, 193;
    Pedigree Cats, 152;
    Short-hairs, 284, 288, 291, 294;
    Siamese, 256, 258;
    Silvers, 143, 144, 172, 175;
    Smokes, 182;
    Stud Cats, 47;
    Stud Fees, 91;
    Tortoiseshells, 209, 214, 295;
    White Persians, 119

  Maynard, Rev. R., on Silver Tabbies, 167

  Meat, Raw, as Food, 37;
    for Kittens, 338

  Medal, Cat Club, 133

  Medicine, 39, 135, 358;
    Bromide, 38;
    for Diarrhœa, 40;
    for Show Cats, 67;
    in Teething, 46;
    Worm Powders, 38, 361

  Meibomian Cysts, 371

  Melox, 339

  Melrose, Mass., Cattery, 306

  Middle Ages, Cat Fables, 8, 10

  Midland Counties Cat Club, 27, 29, 94

  Milk, Condensed, 43, 338

  Milk, Cows, 41, 158;
    in Enteritis, 358;
    for Kittens, 41, 338

  Millerton, N.Y., 307

  Milton, J., 14

  Mind, Swiss Painter, 15

  Mivart, G., 11

  Mohr au Chat, 13

  Moncrieff, 11

  Montreal Cats’ Home, 34

  Moon, Cat Emblem of, 4

  Morgan, Mrs., 32

  Morris Refuge for Homeless and Suffering Animals, 34

  Morrison, Mrs. McLaren, 105

  Mountain Lion, The, 322

  Mouse in Arabian Legend, 1

  Muezza, 10

  Mummies, Cat, 1, 4;
    Kitten, 3

  Muscles of Cat, 355


                                    N

  Naples, 6

  Nasal Catarrh, 362

  Nasal Discharge, 362

  National Cat Club, 26;
    Championship Show, 94;
    Classes, 27, 301;
    Manx Cat Judging, 251;
    Objects in View, 27;
    Register, 78;
    Registration, 29, 62;
    Stud Book, 27;
    Varieties recognised by, 63

  Neate, Mrs., on Orange Persians, 195

  Neck of Cat, 96;
    Neck Bones, 352

  Neuter Cats, 47, 237;
    in America, 331;
    Miss H. Cochran on, 239;
    Fanciers, 240;
    Persian, 47, 127;
    Points, 238, 242;
    Ring Class at Richmond Show, 68;
    Short-haired, 241;
    Showing, 83;
    Training, 340

  New York:
    Cat Fancy, 35, 306;
    First Show, 303

  Nield, Mrs., on Silver Persians, 155

  Nine, Number, 19

  Normal Temperature of Cat, 356

  Norris, Mr. F., on Cream Persians, 203

  Northern Counties Cat Club, The, 26, 29;
    Kitten Show, 93

  Norton, Mrs. L., Cats’ Refuge, 34

  Nunneries, Cats in, 10

  Nursery Rhymes, 14


                                    O

  Ocelot, The, 297, 302, 322;
    Colour, 321

  Ohio, Cat Fancy, 314

  Old Deer Park, Richmond, 67

  Old Fort Cattery, 305

  Old and New London, 13

  Ophthalmia, 371;
    External, 372

  Opiates, 359, 360

  Orange and Cream Cat Club, 199

  Orange, Cream, Fawn, and Tortoiseshell Society, 26, 30, 188

  Orange Persians, 187;
    Colour Breeding, 196, 348;
    Fanciers, 191;
    Mrs. D’Arcy Hildyard on, 198;
    Markings, 187, 193;
    Mating, 190, 193, 196, 198;
    Mrs. Neate on, 195;
    Points, 188;
    Mrs. Vidal on, 192

  Orange-and-White Persians, 233

  Orange Tabby Short-hairs, 291;
    Mating, 294

  Origin of Cat, 1

  Ottolengui, Dr., 305

  “Our Cats,” Serial, 17;
    on Classification of Short-hairs, 285;
    First Number, 31;
    on Manx Cats, 247

  “Our Cats,” Work by H. Weir, 16

  Outdoor Exercise for Kittens, 339

  Owena Cattery, 313


                                    P

  Pacific Cat Club, 27

  Pads on Cat’s Foot, 353

  Painless Destruction of Cats, 376

  Pampas Cats, 323

  Parasites, External, 376;
    Internal, 361

  Parasitic Canker, 370

  Pasht, 3

  Patent Foods for Cats, 37, 45, 131, 339

  Paw of Cat, 97

  Pedigree Cats, 27;
    Mating of, 152, 175, 340

  Peluse, 5

  Pennant, on Wild Cats, 7

  Pens, Sleeping:
    in Cattery, 51;
    in Shows, 65

  Persian Cats, 98;
    in America, 325;
    Breeding of Kittens, 340;
    at Cat Club Shows, 95;
    Coats, 37, 99, 340;
    Colour of Eyes, 112;
    Ear tufts, 96, 154, 172, 178;
    Imported, 113;
    In-breeding, 99;
    Photographing, 333;
    Rearing Kittens, 337;
    Sensitiveness to Damp, 340;
    Showing, 62, 76, 100;
    Tail, 97;
    Toe tufts, 97

  Pets, Neuters as, 48

  Pettit, Mrs., on White Persians, 122

  Philadelphia Cats’ Home, 34

  Phisalix, Dr., 368

  Phthisis, 363

  Pierce, Mrs. E. R., on Maine Cats, 325

  Pioneer Cattery, Toronto, 315

  Pittsburg Cattery, 304

  Plasmon Powder, 135

  Pleurisy, 363

  Plica Semilunaris in Cat’s Eye, 357

  Plutarch, 4

  Pneumonia, 45, 363

  Points of Cat, 97, 333;
    in Selecting Stud Cats, 341

  Popular Superstitions, 13

  Portable Hutch, 56

  Portier, Mme., 68

  Pottsdown Cattery, 307

  Prizes at Shows, 28, 79, 85;
    Special, 76

  Pulse of Cat, 356

  Puma, The, 350

  Purulent Ophthalmia of the New-born, 372


                                    Q

  Queen, Her Most Gracious Majesty the, 32, 240

  Queens, 38;
    Feeding, 42;
    Handling, 39;
    in Season, 38;
    Selection of Stud Cat, 340;
    Visiting, 39, 91

  Quinine Sulphate, 362


                                    R

  Rail, Cats Travelling by, 66

  Raphael of Cats, The, 15

  Raw Meat for Kittens, 338

  Red-spotted Cat of India, 350

  Red Tabby Cats, 194, 288

  Red Tortoiseshell Persians, 208

  Registration:
    Cat Club, 29;
    National Cat Club, 27, 62;
    at Shows, 78

  Repplier, Miss A., 24

  Ribs of Cat, 352

  Rice, 37, 339

  Rice-water, 339

  Richelieu, Cardinal, 10

  Ridgefield Cattery, 306

  Ring, Judging in, 70;
    Ring Class National Cat Club Shows, 83

  Ringworm, 374

  Robinson, Mrs. C., on Siamese Cats, 259

  Romans and Cats, 6

  Ronner, Mme. H., 16

  Roper, Dr., on Black Persians, 115

  Russia, 279

  Russian Cats, 279


                                    S

  Sable Cat, 347

  St. John, Festival of, 8

  Salubrene, 55

  Salvo, 31;
    Worm Powders, 38

  Sancho, an Old Friend, 36

  Sandy Show, 92

  Sanskrit Writings, 1

  Santonin, 361

  Saratoga Cattery, 305

  Sarcoptic Mange, 374

  Scott, Sir W., 11

  Scottish Cat Club, 27, 29;
    Annual Show, 94

  Sectorial Tooth, 352

  Selection in Breeding, 152, 340

  Self Blues, 125, 137

  Self Silvers, 137, 161

  Serval, The, 351

  Sessa, M., 13

  Shaded Silvers, 137, 161

  Shakespeare, W., 11

  Shelley, P. B., 11

  Short-haired Cat Club, The, 26

  Short-haired Cat Society, The, 275

  Short-haired Cats, 17, 98, 274;
    in America, 286, 321;
    Black, 289;
    Blue, 288;
    Blue, in America, 321;
    Mrs. Bonny on, 285;
    Broken Colours, 282;
    Brown Tabby, 288, 294;
    Clubs for, 30;
    Coat, 282;
    Fanciers, 274, 285, 293;
    Judging, 295;
    Mr. Jung on, 286;
    Mr. T. B. Mason on, 290;
    Markings, 283;
    Mating, 284, 291;
    Neuters, 241;
    Points, 282;
    Red Tabby, 288;
    Russian Blues, 291;
    Showing, 62;
    Silver Tabby, 287;
    Spotted Tabby, 284;
    Tabby, 291, 294;
    Tortoiseshell, 284, 295;
    H. Weir on, 285;
    White, 289

  Shoulder and Fore arm of Cat, 96

  Showing, 97, 116, 129;
    in America, 324

  Shows, 25, 67, 85;
    Abyssinian Cats at, 301;
    in America, 304, 319, 327;
    “A.O.C.” Class, 233;
    Bedding at, 80;
    Best Time for Persians, 76;
    blood-poisoning Persian Classes, 112;
    California, 316;
    Chinchilla Class, 137;
    Classification, 64, 78, 169, 188;
    Cleveland, U.S., 314;
    Connecticut, 308;
    Crystal Palace (1871), 17;
    Danger of Distemper, 364;
    Despatch of Prizes, 85;
    Disqualifications, 66;
    Entries and Fees, 64, 65;
    “Faking” for, 66;
    Feeding at, 66, 81;
    Financial Aspect of, 86, 90;
    Foreign Cats, 301;
    Illness at, 81;
    Judging Books, 82;
    Kittens, Litter Classes, 65;
    Local, 92;
    Management, 75;
    Mixed, 75;
    Naming of Cats, 63;
    National Cat Club, 27, 94;
    Neuters, 237;
    New York, 304;
    Ohio, 314;
    Open Judging, 84;
    Pedigree Particulars, 63;
    Penning, 80;
    Persians, 100;
    Prize Tickets, 80;
    Registration, 78;
    Sales, 84;
    Selling Classes, 82;
    Shaded Silver Class, 161;
    Short-haired Cats, 274, 285, 290;
    Silver Persians, 142, 162;
    Smoke Persians, 178;
    Special Prizes, 76;
    Specialist Societies and, 76;
    Training Exhibits for, 61, 62;
    “Variety” Class, 231;
    Various, 28;
    Veterinary Surgeon at, 81

  Siam, 257;
    Chocolate Cat of, 256;
    Common Cat of, 264;
    Royal Cat of, 254

  Siamese Cat Club, The, 26, 30, 255, 259

  Siamese Cats, 254, 271;
    in America, 271;
    Miss Armitage on, 260;
    Breeding, 272;
    Lady Marcus Beresford on, 261;
    Mrs. Parker Brough on, 263;
    Chocolate Colour, 256;
    Miss Cochran on, 265;
    Mrs. Carew Cox on, 266;
    Delicacy, 254;
    Eyes, 272;
    Fanciers, 256, 258;
    Feeding, 264;
    Fighting Propensities, 272;
    Freaks, 272;
    Mrs. Hawkins on, 262;
    Judging, 265;
    Kittens, 257, 268;
    Legends, 257, 260;
    Markings, 257;
    Mating, 256, 258, 262;
    Origin of Title “Royal,” 259;
    Points, 255, 259, 265;
    Recognised Varieties, 266;
    Mrs. C. Robinson on, 259;
    Mrs. Spencer on, 261;
    Superstitions, 268;
    Throat Complaints, 269;
    Voice, 254, 272;
    Miss Forestier-Walker on, 257, 267

  Signboards, Cat on, 13

  “Silver Lambkin” Challenge Trophy, 151

  Silver Persians, 137, 161;
    Coats, 140;
    Fanciers, 143;
    Kittens, 139, 158;
    Markings, 138;
    Mrs. Martin on, 160;
    Mating, 143;
    Mrs. Nield on, 155;
    Points, 137, 141;
    Queens, 157;
    Specialist Club, 30;
    Mrs. Wellbye on, 160

  Silver and Smoke Persian Cat Society, 26, 30, 143, 151

  Silver Society, 141, 151;
    Smokes Defined by, 182

  Silver Tabby Persians, 165;
    Colour, 170;
    Miss Cope on, 163;
    Fanciers, 168;
    Mr. House on, 175;
    In-breeding, 348;
    Miss Leake on, 170;
    Mating, 172, 175;
    Points, 162, 166, 170, 174;
    H. Weir on, 165

  Silver Tabby Short-haired Cats, 287, 291;
    Fanciers, 288

  Sinkins, Mrs., on Smoke Persians, 187

  Sires, Choice of, 38

  Skeleton of Cat, 351;
    Diagram, 355

  “Skellingthorpe Patrick,” 345

  Skin, Diseases of the, 373

  Skull of Cat, 96, 351, 353

  Sleeping Boxes, 52

  Smoke Persians, 178;
    in America, 184;
    Colour Breeding, 346;
    Eyes, 180, 183, 346;
    Fanciers, 180;
    “Field and Fancy” on, 185;
    Mrs. H. V. James on, 180;
    Kittens, 346;
    Markings, 346;
    Mating, 179, 182, 184, 346;
    Points, 178, 180, 182;
    Mrs. Sinkins on, 184;
    Mrs. Stead on, 185

  Snow Leopard, The, 351

  Soda-water, 258

  Somatose, 135

  Soul of Animals, 36

  South American Dwarf Cats, 300

  Southdown Cats, 186

  Specialist Clubs, 30;
    and Midland Counties Cat Club, 94;
    and Shows, 76

  Specialists, Veterinary, 31

  Spencer, Mrs., on Siamese Cats, 261

  Speos, 3

  Splaying, 47, 237

  Sporting Instinct, 22

  Spratt’s Biscuits, 37

  Staphyloma, 373

  Statuary, 13

  Stead, Mrs., on Smoke Persians, 185

  Sternum of Cat, 353

  Stewart, Mrs. Mackenzie, 104

  Stomach of Cat, 351

  Stray Cats, Homes for, 32

  Structure of Cat, 350, 351

  Stud Cats, 47, 109;
    in America, 30, 305;
    Blue Persians, 125, 130;
    Chinchillas, 148;
    Fees for, 47, 91;
    Food, 47;
    Mating, 47;
    Orange Persians, 191, 193;
    at Shows, 84;
    Siamese, 258, 265;
    Silver Persians, 144, 168;
    Tortoiseshell, 284;
    White Persians, 122

  Sulphate of Iron, 196

  Sun, Need of, for Health, 49, 342

  Superficial Flexor Tendons, 352

  Superficial Muscles of Cat, 354

  Superstitions, 144

  Surface of Cat’s Tongue, 357

  Swinburne, 11

  Syringing Nasal Passages, 362


                                    T

  Tabby Cat, 2, 215;
    Harrison Weir on, 216

  Tabby Persians, 165;
    Colour Breeding, 347

  Tabby Short-haired Cats, 291;
    Colour Breeding, 349;
    Mating, 294

  Tabby and White Persians, 233

  Tags, 331

  Tail or Brush, 97;
    in Eastern Cats, 245;
    Siamese Cats, 254, 257, 264, 266;
    Silver Persians, 172, 174;
    Smoke Persians, 178;
    Terminal Bones in, 352

  Tailless Cats, 245

  Tapeworm, 361

  Tarsal Bones of Cat, 354

  Taxation of Cats, 19

  Techau, 5

  Teeth of Cat, 350;
    as Guide to Age, 99;
    of Kittens, 352

  Terminal Bones of Cat’s Foot, 353

  Thebes, 3;
    Paintings, 5

  Thomas, Mrs. G., 330

  Tiger, The, 350, 351

  Tiger Cat, 219

  Toe tufts, 97;
    in Blue Persians, 126;
    in Chinchillas, 154;
    in White Persians, 118

  Toes of Cat, 350

  Tongue of Cat, 351, 355;
    Diagram, 357

  Tortoiseshell Persians, 208, 211;
    Miss M. Beal on, 210;
    Colour Breeding, 345, 349;
    Mating, 209, 211;
    Points, 209, 210;
    Scarcity of Males, 209

  Tortoiseshell Short-haired Cats, 287;
    Fanciers, 287;
    Markings, 295;
    Mating, 295

  Tortoiseshell-and-White Persians, 212;
    Mating, 214

  Tortoiseshell-and-White Short-haired Cats, 295

  “Touch not the cat, but the glove,” 13

  Travelling Baskets, 38, 58, 65

  Trichiasis, 371

  Trick Training, 24

  True Canker, 369

  “Twenty Lookes over all the Roundheads of the World,” 8


                                    U

  Undigested Food, 46, 360

  Unreasonable Buyers, 89

  Urine, Incontinence of, 361


                                    V

  Vegetables as Food, 37

  Ventilation, 52, 338

  Vertebræ of Cat, 352

  Veterinary Surgeon at Shows, 80

  Victoria, H. R. H., Princess of Schleswig-Holstein, 27, 105, 119, 151

  Vidal, Mrs. G. H., on Orange Persians, 192

  Vomiting, 358


                                    W

  Wain, Louis, 16;
    on Eyes, 167;
    on Neuters, 242

  Walker, Mrs. G. H., 159

  Ward, Mr., 31;
    Artificial Foster-mother, 42, 340;
    Lethal Box, 56

  Washing Cats, 37, 124

  Water, 37

  Waterfowl, 5

  Weaning Kittens, 159

  Weir, Harrison, 10;
    on Angoras, 98;
    on Black Cats, 114;
    on Blue Persians, 128;
    on Cat Proverbs, 15;
    on Curious Markings, 233;
    “Our Cats,” by, 16;
    President N.C.C., 26;
    on Russian Cats, 275;
    on Short-hairs, 284, 285;
    on Siamese Cats, 272;
    on Silver Tabbies, 165;
    on “Tabby Cat,” 216;
    on Tortoiseshell-and-White Persians, 213

  Wellbye, Mrs., on Silver Persians, 160

  Westlake, Mrs., on White Persians, 123

  Whately, Archbishop, 18

  White Persians, 118;
    in America, 304;
    Breeding, 344;
    Cleaning Coat, 124;
    Deafness, 123;
    Fanciers, 119;
    Miss M. Hunt on, 121;
    Kittens, 121;
    Mrs. C. Locke on, 123;
    Mrs. Westlake on, 123

  White and Black Persians, 233

  White Short-haired Cats 289

  Whitney, Miss, on Brown Tabbies, 224

  Whiskers, of Cat, 97;
    of Silver Tabbies, 172, 174

  Wild Cats, 7, 13;
    in America, 322;
    Anatomy of, 100;
    European, 297

  Winslow, Miss H., 34

  Wire Netting, 108

  Witchcraft, 8, 19

  Worcester, Mass., Cattery, 306

  Wordsworth, W., 11

  Worms, 38;
    Gastritis caused by, 358;
    in Kittens, 44;
    Medicines, 361;
    in Siamese Cats, 268;
    Treatment, 361;
    Vomiting caused by, 358


                                    Y

  Yellow Ringworm, 375


                                    Z

  “Zaida,” 102, 144


  PRINTED BY CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED, LA BELLE SAUVAGE, LONDON, E. C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

  125 bought in the other, fearing I   brought in the other, fearing I
      should lose her                  should lose her

  ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
  ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
  ● Enclosed bold or blackletter font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BOOK OF THE CAT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


