The Project Gutenberg eBook of Civilization and ethics
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Civilization and ethics
        The philosophy of civilization, part 2

Author: Albert Schweitzer

Translator: C. T. Campion

Release date: May 10, 2025 [eBook #76061]

Language: English

Original publication: London: A. & C. Black, Ltd, 1929

Credits: Actonian Press


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS ***




The Dale Memorial Lectures, 1922.

CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS

THE PHILOSOPHY OF CIVILIZATION

PART II

BY

ALBERT SCHWEITZER

D.THEOL.; D.PHIL.; D.MED. (STRASSBURG)

_Second Edition_

TRANSLATED BY

C. T. CAMPION

M.A. (OXON.)

A. & C. BLACK, LTD.

4, 5 & 6 SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1

1929





_First Edition published November, 1923_

_Second Edition (revised), published in 1929_



To

MY WIFE

THE MOST LOYAL OF COMRADES


_Printed in Great Britain._




PREFACE

MY subject is the tragedy of the Western world-view._(_1_)_

While still a student I was surprised to find the history of thought
always written merely as a history of philosophical systems, never as
the history of man’s effort to arrive at a world-view. Later, when
reflecting on the current of civilization in which I found myself
living, I was struck by the strange and inexorable connexions which
exist between civilization and our view of the world as a whole. Next
I felt a still stronger compulsion to put to Western thought the
question what it has been aiming at, and what result it has reached in
the matter of world-view. What is there left of the achievements of
our philosophy when it is stripped of its tinsel of learning? What has
it to offer us when we demand from it those elemental ideas which we
need if we are to take our position in life as men who are growing in
character through the experience given by work?

So I came to an unsparing reckoning up with Western thought. I
recognized and admitted that it has sought for that world-view from
which alone a deep and comprehensive civilization can come. It wanted
to reach a position [pg vi] of world- and life-affirmation and on that
foundation lay down that it is our duty to be active, to strive for
progress of all kinds, and to create values. It wanted to reach an
ethical system and on that foundation lay down that for the sake of
serviceable activity we have to place our life at the service of ideas
and of the other life around us.

But it did not succeed in grounding its world- and life-affirming
ethical world-view convincingly and permanently in thought. Our
philosophy did nothing more than produce again and again unstable
fragments of the serviceable world-view which hovered before its
mind’s eye. Consequently our civilization also remained fragmentary
and insecure.

It was a fatal mistake that Western thought never admitted to itself
the unsatisfying result of its search for a stable and serviceable
world-view. Our philosophizing became less and less elemental, losing
all connexion with the elementary questions which man must ask of life
and of the world. More and more it found satisfaction in the handling
of philosophic questions that were merely academic, and in an expert’s
mastery of philosophical technique. It became more and more the
captive of secondary things. Instead of real music it produced again
and again mere bandmaster’s music, often magnificent stuff of its
kind, but still only bandmaster’s music.

Through this philosophy which did nothing but philosophize instead of
struggling for a world-view grounded in thought and serviceable for
life, we came to be without any world-view and therefore without any
civilization.

Signs of an awakening of thought on this point are beginning to be
visible. It is admitted here and there that philosophy must again try
to offer a world-view. This is generally expressed by saying that
people are encouraging it to venture once more on “metaphysics,” that
is to put forward definitive views about the spiritual nature of the
world, whereas hitherto it has been occupied with the classification
of scientific facts and in cautious hypotheses.

Not only in philosophy, but in thought generally this [pg vii]
awakening of the need for a world-view expresses itself as a need for
“metaphysics.” Fantastic systems of “metaphysics” are sought for and
offered. Individuals who believe that they have at their disposal
peculiar psychic experiences, and assert that with their aid they can
look behind the actual nature of phenomena, come forward as bringers
of a world-view.

But neither the cautious academic, nor the much-claiming fantastic
“metaphysics,” can really give us a world-view. That the road to a
world-view leads through “metaphysics” is a fatal error which has
already enjoyed too long a span of life in our Western thought. It
would be tragic if we renewed its vigour just now, when we are faced
by the necessity of working our way out of that lack of world-view in
which our misery, both spiritual and material, is grounded. No further
wandering along the traditional roads that lead nowhere can save us,
whether we advance as the successors of our fathers or on adventurous
lines of our own. Only in a deep conception of and experience in the
problems of world-view is there for us any possibility of advance.

That is why I am undertaking what has never been attempted in this way
before, viz. so to pose the problem of the Western world-view as to
make the Western search for a world-view come to a halt and take
account of itself. There are two points on which it must be clear
before it proceeds to further exertion. The first is the overwhelming
importance in the search for a world-view of the quality of the
world-view sought. What is it that we want? We want to find the world-
and life-affirmation and the ethical system which we need for that
serviceable activity which gives our life a meaning, based on such
thought about the world and life as finds a meaning in them also. If
our search for a world-view is once thoroughly permeated by the
recognition that everything turns upon these two fundamental
questions, it is thereby saved from betaking itself to by-paths,
thinking that by some happy disposition of fortune it can reach its
goal along them. It will then [pg viii] not search for a “metaphysic,”
thinking by means of it to reach a world-view, but it will search for
a world-view and accept with it anything “metaphysical” that may turn
up. From every point of view it will remain elemental.

The second task which the conscious search for a world-view must not
shirk, is the consideration of what is the real and ultimate nature of
the process by which it has hitherto attempted to secure that
serviceable world-view which hovered before it. Reflexion on this is
necessary that it may make up its mind whether further advance along
the road it has hitherto followed gives any prospect of success. Our
philosophy ought to have been philosophizing long ago about the road
along which it was going in search of a world-view. It never did so,
and therefore was always running uselessly round and round in a
circle.

The process by which Western thought has hitherto sought for a
world-view is doomed to be fruitless. It consisted simply in
interpreting the world in the sense of world- and life-affirmation,
that is, in attributing to the world a meaning which allowed it to
conceive the aims of mankind and of individual men as having a meaning
within it. This interpretation is acted upon by all Western
philosophy. A few thinkers who venture to be un-Western and resolutely
allow world- and life-negation and ethics to be made subjects of
discussion, are side-currents which do not affect the main course of
the river.

That this process followed by Western thought consists in adopting an
optimistic-ethical interpretation of the world will not be clear
without further explanation, for it is, indeed, not always openly
followed. The optimistic-ethical interpretation is often to be found
imbedded in the results of investigations into the nature of
knowledge; it often appears beneath a veil of “metaphysics”; it is
often so delicately shaded that it produces none of its usual effects.
It is only when one has clearly grasped the fact that Western thought
has nothing else in mind than to establish for itself a world-view
based on world- and life-affirmation and ethical in character, that
one can realize [pg ix] how in its theory of knowledge, in its
metaphysics, and in all its movements generally in the game of life,
it is guided, consciously or unconsciously, by the effort to interpret
the world in some way or other and in some measure in the sense of
world- and life-affirmation and of ethics. Whether in this attempt it
goes to work openly or secretly, skilfully or unskilfully, honourably
or craftily, does not matter. Western thought needs this
interpretation that it may be able to give a meaning to human life.
Its view of life is to be a result of its view of the world. No other
course was ever taken into consideration by it.

But this awakening of Western thought will not be complete until that
thought steps outside itself and comes to an understanding with the
search for a world-view as this manifests itself in the thought of
mankind as a whole. We have too long been occupied with the developing
series of our own philosophical systems, and have taken no notice of
the fact that there is a world-philosophy of which our Western
philosophy is only a part. If, however, one grasps philosophy as being
a struggle to reach a view of the world as a whole, and seeks out the
elementary convictions which are to deepen it and give it a sure
foundation, one cannot avoid setting our own thought face to face with
that of the Hindus and Chinese in the Far East. The latter looks
strange to us because much of it has remained even till now naïve and
embodied in myth, while in other parts again it has spontaneously
advanced to refinements of criticism and to artificialities. But this
does not matter. The essential thing is that it is a struggle for a
world-view: the form it takes is a secondary matter. Our Western
philosophy, if judged by its own latest pronouncements, is much naïver
than we admit to ourselves, and we fail to perceive it only because we
have acquired the art of expressing what is simple in a learned way.

Among the Hindus we encounter the world-view which is based on world-
and life-negation, and the way in which it grounds itself in thought
is calculated to leave us not knowing what to make of our prejudice in
favour of world- [pg x] and life-affirmation, which, as Westerners, we
are inclined to assume as something more or less self-evident.

The attraction and tension which in Hindu thought govern the relations
between world- and life-negation and ethics, afford us glimpses into
the problem of ethics for which Western thought offers us no
comparable opportunities.

Nowhere, again, has the problem of world- and life-affirmation, both
in itself and in its relation to ethics, been felt in so elemental and
comprehensive a fashion as in Chinese thought. Lao-tse, Chwang-tse,
Kung-tse (Confucius), Meng-tse, Lie-tse, and the rest, are thinkers in
whom the problems of world-view with which our Western thought is
wrestling, encounter us in a form, strange indeed, but compelling our
attention.

Discussing these problems with them means discussing them with
ourselves also.

That is why I bade our search for a world-view seek to reach clear
ideas about itself, and come to a halt in order to fix its attention
on the thought of mankind as a whole.

My solution of the problem is that we must make up our minds to
renounce completely the optimistic-ethical interpretation of the
world. If we take the world as it is, it is impossible to attribute to
it a meaning in which the aims and objects of mankind and of
individual men have a meaning also. Neither world- and
life-affirmation nor ethics can be grounded on what our knowledge of
the world can tell us about the world. In the world we can discover
nothing of any purposive evolution in which our activities can acquire
a meaning. Nor is the ethical to be discovered in any form in the
world-process. The only advance in knowledge that we can make is to
describe more and more minutely the phenomena which make up the world
and their course. To understand the meaning of the whole—and that is
what a world-view demands—is for us an impossibility. The last fact
which knowledge can discover is that the world is a manifestation in
every way puzzling, of the universal will-to-live.

[pg xi]

I believe I am the first among Western thinkers who has ventured to
recognize this crushing result of knowledge, and who is absolutely
sceptical about our knowledge of the world without at the same time
renouncing with it belief in world- and life-affirmation and ethics.
Resignation as to knowledge of the world is for me not a hopeless fall
into a scepticism which leaves us to drift about in life like a
derelict vessel. I see in it that effort of honesty which we must
venture to make in order to arrive at the serviceable world-view which
hovers within sight. Every world-view which does not start from
resignation in regard to knowledge, is artificial and a mere
fabrication, for it rests upon an inadmissible interpretation of the
world.

When once thought has become clear to itself about the relation in
which world-view and life-view stand to each other, it is in a
position to reconcile resignation as to knowledge with adherence to
world- and life-affirmation and ethics. Our view of life is not
dependent on our view of the world in the way that uncritical thought
imagines it to be. It does not wither away if it cannot send its roots
down into a corresponding world-view, for it does not originate in
knowledge although it would like to base itself thereon. It can safely
depend upon itself alone, for it is rooted in our will-to-live.

World- and life-affirmation and ethics are given in our will-to-live,
and they come to be clearly discerned in it in proportion as it learns
to think about itself and its relation to the world. The rational
thought of other times aimed at getting to know the world, and at
being able in that knowledge to conceive of the highest impulses of
our will-to-live as purposive in view of the universe and its
evolution. But that aim was unattainable. We are not meant to unite
the world and ourselves in such harmony with one another. We were
naïve enough to assume that our view of life must be contained in our
view of the world, but the facts do not justify this assumption. The
result is that our thought finds itself involved in a dualism with
which it can [pg xii] never finally settle. It is the dualism of
world-view and life-view, of knowing and willing.

To this dualism all the problems with which human thought has busied
itself ultimately go back. Every fragment of the thought of mankind
which has any bearing on man’s view of the world—whether in the
world-religions or in philosophy—is an attempt to resolve this
dualism. It is sometimes softened down, but only to let a unitary,
monistic world-view be adopted in its place; at other times it is left
current, but is transformed into a drama with a monistic issue.

Innumerable are the expedients which thought used in trying to get rid
of dualism. Everything it has undertaken commands respect, even the
staggering _naïvetés_ and the meaningless acts of violence to which it
committed itself, for it was always acting under the compulsion of an
inner necessity: it wanted to rescue a serviceable world-view from the
abyss of dualism.

But from this continuous mishandling of the problem no solution could
issue capable of satisfying thought. We were to be taken over the
abyss on tottering bridges of snow.

Instead of going on bridging this abyss with forced logic and
imaginative ideas, we must make up our minds to get to the root of the
problem and let it work upon us as it comes straight to meet us in the
facts. The solution is, not to try to get rid of dualism from the
world, but to realize it as something which can no longer do us any
harm. That is possible if we leave behind us all the arts and the
unveracities of thought and bow to the fact that, as we cannot
harmonize our life-view and our world-view, we must make up our minds
to put the former above the latter. The volition which is given in our
will-to-live reaches beyond our knowledge of the world. What is
decisive for our life-view is not our knowledge of the world but the
character of the volition which is given in our will-to-live. The
universal spirit meets us in nature as puzzling creative power. In our
will-to-live we experience [pg xiii] it within us as volition which is
both world- and life-affirming and ethical.

Our relation to the world as it is given in the character of our
will-to-live, when this latter seeks to comprehend itself in thought:
that is our view of the world. World-view is a product of life-view,
not _vice versâ_.

The rational thought of to-day, therefore, does not hunt the phantom
of getting to know the world. It leaves knowledge of the world on one
side as something unattainable by us, and tries to come to clear ideas
about the will-to-live which is within us.

The problem of world-view, then, brought back to facts and tackled by
rational thought without assumptions being made, may be put thus:
“What is the relation of my will-to-live, when it learns to think, to
itself and to the world?” And the answer is: “From an inner compulsion
to be true to itself and to remain consistent with itself, our
will-to-live enters into relations with our own individual being and
with all manifestations of the will-to-live which surround it, that
are determined by the sentiment of reverence for life.”

Reverence for life, _veneratio vitæ_, is the most direct and at the
same time the profoundest achievement of my will-to-live.

In reverence for life my knowledge passes into experience. The
unsophisticated world- and life-affirmation which is within me just
because I am will-to-live has, therefore, no need to enter into
controversy with itself, if my will-to-live learns to think and yet
does not understand the meaning of the world. In spite of the negative
results of knowledge I have to hold fast to world- and
life-affirmation and deepen it. My life carries its own meaning in
itself. This meaning lies in my living out the highest idea which
shows itself in my will-to-live, viz. the idea of reverence for life.
With that for a starting-point I give value to my own life and to all
the will-to-live which surrounds me, I persevere in activity, and I
produce values.

Ethics grow out of the same root as world- and [pg xiv]
life-affirmation, for ethics, too, are nothing but reverence for life.
That is what gives me the fundamental principle of morality, viz. that
good consists in maintaining, promoting, and enhancing life and that
destroying, injuring, and limiting life are evil. Affirmation of the
world, which means affirmation of the will-to-live that manifests
itself all round me, is only possible if I devote myself to other
life. From an inner necessity I exert myself in producing values and
practising ethics in the world and on the world even though not
understanding the meaning of the world. For in world- and
life-affirmation and in ethics I carry out the will of the universal
will-to-live which reveals itself in me. I live my life in God, in the
mysterious divine personality which I do not know as such in the
world, but only experience as a mysterious Will within myself.

Rational thinking which is free from assumptions ends therefore in
mysticism. To relate oneself in the spirit of reverence for life to
the multiform manifestations of the will-to-live which together
constitute the world is ethical mysticism. All profound world-view is
mysticism, the essence of which is just this: that out of my
unsophisticated and naïve existence in the world there comes, as a
result of thought about self and the world, spiritual self-devotion to
the mysterious infinite Will which is continuously manifested in the
universe.

This world-affirming, ethical, active mysticism has always been
hovering as a vision before Western thought, but the latter could
never adopt it because in its search for a world-view it always turned
into the wrong road of optimistic-ethical interpretation of the world,
instead of reflecting directly on the relation which man assumes to
the world under the inner compulsion of the deepest characterisation
of his will-to-live.

From my youth onwards I have felt certain that all thought which
thinks itself out to an issue ends in mysticism. In the stillness of
the primæval forest in Africa I have been able to work out this
thought and give it expression.

I come forward therefore with confidence as a restorer [pg xv] of that
rational thought which refuses to make assumptions. I know indeed that
our time will have absolutely no connexion with anything that is in
any way rationalistic, and would like to know it renounced as an
aberration of the eighteenth century. But the time will come when it
will be seen that we must start again where that century came to a
stop. What lies between that time and to-day is an intermezzo of
thought, an intermezzo with extraordinarily interesting and valuable
moments, but nevertheless an unhappy and fatal one. Its inevitable end
was our sinking into a condition in which we had neither world-view
nor civilization, and which contains in itself all that spiritual and
material misery in which we languish.

The restoration of our world-view can come only as a result of
inexorably truth-loving and recklessly courageous thought. Such
thinking alone is mature enough to learn by experience how the
rational, when it thinks itself out to a conclusion, passes
necessarily over into the non-rational. World- and life-affirmation
and ethics are non-rational. They are not justified by any
corresponding knowledge of the nature of the world, but are the
disposition in which, through the inner compulsion of our
will-to-live, we determine our relation to the world.

What the activity of this disposition of ours means in the evolution
of the world, we do not know. Nor can we regulate this activity from
outside; we must leave entirely to each individual its shaping and its
extension. From every point of view, then, world- and life-affirmation
and ethics are non-rational, and we must have the courage to admit it.

If rational thought thinks itself out to a conclusion, it comes to
something non-rational which, nevertheless, is a necessity of thought.
This is the paradox which dominates our spiritual life. If we try to
come through without this non-rational, the result is views of the
world and of life which are without life and without value.

All valuable conviction is non-rational and has an emotional
character, because it cannot be derived from [pg xvi] knowledge of the
world but arises out of the thinking experience of our will-to-live,
in which we stride out beyond all knowledge of the world. This fact it
is which the rational thought that thinks itself out to a conclusion
comprehends as the truth by which we must live. The way to true
mysticism leads up through rational thought to deep experience of the
world and of our will-to-live. We must all venture once more to be
“thinkers,” so as to reach mysticism, which is the only direct and the
only profound world-view. We must all wander in the field of knowledge
to the point where knowledge passes over into experience of the world.
We must all, through thought, become religious.

This rational thought must become the prevailing force among us, for
all the valuable ideas that we need develop out of it. In no other
fire than that of the mysticism of reverence for life can the broken
sword of idealism be forged anew.

In the disposition to reverence for life lies enclosed an elementary
conception of responsibility to which we must surrender ourselves; in
it there are forces at work which drive us to revision and ennoblement
of our individual social and political disposition.

It is the disposition to reverence for life, too, which alone is
capable of creating a new consciousness of law. The misery prevailing
under our political and social condition consists to a great extent in
this, that neither jurists nor laity have in their minds a living and
direct conception of law. During the age of rational thought there was
a search made for such a conception, and effort was made to establish
fundamental laws which were held to be given in the nature of man, and
to get them generally recognized. Later on, however, this was given
up, and laws passed at definite dates displaced natural law. Finally
we got to the stage of being satisfied with purely technical law. This
was the intermezzo which followed the period of rational thought in
the sphere of law.

We have entered on a period in which the feeling for [pg xvii] law is
hopelessly bereft of force, of soul, and of sense of moral obligation.
It is a period of lawlessness. Parliaments produce with easy readiness
statutes which contradict the idea of law. States deal arbitrarily
with their subjects without regard to the maintenance of any feeling
for law. Those, indeed, who fall into the power of a foreign nation
are outlaws. No respect is shown for their natural right to a
fatherland, or freedom, or dwelling-place, or property, or industry,
or food, or anything else. Belief in law is to-day an utter ruin.

This state of things was in preparation from the moment when the
search for the natural conception of law, grounded on rational
thought, was given up.

The only thing to be done, then, is to make a new connexion in the
sphere of law also, at the point where the thread of the rational
thought of the eighteenth century got broken. We must search for a
conception of law that is grounded in an idea which grows directly and
independently out of a world-view. We have to re-establish human
rights which cannot be infringed, human rights which guarantee to each
person the greatest possible freedom for his personality in his own
national body, human rights which protect his existence and his human
dignity against any foreign violence to which he may be subjected.

Jurists have allowed law and the feeling for law to be ruined. They
could not help it, however, for there was no idea provided by the
thought of the time to which a living conception of law could have
anchored itself. In the complete absence of any world-view law
collapsed entirely, and it is only out of a new world-view that it can
be built up again. It is from a fundamental idea about our relation to
all that lives, as such, that it must flow in future, as from a spring
which can never dry up and never become a swamp. That spring is
reverence for life.

Law and ethics spring up together from the same idea. Law is so much
of the principle of respect for life as can be embodied in an external
code; ethics are what cannot be so embodied. The foundation of law is
humanity. It is [pg xviii] folly to wish to put out of action the
links between law and world-view.

In this way a world-view is the germ of all ideas and dispositions
which are determinative for the conduct of individuals and of society.

Flying machines carry men to-day through the air over a world in which
hunger and brigandage have a place. It is not in China only that one
recognizes the grotesque character of such progress: it is almost
typical for mankind generally, and such grotesque progress cannot be
changed to the normal till a general disposition prevails which is
capable of bringing order again into the chaos of human life through
ethics. In the last resort the practical can be realized only through
the ethical

What a remarkable circle! Rational thought which thinks itself out
arrives at something non-rational and subjective which is a necessity
of thought, viz. the ethical affirmation of world and life. On the
other hand, what for the purpose of moulding the conditions of
existence for individual men and mankind as a whole is rational, that
is to say, what is objectively practical in this regard, can only be
brought about by individuals perseveringly putting into action the
above-mentioned non-rational and subjective. The non-rational
principle underlying our activity, a principle which is provided for
us by rational thought, is the sole rational and practical principle
underlying all the happenings which are to be produced through human
action. Thus the rational and the non-rational, the objective and the
subjective proceed each from the other, and return each into the other
again. Only when the play of this mutual interchange is in full
activity do normal conditions of existence arise for men and mankind.
Let it be disturbed and the abnormal develops.

I have, then, in this book written the tragedy of the search for a
world-view, and have myself trodden a new path to the same goal.
Whereas Western thought has not arrived at any goal because it would
not venture resolutely into the desert of scepticism about knowledge
of the world, [pg xix] I make my way through this desert with calm
confidence. It is, after all, only a narrow strip, and it lies in
front of the ever-green oasis of an elemental world-view which grows
out of thought about the will-to-live. In my attempt, however, to
reach a world-view by this new method, I am conscious of having done
no more than put together and think out to conclusions many gropings
after this new method which were made by other seekers during the
period covered.

But I also put into this book my conviction that mankind must renew
itself in a new temper of mind, if it is not to be ruined. I entrust
to it, further, my belief that this revolution will come about, if
only we can make up our minds to become thinking men.

A new Renaissance must come, and a much greater one than that in which
we stepped out of the Middle Ages; a great Renaissance in which
mankind discovers that the ethical is the highest truth and the
highest practicality, and experiences at the same time its liberation
from that miserable obsession by what it calls reality, in which it
has hitherto dragged itself along.

I would be a humble pioneer of this Renaissance, and throw the belief
in a new humanity, like a torch, into our dark age. I make bold to do
this because I believe I have given to the disposition to humanity,
which hitherto has ranked only as a noble feeling, a firm foundation
in a world-view which is a product of elementary thinking and can be
made intelligible to everyone. Moreover, it has gained thereby a power
of attracting and convincing which it has not had hitherto; and is
capable now of coming to terms in energetic and consistent fashion
with our so-called reality, and of proving its full value within it.

ALBERT SCHWEITZER.

_July_, 1923.

The two instalments of my Philosophy of Civilization which are now
ready—_The Decay and Restoration of [pg xx] Civilization_ and
_Civilization and Ethics_—will be followed by two others. In the next,
which will be entitled _The World-view of Reverence for Life_, I
elaborate this world-view, which so far I have only sketched for a
conclusion to my discussion of the search for a world-view, as carried
on down to the present day. The fourth and last will treat of the
Civilized State.

       *       *       *       *       *

The translator offers his thanks to Mrs. C. E. B. Russell, now helping
at Lambarene, who kindly reviewed the whole work before it went to the
printers. Many of her criticisms and suggestions were adopted, and
have helped to secure a better translation.




CONTENTS


I. THE CRISIS IN CIVILIZATION AND ITS SPIRITUAL CAUSE  [I]

  The material and spiritual elements in civilization [I]
  Civilization and world-view [6]

II. THE PROBLEM OF THE OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW [11]

   The Western and the Indian conceptions of civilization[11]
   The struggle for the optimistic world-view [12]
   Optimism and pessimism [14]
   Optimism, pessimism, and ethics [17]

III. THE ETHICAL PROBLEM [19]

   The difficulties of ethical perception [19]
   The importance of thought about ethics [21]
   The search for a basic principle of morality [22]
   Religious and philosophical ethics [24]

IV. RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL WORLD-VIEWS [27]

   The world-views of the world-religions [27]
   The world-views of the world religions and that of Western
   thought [29]

V. CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS IN THE GRÆCO-ROMAN PHILOSOPHY [32]

   The beginnings: Socrates [32]
   Epicureanism and Stoicism. The ethic of resignation [35]
   Plato’s abstract basic principle of the ethical. The ethic
   of world-negation [40]
   Aristotle. Instruction about virtue in place of ethics [42]
   The ideal of the civilised State in Plato and Aristotle [47]
   Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius [52]
   The optimistic-ethical world-view of the later Stoicism [57]

VI. OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW AND ETHICS IN THE RENAISSANCE AND
POST-RENAISSANCE PERIODS [61]

   Belief in progress and ethics [61]
   Christian and Stoic elements in modern ethics [64]

VII. LAYING THE FOUNDATION OF ETHICS IN THE SEVENTEENTH AND
EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES [71]

   Hartley, Holbach. Devotion as enlightened egoism [71]
   Hobbes, Locke, Helvetius, Bentham [75]
   Altruism as a natural quality. Hume, Adam Smith [80]
   The English ethic of self-perfecting [84]
   Shaftesbury, An optimistic-ethical nature-philosophy [87]

VIII. LAYING THE FOUNDATIONS OF CIVILIZATION IN THE AGE OF
RATIONALISM [90]

   The mentality and the achievements of the ethical belief
   in progress [90]
   Obstacles to the reform movement. The French Revolution [99]
   The undermining of the rationalistic world-view [102]

IX. THE OPTIMISTIC-ETHICAL WORLD-VIEW IN KANT [106]

   Kant’s ethics, deepened, but lacking content [106]
   Kant’s attempt to reach an ethical world-view [110]

X. NATURE-PHILOSOPHY AND WORLD-VIEW IN SPINOZA AND LEIBNIZ [116]

   Spinoza’s attempt to reach an optimistic-ethical
   nature-philosophy [116]
   Leibniz’s optimistic-ethical world-view side by side with
   nature-philosophy [122]

XI. J. G. FICHTE’S OPTIMISTIC-ETHICAL WORLD-VIEW [125]

   Speculative philosophy and Gnosticism [125]
   Fichte’s speculative founding of an ethic and of optimism [126]
   Fichte’s mysticism of activity incapable of being carried
   through [131]

XII. SCHILLER; GOETHE; SCHLEIERMACHER [136]

   Schiller’s ethical world-view: Goethe’s world-view based on
   nature-philosophy [136]
   Schleiermacher’s attempt at a nature-philosophy [138]

XIII. HEGEL’S SUPRA-ETHICAL OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW [141]

   Ethics in Hegel’s nature-philosophy, and in his philosophy of
   history [141]
   Hegel’s supra-ethical world-view. His belief in progress [145]

XIV. THE LATER UTILITARIANISM, BIOLOGICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL
ETHICS [150]

   Beneke, Feuerbach, Laas, Auguste Comte, John Stuart Mill [150]
   Darwin and Spencer [153]
   The weak points in biological and sociological utilitarianism [156]
   Sociological ethics and socialism. Mechanical belief in
   progress [160]

XV. SCHOPENHAUER AND NIETZSCHE [165]

   Schopenhauer. An ethic of world- and life-denial [165]
   Absorption of ethics in world- and life-denial [171]
   Nietzsche’s criticism of current ethics [174]
   Nietzsche’s ethic of higher life-affirmation [177]

XVI. THE ISSUE OF THE WESTERN STRUGGLE FOR A WORLD-VIEW [181]

   Academic thinkers: Sidgwick, Stephen, Alexander, Wundt, Paulsen,
   Höffding [181]
   The ethic of self-perfecting, Kant’s successors: Cohen,
   Herrmann [183]
   The ethic of self-perfecting: Martineau, Green, Bradley, Laurie,
   Seth, and Royce [185]
   Nature-philosophy and ethics. Fouillée, Guyau, Lange, Stern [186]
   Nature-philosophy and ethics in Eduard von Hartmann [194]
   Nature-philosophy and ethics in Bergson, Chamberlain, Keyserling,
   Haeckel [198]
   The death-agony of the optimistic-ethical world-view [202]

XVII. THE NEW WAY [205]

   Why the optimistic-ethical world-view cannot be carried through to
   the logical conclusion [205]
   Life-view independent of world-view [208]

XVIII. THE FOUNDATIONS OF OPTIMISM SECURED FROM THE WILL-TO-LIVE [212]

   The pessimistic result of knowledge [212]
   The world- and life-affirmation of the will-to-live [216]

XIX. THE PROBLEM OF ETHICS, STARTING FROM THE HISTORY OF ETHICS [221]

   An ethic of self-devotion, or an ethic of self-perfecting? [221]
   Ethics and a theory of knowledge. Ethics and natural happenings.
   The enthusiastic element in ethics [224]
   The ethic of ethical personality, and the ethic of society [228]
   The problem of a complete ethic [230]

XX. THE ETHIC OF DEVOTION AND THE ETHIC OF SELF-PERFECTING [232]

   The widening of the ethic of self-devotion into a cosmic
   ethic [232]
   The ethic of self-perfecting and mysticism [235]
   Abstract mysticism and the mysticism of reality. Supra-ethical and
   ethical mysticism [241]

XXI. THE ETHIC OF REVERENCE FOR LIFE [244]

   The basic principle of the moral [244]
   The ethic of resignation. An ethic of veracity towards oneself,
   and an activist ethic [251]
   Ethics and thoughtlessness. Ethics and self-assertion [253]
   Man and other living creatures [256]
   The ethic of the relation of man to man [258]
   Personal and supra-personal responsibility. Ethics and
   humanity [262]

XXII. The CIVILIZING POWER OF THE ETHIC OF REVERENCE FOR LIFE [269]

   Civilization as a product of reverence for life [269]
   The four ideals of civilization. The struggle for a civilized
   mankind in the machine age [271]
   Church and State as historical entities, and as ideals of
   civilization [278]
   The moralizing of the religious and political community [280]

FOOTNOTES
INDEX [287]




CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS




CHAPTER I

THE CRISIS IN CIVILIZATION AND ITS SPIRITUAL CAUSE


The material and spiritual elements in civilization

OUR civilization is going through a severe crisis.

Most people think that the crisis was produced by the war, but that is
wrong. The war, with everything connected with it, is only a
phenomenon of the condition of un-civilization in which we find
ourselves. Even in States which took no part in the war, and on which
the war had no direct influence, civilization is shaken, only the fact
is not so clearly evident in them as in those which were hard hit by
the consequences of its peculiarly cruel spiritual and material
happenings.

Yet is there any real, live thought going on among us about this
collapse of civilization, and about possible ways of working ourselves
up out of it? Scarcely! Clever men stumble about in seven-league boots
in the history of civilization and try to make us understand that
civilization is some kind of natural growth which blossoms out in
definite peoples at definite times and then of necessity withers, so
that new peoples with new civilizations must keep replacing the
worn-out ones. When they are called upon, indeed, to complete their
theory by telling us what peoples are destined to be our heirs, they
are somewhat embarrassed. There are, in fact, no peoples to be seen
whom one could imagine to be capable of even a portion of such a task.
All the peoples of the earth have been in large measure under the
influence both of our civilization [pg 002] and of our lack of it, so
that they share more or less our fate. Among none of them are to be
found thoughts which can lead to any considerable original movement of
civilization.

Let us put on one side cleverness and interesting surveys of the
history of civilization, and busy ourselves in a practical way with
the problem of our endangered civilization. Of what character is this
degeneration in our civilization, and why has it come about?

To begin with, there is one elementary fact which is quite obvious.
The disastrous feature of our civilization is that it is far more
developed materially than spiritually. Its balance is disturbed.
Through the discoveries which now place the forces of Nature at our
disposal in such an unprecedented way, the relations to each other of
individuals, of social groups, and of States have undergone a
revolutionary change. Our knowledge and our power have been enriched
and increased to an extent that no one would have thought possible. We
have thereby been enabled to make the conditions of human existence
incomparably more favourable in numerous respects, but in our
enthusiasm over our progress in knowledge and power, we have come to a
defective conception of what civilization is. We value too highly its
material achievements and no longer keep in mind as vividly as is
desirable the importance of the spiritual. Now the results are upon
us, and summon us to reflect. They tell us in terribly harsh language
that a civilization which develops only on its material side but not
in corresponding measure on its spiritual side, is like a ship which
with defective steering gear gets at a constantly accelerating pace
out of control, and thereby heads for a catastrophe.

The essential nature of civilization does not lie in its material
achievements, but in the fact that individuals keep in mind the ideals
of the perfecting of man, and the improvement of the social and
political conditions of peoples, and of mankind as a whole, and that
their habit [pg 003] of thought is determined in living and constant
fashion by such ideals. Only when individuals work in this way as
spiritual forces on themselves and on society is the possibility given
of solving the problems which have been produced by the facts of life,
and of attaining to a general progress which is valuable in every
respect. Whether there is rather more or rather less of material
achievement to record is not what is decisive for civilization. Its
fate depends on whether or no thought keeps control over facts. The
issue of a voyage does not depend on whether the vessel’s pace is
somewhat quicker or somewhat slower, but on whether it steers a
correct course, and its steering gear keeps in good condition.

Revolutions in the relations of life between individuals, society, and
peoples, as they follow in the train of our great material
achievements, make, if they are to show real progress in the sense of
valuable civilization, higher demands on the habit of thought of
civilized people, just as the increased speed of a ship presupposes
greater reliability in rudder and steering gear. Advances in knowledge
and power work out their effects on us almost as if they were natural
occurrences. It is not within our power so to direct them that they
influence favourably in every respect the relations in which we live,
but they produce for individuals, for society, and for nations,
difficult and still more difficult problems, and bring with them
dangers which it is quite impossible to estimate beforehand.
Paradoxical as it may seem, our advances in knowledge and power make
true civilization not easier but more difficult. One can even say
that, judging by the events of our own and the two preceding
generations, we are almost entitled to doubt whether in view of the
way in which these material achievements have been showered upon us,
true civilization is still possible.

The most widespread danger which material achievements bring with them
for civilization consists in the fact that through the revolutions in
the conditions of life men [pg 004] become in greater numbers unfree,
instead of free. The type of man who once cultivated his own bit of
land becomes a worker who tends a machine in a factory; manual workers
and independent trades-people become employees. They lose the
elementary freedom of the man who lives in his own house and finds
himself in immediate connexion with Mother Earth. Further, they no
longer have the extensive and unbroken consciousness of responsibility
of those who live by their own independent labour. The conditions of
their existence are therefore unnatural. They no longer carry on the
struggle for existence in comparatively normal relations in which each
one can by his own ability make good his position whether against
Nature or against the competition of his fellows, but they see
themselves compelled to combine together and create a force which can
extort for itself better living conditions. They acquire thereby the
mentality of unfree men, in which ideals of civilization can no longer
be contemplated in the needful purity, but become distorted to
correspond with the surrounding atmosphere of struggle.

To a certain extent we have all of us, under modern conditions, become
unfree men. In every rank of life we have from decade to decade, if
not from year to year, to carry on a harder struggle for existence.
Overwork, physical or mental or both, is our lot. We can no longer
find time to collect and order our thoughts. Our spiritual dependence
increases at the same pace as our material dependence. In every
direction we come to conditions of dependence which in former times
were never known in such universality and such strength. Economic,
social, and political organizations, which are steadily becoming more
and more complete, are getting us more and more into their power. The
State with its more and more rigid organization holds us under a
control which is growing more and more decided and inclusive. In every
respect, therefore, our individual being is depreciated. It is
becoming more and more difficult to be a personality.

[pg 005]

Thus it is that the progress of our external civilization brings with
it the result that individuals, in spite of all the advantages they
get, are in many respects injured both materially and spiritually in
their capacity for civilization through those very advantages.

It is our progress in material civilization, too, which intensifies in
so disastrous a way our social and political problems. Through the
social ones we are involved in a class struggle which shakes and
throws into confusion economic and national relations. If we go down
to rock-bottom, it was machinery and world commerce which brought
about the world war, and the inventions which put into our hands such
mighty power of destruction made the war of such a devastating
character that conquered and conquerors alike are ruined for a period
of which no one can see the end. It was also our technical
achievements which put us in a position to kill at such a distance,
and to wipe out the enemy in such masses, that we sank so low as to
push aside any last impulse to humanity, and were mere blind wills
which made use of perfected lethal weapons of such destructive
capacity that we were unable to maintain the distinction between
combatants and non-combatants.

Material achievements, then, are not civilisation, but become
civilization only so far as the mental habit of civilized peoples is
capable of allowing them to work towards the perfecting of the
individual and the community. Fooled, however, by our advances in
knowledge and power, we did not reflect on the danger to which we were
exposing ourselves by the diminished value we put on the spiritual
elements in civilization, and we surrendered completely to a naïve
satisfaction at our magnificent material achievements, and went astray
into an incredibly superficial conception of civilization. We believed
in a progress which was a matter of course, because contained in the
facts themselves. Instead of harbouring in our thought ideals approved
by reason, and undertaking to mould reality into accordance with them,
we were fooled [pg 006] by a vain feeling for reality, and wanted to
come through with lowered ideals which were borrowed from it. By
taking this course we lost all control over the facts.

Accordingly, just when the spiritual element in culture was necessary
in extraordinary strength, we let it waste away.

Civilization and World-View

How could it come about that the spiritual element in civilization
became so lost to us?

To understand that, we must go back to the time when it was at work
among us in a direct and living way, and the path thereto leads us
back into the eighteenth century. Among the Rationalists who approach
everything through reason, and would regulate everything in life by
rational considerations, we find expression given in elemental
strength to the conviction that the essential element in civilization
is a habit of thought. It is true that they are already impressed by
modern achievements in discovery and invention, and do allow to the
material side of civilization a corresponding importance. But they
nevertheless regard it as self-evident that the essential and valuable
element in civilization is the spiritual. That interest is focused
first of all on the spiritual progress of men and humanity, and in
that they believe with a mighty optimism.

The greatness of these men of the period of the “Aufklärung” lies in
this, that they set up as ideals the perfecting of the individual, of
society, and of mankind, and devote themselves to these ideals with
enthusiasm. The force on which they count for the realizing of them is
the general habit of thought; they demand of the human spirit that it
shall transform men and the relations in which they live, and they
trust to it to prove itself stronger than the facts of life.

But whence came the impulse to set up such high ideals of
civilization, and their confidence of being able to realise [pg 007]
them? It was from their view of the world (Weltanschauung).

The Rationalist world-view is optimistic and ethical, its optimism
consisting in this, that it assumes as ruling in the world a general
purposive adaptation which is directed to the perfecting of the world,
and from this purposiveness the efforts of individual men and of
mankind to secure material and spiritual progress derive meaning and
importance and a guarantee of success.

This world-view is ethical because it regards the ethical as something
in accordance with reason, and on that ground demands from man that,
putting egoistic interests behind him, he shall devote himself to all
ideals that are waiting for realization, taking the ethical as in
everything the standard by which to judge. A habit of humane thought
is for the Rationalists an ideal which they can be induced by no
consideration to resign.

When at the close of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the
nineteenth the reaction against rationalism set in and criticism began
to play upon it, its optimism was reproached as being superficial and
its ethics as being sentimental. But the good it did, in spite of its
manifold imperfections, by inspiring men with ideals of civilization
grounded in reason, the spiritual movements which criticise it and
take its place cannot develop in the same way. The energy of thought
about civilization decreases imperceptibly but steadily. In proportion
as the world-view of rationalism is left behind, the feeling for
actuality makes its influence felt, until at last, from the middle of
the nineteenth century onwards, ideals are borrowed no longer from
reason but from actuality, and we therewith sink still further into a
state of uncivilization and lack of humanity. This is the clearest and
the most important of all the facts which can be established in the
history of our civilization.

What has it to tell us? It tells us that there is a close connexion
between civilization and world-view. Civilization is the product of an
optimistic-ethical view of the world. [pg 008] Only in proportion as
the prevalent world-view is one which is world- and life-affirming and
at the same time ethical, do we find ideals of civilization put
forward and kept influential in the habits of thought of individuals,
and of society.

That this inner relation between civilization and the world-view of
civilized peoples has never received the attention that it deserves,
is the result of there having been among us so little real meditation
on the essential nature of civilization.

What is civilization? It is the sum total of all progress made by men
and mankind in every sphere of action and from every point of view, so
far as this progress helps towards the spiritual perfecting of
individuals as the progress of all progress.

The impulse to strive for progress in all spheres of action and from
every point of view comes to men out of an optimistic world-view which
affirms the world and life to be something valuable in themselves, and
consequently bears within itself a compulsion to raise to its highest
possible value all that is, so far as it can be influenced by us.
Hence come will and hope, and effort directed to the improvement of
the condition of individuals and of society, of peoples and of
mankind. This leads to a lordship of the spirit over the powers of
Nature, to the completion of the religious, social, economic, and
practical grouping of men, and to the spiritual perfecting of
individuals and of the community.

Just as the world- and life-affirming, that is, the optimistic
world-view is alone capable of stirring men to effort aimed at
promoting civilization, so in an ethical world-view alone is there
latent the power to make men, when putting aside and giving up
altogether their selfish interests, persevere in such effort for
civilization, and keep them always turned in the direction of the
spiritual and moral perfecting of the individual as the essential
object of civilization. Bound the one to the other, then, world- and
[pg 009] life-affirming world-view and ethics think out in harmony the
ideals of true, complete civilization and set to work at realizing
them.

If civilization remains incomplete or its level falls, this rests in
the last resort on the fact that either the world- and
life-affirmation of the world-view, or its ethics, or both of them
have remained undeveloped or have gone backwards. And that is the case
with us. It is evident that the ethics required for civilization have
gone out of use.

For decades we have been accustoming ourselves increasingly to measure
with relative ethical standards, and no longer to allow ethics to have
their say in all questions alike. This renunciation of consistent
ethical judgment we feel as an advance in practicality.

But our world- and life-affirmation also have become shaky. The modern
man no longer feels under any compulsion to think about ideals of
progress and to will them. To a large extent he has come to terms with
actuality. He is much more resigned than he admits to himself, and in
one respect he is even outspokenly pessimistic. He does not really
believe any more in the spiritual and ethical progress of men and of
mankind, which is nevertheless the essential element in civilization.

This stunting of our world- and life-affirmation and of our ethics has
its cause in the constitution of our world-view. In regard to this we
have since the middle of the nineteenth century been going through a
crisis. It is no longer possible for us to arrive at a conception of
the universe in which the meaning of the existence of men and of
mankind can be recognized, and in which, therefore, there are also
contained the ideals which flow from thoughtful world- and
life-affirmation and from ethical volition. We are falling more and
more into a condition of having no world-view at all, and from our
lack of that comes our lack of civilization.

The great question for us is, therefore, whether we have to renounce
permanently the world-view which carries within it in all their
strength the ideals of the perfecting of men and of mankind, and of
ethical effort. If we succeed [pg 010] in establishing again a
world-view in which world- and life-affirmation is given in convincing
fashion, we shall become masters of the decay of civilization which is
in progress, and shall reach again a true and living civilization.
Otherwise we are condemned to see the wreck of all attempts to arrest
the degeneration. Only when the truth that renewal of civilization can
only come by a renewal of our world-view becomes a universal
conviction, and a new longing for a world-view sets in, shall we find
ourselves on the right path. But this is not yet in prospect. The
modern man is still without any correct feeling of the full
significance of the fact that he is living with an unsatisfactory
world-view, or without any at all. The unnatural and dangerous
character of this condition must first be brought home to his
consciousness, just as those persons who exhibit disturbances of the
stability of their nervous system have to be clearly told that their
vitality is threatened, although they feel no pain. Similarly, we have
to stir up the men of to-day to elementary meditation upon what man is
in the world, and what he wants to make of his life. Only when they
are impressed once more with the necessity of giving meaning and value
to their existence, and thus come once more to hunger and thirst for a
satisfying world-view, are the preliminaries given for a spiritual
condition in which we become again capable of civilization.

But in order to learn the way to such a world-view we must see clearly
why the struggle undertaken by the European spirit to secure it was
for a time successful, but during the second half of the nineteenth
century came to an unfortunate end.

Because our thinking is too little occupied with civilization it has
been insufficiently noticed that the most important part of the
history of philosophy is the history of man’s struggle for a
satisfactory world-view. Regarded in this light, the history unrolls
itself like a tragic drama.




[pg 011]

CHAPTER II

THE PROBLEM OF THE OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW


The Western and the Indian conceptions of civilization

FOR us Westerners civilization consists in this, that we work for the
perfecting of ourselves and of the world at the same time.

But do the activities that are directed outwards and inwards
necessarily belong together? Cannot the spiritual and moral perfecting
of the individual, which is the ultimate aim of civilization, also be
secured if he works for himself only and leaves the world and its
circumstances to themselves? Who gives us any guarantee that the
course of the world can be influenced so as to promote the special aim
of civilization, viz., the perfecting of the individual? Who tells us
that it has any meaning at all which can be further developed? Is not
any action of mine which is directed on the world a diversion of what
could be directed on myself, though everything depends finally upon
the latter?

Moved by these doubts the pessimism of the Hindus and that of
Schopenhauer refuse to allow any importance to the material and social
achievements, which form the outward and visible part of civilization.
About society, nation, mankind, the individual is not to trouble
himself; he is only to strive to experience in himself the sovereignty
of spirit over matter.

This, too, is civilization, in that it pursues the final object of the
latter, viz., the spiritual and ethical perfecting of the individual.
If we Westerners pronounce it incomplete, we must not do so too
confidently. Do the outward progress of mankind and the inner
completion of the individual really belong together as we imagine them
to? Are we not, under an illusion, forcing together things which are
[pg 012] different in kind? Has the spirit in one kind of action
actually some gain for the other?

What we set up as our ideal we have not realized. We lost ourselves in
outward progress, allowing the moralization and inward deepening of
the individual to come to a stop. So we have not been able to produce
practical proof of the correctness of our view of what civilization
is. We cannot, therefore, simply put aside that other narrower
conception, but must come to terms with it.

There will come a time—it is already being prepared for—when
pessimistic and optimistic thought, which have hitherto talked past
each other almost as strangers, will have to meet for practical
discussion. World-philosophy is just dawning. It will shape itself in
a struggle as to whether its world-view shall be optimistic or
pessimistic.

The struggle for the optimistic world-view

The history of Western philosophy is the history of the struggle for
an optimistic world-view. If in antiquity and in modern times the
peoples of Europe have managed to produce a civilization, it is
because in their thought the optimistic world-view was dominant, and
held the pessimistic permanently in subjection, although it was not
able to suppress it altogether.

The accessions of knowledge which have come in the course of our
philosophy have been nothing in themselves: they always stand in the
service of one world-view or the other, and attain only in it to their
real significance.

But the characteristic thing about the way in which the settlement is
made on each occasion, is that it never is made openly. The two
world-views are never brought face to face and the case of each heard.
That the optimistic alone is in the right is a conviction which is
accepted as more or less self-evident. The only thing felt as a
problem is how to marshal all possible knowledge in the triumphal
procession of proof to defeat the other, and to knock on the head
anything that may still wish to rise in its defence.

[pg 013]

Since the pessimistic world-view has never made its presence properly
felt, Western thought manifests a lofty unwillingness to understand
it, though it has a splendid faculty for detecting it. Where it finds,
as in Spinoza, too little interest for activity directed upon the
world, it reacts immediately with rejection of it. Yet all objectively
thinking investigation of the reality of nature is disliked by it
because it may lead to the central position of the human spirit in the
world being insufficiently emphasised. It is because materialism seems
likely to be the last ally of pessimism that it carries on so
embittered a struggle against it.

In the discussion of the problem of the theory of knowledge from
Descartes to Kant and beyond him it is really the cause of the
optimistic world-view which is being maintained. That is why the
theoretical possibility of a depreciation or a denial of the world of
sense is attacked with such obstinacy. By proving the ideality of
space and time Kant hopes to make finally secure the optimistic
world-view of rationalism with all its ideals and demands. Only so can
it be explained that the most acute examinations of the theory of
knowledge are carried through with the most naïve conclusions about
world-view. The great post-Kantian systems of thought, however much
they differ from one another in their subject-matter and the process
of the speculation with which they deal with it, are all united in
this, that they crown the optimistic world-view in their cloud-castles
as the ruler of the universe.

To fit in the aims of mankind with those of the universe in a
logically convincing fashion, that is the endeavour in which European
philosophy serves the optimistic world-view. Anyone who does not help,
or who is indifferent about it, is an enemy.

In its prejudice against scientific materialism philosophy was right.
Materialism has done much more to shake the position of the optimistic
world-view than Schopenhauer has, although it never proceeded against
it with outspoken hostility. When, after the collapse of the great
systems, [pg 014] it was allowed to seat itself at table with
philosophy, which had now become more modest, it even exerted itself
to find out in what sort of tone the latter would like the
conversation to be carried on. In dealing with Darwin and others,
philosophizing natural science made touchingly naïve attempts so to
extend and stretch out the history of zoological development which led
up to man, that mankind and with it the spiritual should appear again
as the goal of the world-process, as in the speculative systems. But
in spite of these well-meant efforts of the proletarian guest the
conversation could no longer be carried on in the old spirit. Of what
use was it for him to try to be better than his reputation? He brought
with him more respect for nature and facts than was consistent with
the convincing establishment of the optimistic world-view. He
therefore shook it, even when he did not intend to.

To such a disregard of nature and science as was shown by the earlier
philosophy we can never return. Nor can we expect the return of a
system of thought which makes it possible to discover in any
convincing way in the universe the aims and objects of mankind, as was
allowed by the old methods. The optimistic world-view ceases,
therefore, to be self-evident to us, or to be demonstrable by the arts
of philosophy. It must give up the idea of finding for itself a solid
foundation.

Optimism and Pessimism

Confusion is caused by the fact that the optimistic and pessimistic
world-views seldom come forward in their purity in the history of
human thought. Their relations are usually such that the one is
predominant, while the other treats with it without being officially
recognized. In India a tolerated world- and life-affirmation maintains
for pessimism something of interest in the external civilization which
it nominally denies. With us pessimism slips in and gnaws at the
civilizing energies of the optimistic view, the result being that
belief in the spiritual progress of [pg 015] mankind has left us. From
it, too, comes the fact that we everywhere conduct the business of
life with lowered ideals.

Pessimism is a lowered will-to-live, and is to be found wherever man
and society are no longer under the pressure of all those ideals of
progress which must be thought out by a will-to-live that is
consistent with itself, but have sunk to the level of letting
actuality be, over wide stretches of life, nothing but actuality.

It is where pessimism is at work in this anonymous fashion, that it is
most dangerous to civilization. It attacks then the most valuable
ideas belonging to life-affirmation, leaving the less valuable ones
untouched. Like some concealed source of magnetic power it disturbs
the world-view’s compass, so that it takes, without suspecting it, a
wrong course. Thus the unavowed mixture of optimism and pessimism in
our thought has the result that we continue to approve the external
blessings given us by civilization, things which to thinking pessimism
are a matter of indifference, while we abandon that which alone it
holds to be valuable, the pursuit of inner perfection. The desire for
progress which is directed to objects of sense, goes on functioning
because it is nourished by actuality, while that which reaches after
the spiritual becomes exhausted, because it is thrown back upon the
inner stimulus which comes from the thinking will-to-live. As the tide
ebbs, objects which reach deep down are left stranded, while what is
just on the surface remains afloat.

Our degeneration, then, traced back to our world-view and what
resulted from it, consists in true optimism having, without our
noticing it, disappeared from among us. We are by no means a race
weakened and decadent through excessive enjoyment of life, and needing
to pull ourselves together to show vigour and idealism amid the
thunderstorms of history. Although we have retained our vigour in most
departments of the direct activities of life, we are spiritually
stunted. Our conception of life with all that depends on it has been
lowered both for individuals and for the community. The higher forces
of volition and [pg 016] influence are impotent in us, because the
optimism from which they ought to draw their strength has become
imperceptibly permeated with pessimism.

A characteristic feature of the presence at the same time of optimism
and pessimism as lodgers in “Thoughtless House” is that each goes
about in the other’s clothes, so that what is really pessimism gives
itself out among us as being optimism, and _vice versâ_. What passes
for optimism with the mass of people is the natural or acquired
faculty of seeing things in the best possible light. This illumination
of them is the result of a lowered conception of what ought to be now
and in the future. A person ill with consumption is brought by the
poison of the disease into the condition which is called Euphoria, so
that he experiences an imaginary feeling of health and strength.
Similarly there is an external optimism present in individuals and in
society just in proportion as they are, without realizing it, infected
with pessimism.

True optimism has nothing to do with any sort of lenient judgement. It
consists in contemplating and willing the ideal in the light of a deep
and self-consistent affirmation of life and the world. Because the
spirit which is so directed proceeds with clear vision and impartial
judgement in the valuing of all that is given, it wears to ordinary
people the appearance of pessimism. That it wishes to pull down the
old temples in order to build them again more magnificently is by the
vulgar optimism put down to its discredit as sacrilege.

The reason, then, why the only legitimate optimism, that of volition
inspired by imagination, has to carry on such a hard struggle with
pessimism is that it always has first to track the latter down in
vulgar optimism and unmask it. That is a task which optimism has never
finished, for so long as it allows the enemy to emerge in any shape
there is danger for civilization. When that happens, activity in
promoting the special aims of civilization always diminishes, even if
satisfaction with its material achievements remains as strong as
before.

[pg 017]

Optimism and pessimism, therefore, do not consist in counting with
more or less confidence on such or such a future for the existing
state of things, but in what the will desires to have as the future.
They are qualities not of the judgement, but of the will. The fact
that up to now that inadmissible definition of these qualities was
current side by side with the correct one, so that there were four
items to deal with instead of two, made the game easier for the
unthinking by deceiving us about what true optimism is. Pessimism of
the will they passed off as optimism of the judgement, and optimism of
the will they put aside as pessimism of the judgement. These false
cards must be taken from them, so that they may not continue to
deceive the world in such a fashion.

Optimism, Pessimism, and Ethics

In what relation do optimism and pessimism stand to ethics?

That close and peculiar relations do exist between them is clear from
the fact that in the thought of mankind the two struggles, that for
optimistic or pessimistic world-view and that about ethics, are
usually involved in each other. It is the general belief that when one
is being fought out the other is being fought as well.

This mutual connexion is very convenient for thought. When a
foundation for ethics is being laid, optimistic or pessimistic
arguments are unawares pressed into the service, and _vice versâ_
ethical arguments when optimism or pessimism have to be established.
In this process Western thought lays most stress on justifying a
life-affirming ethical system, that is an activist one, and thinks
that merely by doing so it has proved the case for optimism in its
world-view. With Indian thought the most important thing is finding a
logical foundation for pessimism, and the justifying of a life-denying
ethical system, _i.e._ a passivist one, is rather a derivative from
that.

The confusion which resulted from the two struggles for [pg 018]
optimism and pessimism and for ethics not being kept distinct, has
contributed almost more than anything else to prevent the thought of
mankind from attaining to clarity.

It was an easy mistake to make. The question whether it is to be
affirmation or denial of life and the world, crops up in ethics in the
same way as in the dispute between optimism and pessimism. Things
which by their nature belong together feel themselves drawn together,
so that optimism naturally thinks it can support itself on an
affirmative ethical system, and pessimism thinks the same about a
negative one. Nevertheless, the result has hitherto always been that
neither of these two closely-related entities could stand firm,
because neither of them chose to depend on itself alone.




[pg 019]

CHAPTER III

THE ETHICAL PROBLEM


The difficulties of ethical perception

HOW came mankind to think about morality and to make progress in that
sphere of thought?

It is a picture of confusion that unrolls itself before the eyes of
anyone who undertakes a journey through the history of man’s search
for the ethical. The progress made in that sphere of thought is
inexplicably slow and uncertain. That the scientific view of the world
could be delayed in its rise and development is to a certain extent
intelligible, for its advance depended more or less on the chance of
there existing gifted observers, whose discoveries in the realm of the
exact sciences and the knowledge of nature was needed first, to
provide new horizons and to point out new paths for thought.

But in ethics thought is thrown back entirely on itself: it has to do
only with man himself and his self-development, which goes on by a
process of causation from within. Why, then, does it not make better
progress? Just because man himself is the material which has to be
investigated and moulded.

Ethics and æsthetics are the step-children of philosophy. They both
deal with a subject which is coy about submitting itself to reflexion,
for they both treat of spheres in which man exercises his purely
creative activities. In science man observes and describes the course
of nature, and tries to penetrate its mysteries. In practical matters
he uses and moulds it by applying what he has grasped of it outside
his own person. But in his moral and artistic activities he uses
knowledge and obeys impulses, [pg 020] perceptions, and laws which
originate in himself. To establish these firmly and to create ideals
from them is an undertaking which can be successful to a certain
extent only. Thought lags behind the material on which it exercises
itself.

This is evident from the fact that the examples with which ethics and
æsthetics try to work upon reality are usually not quite consistent
and are often foolish. And how far from simple is whatever is laid
down in either this or that! How the assertions made contradict each
other! The guidance that an artist can get for his activities from the
best works on æsthetics is but small. Similarly, a business man who
seeks in a work on ethics advice as to how, in any given case, he is
to bring the demands of his business into harmony with those of
ethics, can seldom find any satisfactory information.

The inadequacy in this respect of æsthetics is not of great importance
for the spiritual life of mankind. Artistic activity is always the
peculiar affair of individuals whose natural gifts develop more by the
actual production of works of art than by consideration of the
conclusions arrived at by æsthetic theorizing.

With ethics, however, it is a matter of the creative activity of the
mass of men, an activity which is largely determined by the principles
which are current in the general thought of the time. The absence of
that progress which is still possible in ethics is something tragic.

Ethics and æsthetics are not sciences. Science, as the description of
objective facts, the establishment of their connexion with one
another, and the drawing of inferences from them, is only possible
when there is a succession of similar facts to be dealt with, or a
single fact in a succession of phenomena, when, that is, there is a
subject matter which can be reduced to order under a recognized law.
But there is no science of human willing and doing, and there never
can be. Here there are only subjective and infinitely various facts to
be studied, and their mutual connexion lies within the mysterious
human ego.

It is only the history of ethics that is scientific, and that [pg 021]
only so far as a history of man’s spiritual life is scientifically
possible.

The importance of thought about ethics

There is, therefore, no such thing as a scientific system of ethics;
there can only be a thinking one. Philosophy must give up the illusion
which it has cherished even down to the present day. As to what is
good and what is bad, and about the considerations in which we find
strength to do the one and avoid the other, no one can speak to his
neighbour as an expert. All that one can do is to impart to him so
much as one finds in oneself of that which ought to influence
everybody, though better thought out perhaps, and stronger and
clearer, so that noise has become a musical note.

Is there, however, any sense in ploughing for the thousand and second
time a field which has already been ploughed a thousand and one times?
Has not everything which can be said about ethics already been said by
Lao-tse, Confucius, the Buddha, and Zarathustra; by Amos and Isaiah;
by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle; by Epicurus and the Stoics; by
Jesus and Paul; by the thinkers of the Renaissance, of the
“Aufklärung,” and of Rationalism; by Locke, Shaftesbury, and Hume; by
Spinoza and Kant; by Fichte and Hegel; by Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and
others? Is there a possibility of getting beyond all these so
materially contradictory convictions of the past to something new
which will have a stronger and more lasting influence? Can the ethical
kernel of the thoughts of all these men be collected into an idea of
the ethical, which will unite all the energies to which they appeal?
We must hope so, if we are not to despair of the fate of the human
race.

Does thought about ethics bring more ethics into the world? The
confused picture offered us by the history of ethics is enough to make
one sceptical about it. On the other hand, it is clear that ethical
thinkers like Socrates, Kant, or Fichte had a moralizing influence on
many of their [pg 022] contemporaries. From every revival of ethical
reflexion there went forth ethical movements which made the
contemporary generation fitter for its tasks. If any age lacks the
minds which force it to reflect about the ethical, the level of its
morality sinks and with it its capacity for answering the questions
which present themselves to it.

In the history of ethical thought we wander in the innermost circles
of world-history. Of all the forces which mould reality morality is
the first and foremost. It is the determining knowledge which we must
wring from thought. Everything else is more or less secondary.

For this reason everyone who believes that he can contribute something
to help forward the ethical self-consciousness of society and of
individuals has the right to speak now, although it is political and
economic questions that the present day prescribes for study. For what
is inopportune is really opportune. We can accomplish something
lasting in the problems of political and economic life only if we
approach them as men who are trying to think ethically. All those who
help forward in any way our thought about ethics are working for the
coming of peace and prosperity to the world. They are engaged in the
higher politics, and the higher rational economics, and even if all
they can do is nothing more than to bring ethical thinking to the
fore, they have nevertheless done something valuable. All reflexion
about ethics has as one result a raising and rousing of the general
disposition to morality.

The search for a basic principle of morality

But however certain it is that every age lives by the energies which
have sprung from its thought about ethics, it is equally certain that
up to now the ethical thoughts which have become current have after a
longer or a shorter period lost their power of convincing. Why has the
establishment of an ethical system never met with more than a partial
and temporary success, and never been a permanency? Why is the history
of the ethical thinking of [pg 023] mankind the history of
inexplicable stoppages and fallings-back? Why has there been in this
sphere no organic progress which allows one period to build upon the
achievements of preceding ones? Why in the sphere of ethics do we live
in a town full of ruins, in which one generation builds for itself
here, and another there, what is absolutely necessary?

“To preach morality is easy, to establish it is hard,” says
Schopenhauer, and that saying shows what the problem is.

In every effort of thought about ethics there is to be seen,
distinctly or indistinctly, the search for a basic principle of
morality, which needs no support outside itself, and unites in itself
the sum total of all moral demands. But no one has ever succeeded in
really formulating this principle. Elements only of it were brought to
light and given out to be the whole, until the difficulties which
emerged destroyed the illusion. The tree, however finely it sprouted,
did not live to grow old, because it was unable to send its roots down
into the permanently nourishing and moisture-giving earth.

The chaos of ethical views becomes to some extent intelligible as soon
as one sees that we are concerned with differing and mutually
contradictory views about fragments of the basic principle. The
contradiction has its foundation in their incompleteness. There is
ethical matter in what Kant objects to in the ethics of rationalism,
as also in what he puts in its place; in that part of Kant’s writings
where his conception of the moral is opposed by Schopenhauer, as also
in what is to take its place in the ethical system of the latter.
Schopenhauer is ethical in the points on which Nietzsche attacks him,
and Nietzsche is ethical in his opposition to Schopenhauer. What is
wanted is to find the fundamental chord in which the dissonances of
these varied and contradictory ethical ideas unite in producing
harmony.

The ethical problem, then, is the problem of a basic principle of
morality, which is founded in thought. What is the common element of
good in the manifold goods which we feel to be such? Is there such a
universally valid [pg 024] conception of the good? If there is, in
what does it consist, and how far is it real and necessary for me?
What influence has it over my general disposition and my actions? Into
what relations with the world does it bring me?

It is, then, on the basic principle of the moral that the attention of
thought has to be fixed. The mere giving of a list of virtues and
duties is like striking notes at random on the piano and thinking it
is music. And when we come to discuss the works of earlier moralists,
it is only the elements in them which can help the establishment of an
ethical system that will interest us, not the way in which any system
has been advocated.

Otherwise there is no success for any attempt to bring order into
chaos. How utterly at sea Friedrich Jodl_(_2_)_ is in his history of
ethics, the most important existing work in this department, when he
tries to estimate the relative values of the various ethical
standpoints! Failing to judge them directly by their distance from an
initial basic principle of morality, he is unable to establish a
standard of comparison. He gives us, therefore, only a survey of
ethical views, and no history of the ethical problem.

Religious and philosophical ethics

When we come to look for the fundamental principle of morality, are we
concerned only with the direct attempts of philosophy to find it? No,
we are concerned with every kind, those of religion as well as others.
We must trace out the whole experience of mankind in its search for
the ethical.

The raising of a dividing wall between philosophical ethics and
religious ethics is based on the mistaken idea that the former are
scientific and the latter non-scientific. But neither of them is
either: they are both alike merely thought; only one has freed itself
from acceptance of the traditional religious world-view, while the
other still maintains its connexion with it.

[pg 025]

The difference, however, is merely relative. Religious ethics appeal,
indeed, to a supernatural authority, but that is rather the form which
they assume. As a matter of fact, however high they rise, they still
seek to find an independent basic principle of morality. In every
religious genius there lives an ethical thinker, and every really deep
philosophical moralist is in some way or other religious.

How indeterminate is the border-line is shown by Indian ethics. Are
they religious, or are they philosophical? Originating in the thought
of the priests, they claim to be a deeper exposition of the demands of
religion, but in essential nature they are philosophical. With the
Buddha and others, they venture to make the step from pantheism to
atheism, but without giving up their claim to be religious. Spinoza
and Kant, however, who are counted among philosophical moralists, do,
if we judge by the general direction of their thought, belong at the
same time to the religious ones.

It all depends on a relative difference in methods of thought. The one
group works towards the basic principle of ethics by a more intuitive
process, the other by a process which is more analytical. It is the
depth, not the method of the thought, which decides the matter. The
more intuitive thinker produces his ethical thought like an artist who
with the production of an important work of art opens up new horizons.
In deep-reaching moral sayings like the beatitudes of Jesus the basic
principle of morality shines out. There comes progress in the
recognition of what is moral, even if the provision of a foundation
for it fails to advance in the same way.

On the other hand, the searching for the basic principle of the moral
by the process of critical analysis may lead to an impoverished system
of ethics, because there runs through it the effort to take into
account only what is connected with the idea that seems to be what is
being sought for. That is why philosophical ethics are as a rule so
far behind practical ethics, and have so little direct influence.
While religious moralists in one mighty word can get down to the [pg
026] waters flowing far below the surface, philosophical ethics often
dig out nothing but a slight hollow in which a puddle forms.

Nevertheless, it is rational thinking alone which is able to pursue
the search for the basic principle with perseverance and hope of
success. It must find it at last, if it only goes deep enough, and is
simple enough.

The weakness of all ethics hitherto, whether philosophical or
religious, has lain in this, that they have not shown individuals how
to deal directly and naturally with reality. To a large extent they
merely talk “about it and about.” They do not touch a man’s daily
experience, and therefore they exert no permanent pressure upon him.
The result is lack of ethical thought, and mere platitudes about
ethics.

The true basic principle of the ethical must be not only something
universally valid, but something absolutely elementary and inward,
which, once it has dawned upon a man, never lets him loose, which as a
matter of course runs like a thread through all his meditation, which
never lets itself be thrust aside, and which continually challenges
him to come to an understanding with reality.

For centuries men who navigated the seas guided themselves by the
stars. In time they rose above this imperfect method through the
discovery of the magnetic needle, which by its natural principle of
activity pointed them to the north. Now they can tell where they are
in the darkest night on the most distant sea. That is the kind of
progress that we have to seek in ethics. So long as we have nothing
but an ethical system of ethical sayings, we direct our course by
stars, which, however brilliant their shining, give us only more or
less reliable guidance, and can be hidden from us by rising mist.
During a stormy night they leave mankind, as we know by recent
experiences, in the lurch. If, however, we have in our possession a
system of ethics as a principle which is a necessity of thought and
comes to clearness within ourselves, there begins a far-reaching
ethical deepening of individuals, and steady ethical progress in
mankind.




[pg 027]

CHAPTER IV

RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL WORLD-VIEWS


The world-views of the world-religions

IN the world-religions we can see powerful attempts to establish an
ethical world-view.

The religious thinkers of China, Lao-tse (born 604 B.C.), Kung-tse
(Confucius, 537-479 B.C.), Meng-tse (372-289 B.C.) and Chwang-tse
(fourth century B.C.), all try to ground the ethical in a world- and
life-affirming nature-philosophy. In so doing they arrive at a
world-view which, because it is optimistic-ethical, contains
incentives to inward and outward civilization.

The religious thinkers of India also, the Brahmanic philosophers, the
Buddha (560-480 B.C.), and the Hindus, start, like the Chinese, from
thought about the existing world, _i.e._ from nature-philosophy. They
do not, however, take a world- and life-affirming view of it, but a
world- and life-denying one. Their world-view is pessimistic-ethical,
and contains, therefore, incentives to inward civilization only, not
to outward as well.

Chinese religiousness, and Indian, recognize only a single
world-principle. They are monistic and pantheistic. Their world-view
has to solve the problem of how far we can recognize the original
source of the world as ethical, and how far, correspondingly, we
become ethical by the surrender to it of our will.

In contrast to these monistic-pantheistic world-views we find
dualistic ones in the religion of Zarathustra (sixth century B.C.), in
that of the Jewish prophets (from the eighth century B.C. onwards),
and in those of Jesus and Mohammed, this last, however, showing itself
to be in [pg 028] all points unoriginal and decadent. These religious
thinkers do not start from an investigation of the existence which
manifests itself in the universe, but from a view of the ethical which
is quite independent of it. They put it in opposition to natural
happenings. Accordingly they assume the existence of two
world-principles, the natural and the ethical. The first is in the
world, and has to be overcome; the other is incorporated in an ethical
personality which is outside the world and has been given the final
authority in this sphere.

If among the Chinese and the Hindus the basic principle of morality
was life in harmony with the world-will, so among dualists it is an
attempt to be something different from the world in harmony with an
ethical divine personality which is outside and above the world.

The weakness of dualistic religions is that their world-view, because
it rejects every kind of nature-philosophy, is always naïve. Their
strength lies in the fact that they have the ethical within
themselves, directly present and with undiminished force. They have no
need to strain it and explain it, as monists have to, so as to be able
to conceive it as an effluence from the world-will which reveals
itself in nature.

The world-views of the dualistic world-religions, taken as a whole,
are optimistic. They live in the confident belief that ethical force
will prove superior to natural, and so raise the world and mankind to
true perfection. Zarathustra and the older Jewish prophets represent
this process as a kind of world-reform. The optimistic element in
their world-view asserts itself in a quite natural way. They have the
will, and the hope of being able to transform human society and to
make the races of the world fit for their higher destiny. Progress in
any department of life means for them something gained, for they think
of inward and outward civilization together.

With Jesus the value of the optimistic element in his world-view is
impaired by the fact that he looks forward to the perfected world as a
result of a catastrophic end to the natural one, and while with
Zarathustra and the older [pg 029] Jewish prophets the Divine
intervention is to a certain extent only the completion of the human
activities which have been directed to the perfecting of the world, it
is with Jesus the only thing which has to be taken into account. The
kingdom of God is to appear in a supernatural way; it is in no way
prepared for by any effort made by mankind to attain to civilization.

The world-view of Jesus, because it is fundamentally optimistic,
accepts the ends aimed at by outward civilization. Being, however,
entangled in the expectation of the end of the world, it is
indifferent to all attempts made to improve the temporal, natural
world by a civilization which organizes itself on lines of outward
progress, and it busies itself only with the inward ethical perfecting
of individuals.

Just in proportion, however, as the Christian world-view draws the
consequences of the world’s not coming to an end, and accepts the idea
that the kingdom of God must be established by a process of
development which transforms the natural world, it begins to
understand and be interested in the completing of social organization,
and in all such progress in outward civilization as contributes to it.
Then the optimistic element in the world-view can again work
unhindered side by side with the ethical. Thus we get an explanation
of the fact that Christianity, which in the ancient world showed
itself hostile to civilization, seeks in modern times with more or
less success to conduct itself as the world-view which is for progress
in every sphere of activity.

The world-views of the world-religions and that of Western thought

The questions which press for an answer from the world-religions in
their struggle to reach an ethical and an optimistic-ethical
world-view, are the same as those which present themselves to Western
philosophy also. The great problem is to think out a connexion between
the universe and ethics.

[pg 030]

The three types of world-view which show themselves in the
world-religions, recur also in Western philosophy. The latter, too,
attempts to find an ethical code either in a world- and
life-affirming, or in a world- and life-denying, nature-philosophy, or
it attempts, rejecting more or less completely all nature-philosophy,
to reach a world-view which is in itself ethical. Only, it at the same
time does its best to avoid acknowledging, and indeed to conceal, the
naïve and dualistic element which is inevitably encountered when this
last method of procedure is followed.

The world-views, then, of the world-religions, and that of Western
philosophy, do not belong to different worlds, but stand in close
inward relations to one another. Further, the distinctions between a
religious world-view and a philosophical one is a quite superficial
one. The religious world-view which seeks to comprehend itself in
thought becomes philosophical, as is the case among the Chinese and
the Hindus. On the other hand a philosophical world-view which goes
really deep, assumes a religious character.

Although Western thought does, in principle, approach the problem of
world-view without any presuppositions, it has not been able to keep
itself entirely from being influenced by religious world-views. From
Christianity it has received impulses of a decisive character, and the
attempt to convert the naïve-ethical world-view of Jesus into a
philosophical one has cost it more attention and effort than it admits
to itself. With Schopenhauer and his successors the pessimistic monism
of India finds expression, and it enriches their reflexion upon the
nature of the ethical.

Thus the energies of all the great world-views stream into Western
thought, and through the co-operation of these varied forms of thought
and energy the latter is enabled to exalt into a universal conviction
the optimistic-ethical world-view which hovers before its mind, and
that too in a strength which it has never displayed in any previous
age or in any other part of the world. And that is why Western thought
has advanced farthest both in inward civilization and in outward.

[pg 031]

To give a real foundation to the optimistic-ethical world-view Western
thought is indeed as little able as any of the world-religions were,
and because the West experiences the problem of world-view in its most
universal and most pressing form it is the scene of the greatest
advances made by the civilized mind, but also of its greatest
catastrophes. It experiences portentous changes in its world-view, and
is familiar, too, with terrible periods when it has no world-view at
all.

It is because our Western thought is so sensitive in both these
directions, that it reveals most clearly the questions and
difficulties amid which the search for an optimistic world-view moves.

How far does the history of our thought give to us Westerners the
explanation of our fate? What road does it indicate to us as the best
for our future search after a world-view in which the individual can
find inwardness and strength, and mankind progress and peace?




[pg 032]

CHAPTER V

CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS IN THE GRÆCO-ROMAN PHILOSOPHY


The beginnings: Socrates.

IN the seventh century before Christ the Greek spirit begins to free
itself from the world-view which underlay the traditional religion,
and undertakes the task of establishing another on a foundation of
knowledge and thought.

First there comes a nature-philosophy, the result of investigation of
Being with reflexion upon what it really is. Then criticism begins its
work. Belief in the gods is found unsatisfying, not only because the
course of nature is not made intelligible by the rule of dwellers in
Olympus, but also because these personalities no longer answer to the
demands of feeling which is thoughtful and moral. These two elements,
nature-philosophy and criticism, are found united in Xenophanes and
Heraclitus in the sixth century B.C.

In the course of the fifth century B.C. Sophists appear, and begin to
concern themselves critically with the accepted standards of value
current for social life and individual activities._(_3_)_ The result
is annihilating. The more moderate of these “Enlighteners” proclaim the
overwhelming majority of these standards which pass for moral to be
merely claims made by society on its members, leaving open thereby the
possibility that a small remainder may be able to prove themselves to
rational consideration as moral in [pg 033] themselves. But the
younger radical sophists maintain the position that all morality, like
all current law, has been invented by organized society in its own
interest. Hence the thinking man who is freeing himself from this
tutelage will make his own moral standards, and will follow in them
nothing but his own pleasure and interests. Thus Western philosophical
thought about the problem of ethics and civilisation starts with a
shrill dissonance.

What was Socrates (470-399 B.C.) able to contribute, when he came
forward to oppose this tendency?

In the place of the simply pleasurable he put the rationally
pleasurable.

By rational consideration, he asserts, it is possible to establish a
standard of action in which the happiness of the individual, rightly
understood, is in harmony with the interests of society. Virtue
consists in right knowledge.

That the rationally moral is that which procures for the agent true
pleasure, or, what means the same thing, true profit, Socrates draws
out into the most diverse applications in the simple everyday
discussions which Xenophon has transmitted to us in his
_Memorabilia_._(_4_)_ The dialogues of Plato show him going beyond
this primitive utilitarianism, and seeking a conception of the good
which has been made something inward and aims at the well-being of the
soul; which stands, too, in relationship with the beautiful._(_5_)_
How much of these more advanced views are the Master’s own, and how
much of his own thoughts his pupil has in this way put into his mouth,
cannot now be decided.

That Socrates spoke of an inner, mysterious voice, the “daimonion”, as
being the highest moral authority in man is indeed certain, for it is
mentioned in his indictment. His [pg 034] utilitarian rationalism is
therefore completed by a kind of mysticism. An empirical ethic, that
is, one established out of past experience and with a view to future
experience, and an intuitive ethic live in him side by side and
undistinguished from one another, to be separated later and developed
in contrast to one another in his pupils, the Cynics and Cyrenaics on
the one hand, and Plato on the other.

Was Socrates at all conscious that with the bringing back of the moral
to that which is rationally pleasurable he builds the road only a
short way further, and stops exactly at the point where the real
difficulty makes its appearance, viz. that of defining the most
general content of the moral as given by reason? Or was he so simple
as to regard the general formula he had arrived at as the solution of
the difficulty?

The confidence which he displays in all his public life leads us to
suppose the latter. In his unaffected simplicity lies his strength. In
that perilous hour when Western thought comes to the point of having
to philosophize about the moral in order to arrest the dissolution of
Greek society which has been begun by a body of unstable and
disputatious teachers, the wise man of Athens shatters all scepticism
by the mighty earnestness of his conviction that what is moral can be
determined by thought. Beyond that general statement he does not go,
but he is the source of that serious spirit in which antiquity after
his day busied itself with the problem. What would that ancient world
have become without him?

Characteristic for this prologue to Western philosophizing about the
moral is the indifference with which Socrates stands outside the
philosophic efforts to reach a complete world-view. He troubles
himself neither about the results of natural science, nor about
inquiries into the nature of knowledge, but is busied simply with man
in his relation to himself and to society. Lao-tse, Confucius, the
Indian philosophers, the Jewish prophets, and Jesus seek to comprehend
ethics as somehow or other derived from, or [pg 035] forming part of,
a world-view. Socrates gives them no foundation but themselves. On
this stage, which has no scenery to form a background, there will
appear in succession to him the utilitarians of every age.

And here a remarkable prospect opens to us. To all efforts to
determine the content of the moral more help is afforded by the ethic
which keeps clear of all connexion with a complete world-view than by
any other. Such an ethic is the most practical. And yet this isolation
is unnatural. The idea that ethics are rooted in a complete
world-view, or must find their completion in one—that is, the idea
that one’s relations to one’s fellow-men and to society are in the
last resort rooted in some relation to the world—never loses its
natural claim. Hence again and again—already in Plato, then in
Epicurus and in the Stoic philosophy—ethics feel the need of again
connecting themselves with world-view, and the same process continues
in modern thought. But the practical search for the content of the
ethical remains the prerogative of those who are busied with ethics in
themselves.

In Socrates the ethical mysticism of devotion to the inner voice takes
the place of the complete world-view, which was in future to be the
foundation of the ethical determination of mankind.

Epicureanism and Stoicism. The Ethic of Resignation

Three tasks were left by Socrates to his successors: to determine more
exactly the content of the rationally useful; to give the world the
most universal general-notion of the good; and to think ethics into a
complete world-view.

What conclusions are come to by those who concern themselves with the
first question, and seek to determine the rationally useful from a
corresponding experience of pleasure?

As soon as the notion of pleasure is brought into connexion with
ethics it shows disturbances, as the magnetic [pg 036] needle does in
the neighbourhood of the poles. Immediate pleasure shows itself as
incapable in every respect of being reconciled with the demands of
ethics, and it is therefore given up. Lasting pleasure is called on to
take its place, but this retreat does not suffice. Lasting pleasure,
interpreted seriously, can be nothing but pleasure of the mind. Even
this position, however, is not tenable. Reflexion upon the ethic which
is to produce happiness sees itself compelled at last to give up the
positive notion of pleasure in any form. It has to reconcile itself to
the negative notion which conceives pleasure as somehow or other a
liberation from the need of pleasure. Thus the individualistic,
utilitarian ethic, also called Eudæmonism, destroys itself as soon as
it ventures to be consistent. This is the paradox which reveals itself
in the ethics of antiquity.

Instead of coming to maturity in the following generations, the
ethically-rational life-ideal put forward by Socrates succumbs to an
incurable decline, because the notion of pleasure, which lives in it,
denies itself as soon as it makes any attempt to think itself out.

Aristippus (_c._ 435-355 B.C.), the founder of the Cyrenaic school,
Democritus of Abdera (_c._ 450-360 B.C.), the author of the atomic
theory, and Epicurus (341-270 B.C.) seek to retain as much as possible
of the positive notion of pleasure. The Cynic school of Antisthenes
(born _c._ 440 B.C.), and the Stoicism which originated with Zeno, a
native of Kittium in Cyprus (_c._ 336-264 B.C.), keep from the very
beginning to the negative notion._(_6_)_ But the final result is the
same with both. Epicurus sees himself compelled at last to exalt the
[pg 037] absence of desire for pleasure as being itself the purest
pleasure, landing thereby on the shore of resignation where the Stoics
take their exercise. The fundamental difference between the two great
philosophical schools of antiquity does not lie in what they offer to
men as ethical. About what the “wise man” does and leaves undone, they
both frequently express themselves in the same way. What separates
them is the world-view with which their ethic is combined.
Epicureanism accepts the atomistic materialism of Democritus, is
atheistic, asserts that the soul perishes, and is in every respect
irreligious. Stoicism is pantheistic.

With Epicurus and Zeno ethics no longer trust themselves, as with
Socrates, to maintain an independent existence. They see the necessity
of attaching themselves to some sort of world-view. Travelling along
this road, Epicurus is guided solely by the effort after veracity. He
leaves the talking to the purely scientific knowledge of the world,
not allowing ethics to join in the investigation of Being and
introduce into it what might be of advantage to itself. How poor, or
how rich, it will finally become is to him a matter of indifference.
The one thing he is concerned about is that the world-view be a true
one, and therein lies the greatness of Epicurus with its claim to our
respect.

Stoicism seeks to satisfy the need for an inward, stable world-view;
like the Chinese monists it tries to find a meaning in the world. It
tries to widen out the ethical rationalism of Socrates into cosmic
rationalism. The moral is to show itself to be conduct agreeable to
the pronouncements of world-reason.

Stoicism has a vision of an optimistic-ethical affirmation of life,
grounded in the nature of the cosmos, but it fails to reach it. It is
not untutored enough to acquiesce in the ethical simplicity of a
nature-philosophy such as can be seen in Lao-tse and in the older
philosophical Taoism. It is ever struggling to discover in
world-reason the notion of purposive activity, and is ever mercilessly
thrust back upon that of activity pure and simple. Hence the ethic
with which it is operating never has a sufficiently universalist [pg
038] character to let it form a natural connexion with world-reason.
As might be expected from its origin, it is dominated by the problem
of pleasure and not-pleasure, and therefore no longer possesses any
efficacious instinct for effort. Its horizons, because still
determined by the questions arising out of ancient citizenship and the
ancient city-state, are narrow. It is, therefore, not advanced enough
to engage in thought on nature-philosophic lines, concerned with both
the world and man, although it does feel the inner necessity for doing
so.

The vacillation which is characteristic of Stoicism comes, then, from
the fact that the results it attains to do not match its aspirations,
but are much poorer than the latter. The spirit of antiquity tries to
find an optimistic-ethical life-affirmation in nature-philosophy, and
to find in it also the justification of those instincts for reliable
activity which it has possessed since the days when it was entirely
untutored, but it cannot do so. Whenever it acknowledges what has
happened it sees clearly that thinking about the universe leads only
to resignation, and that a life in harmony with the world means quiet
surrender to being carried along in the flood of world-happenings,
and, when the hour comes, sinking into it without a murmur.

Stoicism talks, it is true, with deep earnestness of responsibility
and duty, but since it cannot draw either from nature-philosophy or
from ethics a well-established and living notion of activity, it shows
us in these words nothing but beautiful corpses. It is impotent to
command anything whatever that is bound up with voluntary activity
which is conscious of its aim. Again and again evidence breaks through
that its thinking has been pushed aside on to the track of passivity.
Nature-philosophy only provides the cosmic background for the
resignation to which ethics have come. The ideal which gives life to
Chinese Monism, of the perfecting of a world through ethical and
ethically organized mankind, is not really discerned, much less
securely grasped.

One watches with dismay the shaping of the fate of [pg 039] ancient
ethics in Epicureanism and Stoicism. In place of the vigorous
life-affirming ethic which Socrates expects from rational thinking,
resignation steps in. An inconceivable impoverishment takes place in
the representation of the moral. The notion of action cannot be worked
out to completion. Even so much of it as, thanks to tradition, still
survives in the simple thought-methods of the Greek world in general,
is lost.

The ancient Greek was more citizen than man. Active devotion to the
cause of the community was to him a matter of course. Socrates
presupposes it. In the conversations which Xenophon hands down to us
in the _Memorabilia_ he is ever insisting on it that the individual
must improve himself in order to become an active citizen. The natural
course would have been that the thought which originated with him
should deepen this mentality by setting before it the highest social
aims. It was, however, never at all in a position to maintain the
mentality as it received it. More and more it leads the individual to
withdraw himself from the world and from all that goes on in it.

By a never-ceasing process of change the ethics of Greek thought
become in Epicureanism and Stoicism ethics of decadence. Not being
capable of producing ideals of progressive development for collective
bodies, they are also impotent to become really ethics of
civilization. In place of the ideal of the man who works for
civilization they set the ideal of the “wise man.” It is only the
inward individual civilization of refined and reflective
self-liberation from the world that now floats before its eyes, but
this in all its depth.

It is true that there is power in the preaching of resignation which
ancient thought, now become knowing about life, allows to go forth to
mankind. Resignation is the lofty porch through which one enters upon
ethics. But Epicurus and the Stoics stop in this porch. Resignation
becomes for them an ethical world-view. Hence they are incapable of
leading ancient society from its untutored life- and world-affirmation
to one based on thought.

[pg 040]

The conception of the rationally pleasurable, which was the legacy of
Socrates, is not productive enough to keep a world alive. It is
impossible to develop out of it the ideas of a utilitarianism directed
to the welfare of the community, although he believed he found them in
it. Ethical thought remains confined within the circle of the
self-regarding. Every attempt to ennoble the rationally pleasurable
ends in life-affirmation changing into life-denial. On this logical
fact was wrecked the ancient West, which, after the critical awakening
of the Greek spirit, could have been saved only by means of a
reflective optimistic-ethical world-view. It was able to develop
seriously what Socrates gave it, but not to make it capable of
producing life and civilization.

Plato’s abstract basic principle of the ethical. The ethic of
world-negation

Plato, too (427-347 B.C.), and Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), the two great
independent thinkers of antiquity, are incapable of producing an ethic
of action, and so giving civilization a firm foundation.

Plato seeks the general notion of the Good, but he abandons the path
which was pointed out, even if not followed to the end, by Socrates,
viz. the determination of it by a process of induction. He gives up
trying to arrive at the nature of the Good by considerations of the
kind, the object, and the results of action, that is to say, by its
content. He wants to establish it by a purely formal process, by
abstract logical thinking.

In order to arrive at an ethic he uses a detour through the theory of
ideas. All similar phenomena, he says, are to be conceived of as
varying copies of an original—to express which he uses the word
“idea.” In trees there is to be seen the idea of tree, in horses, that
of horse. The idea does not come to us, as we are inclined to think,
by our abstracting from trees the idea of tree, and from horses that
of horse. We have it within us already. It originates, not in our [pg
041] experience of the empirical world but in the recollection which
our soul brought with it from the supra-sensuous, pure world of ideas,
when it began its existence in a body. In the same way we have brought
with us the idea of the Good.

Thus in a tortured doctrine which is disfigured everywhere with
fancies and obscurities, Plato tries to found ethics on a theory about
the character of our knowledge of the world of sense, and he is
encouraged to this undertaking by the consideration that it is not
from reflexion that we obtain our conception of the Beautiful, which
is closely allied with that of the Good: we bring that conception also
with us, ready made.

Plato is the first of all thinkers who feels that the presence of the
ethical idea in man is what it is: something profoundly puzzling. That
is his greatest distinction. Hence he cannot profess to be satisfied
with the attempt of the historic Socrates to explain the Good as that
which is rationally pleasure-giving. It is clear to him that it is
something unconditional, with a compelling force of its own, and to
preserve for it this character seems to him, as later to Kant, to be
the great task of thought.

But what is the result of his undertaking? A fundamental principle for
ethics which is devoid of content. In order to secure its lofty
character it is allowed to be born of abstract considerations in the
country of the supra-sensuous. It can, therefore, never find itself at
home in reality and become familiar with it, nor can any rules for
concrete ethical conduct be developed from it. Thus Plato, when he
treats practically of ethics, is compelled to abide by the chief
virtues, as popularly conceived. In the _Republic_ he names four of
them: wisdom, courage, temperance, and justice, and he founds them not
on his general idea of the Good, but on his psychology.

But the characteristic ethic of Plato has nothing whatever to do with
such virtues. If the conception of the Good is supra-sensible and the
immaterial world is the only real one, then it is only thought and
conduct which deal with the [pg 042] immaterial that can have any
ethical character. In the world of appearance there is nothing of
value to be made actual. Man is simply compelled to be an impotent
spectator of its shadow-play. All willing must be directed to enabling
oneself to turn away from this, and get sight of that true activity
which goes on in the light.

The true ethic, then, is world-negation. To this view Plato was
committed the moment he allowed the ethical to find its home in the
world of pure Being. Thoughts of ascetic inactivity find expression in
him side by side with the Greek feeling for reality, and it is
confusing that he does not recognize the conflict between them, but
speaks now in one sense, now in the other. His ethic is a chaos, and
he himself an expert in inconsistency.

Plato’s ethic of world-denial is not an original creation; he takes it
over in the Indian setting in which it is offered to him by Orphism
and Pythagoreanism. By what route there found its way into Greek
thought this pessimism which has been thought out to a system and
provided with the doctrine of re-incarnation, we do not know, and
shall probably never learn. The presence side by side in Greek thought
of an artless optimism and a mature pessimism will always remain for
us the great puzzle of Greek civilization. But if the pessimism had
not been there, Plato must have introduced it. The abstract basic
principle of morality which he adopts in order to preserve the
absolute character of morality which he was the first to pronounce to
be a necessity, precludes any other content than that of the denial of
the sensible world and of natural life.

Aristotle. Instruction about virtue in place of ethics

Plato’s fate alarms Aristotle. He refuses to soar to the heights where
Plato lost himself. How then does he fare?

His object is the establishment of a serviceable ethic which is in
harmony both as to extent and content with reality. What he
accomplished lies before us in the [pg 043] so-called _Nicomachean
Ethics_, the comprehensive work which he composed for the benefit of
his son, Nicomachus. The general thought of Socrates, that ethics are
a striving after happiness, he acknowledges. But at the same time he
makes quite clear his opinion that the part played by activity in
ethics must be a much more important one than is given to it in Plato
or in the other post-Socratics. Aristotle feels that the crux of the
question is the conception of activity, and this he wants to save. He
therefore avoids Plato’s paths of abstract thinking, and rejects the
ethic of pleasure and not-pleasure over which the Cyrenaics and Cynics
work so hard. In his ethical thinking the vitality of the ancient
world tries to find expression.

In magnificent fashion he lays down the pre-suppositions which are
necessary for the carrying through of his undertaking. He finds the
motive to activity in the conception of pleasure, a thing he can do
because his whole philosophy has indeed for its aim and object the
conceiving of Being as formative activity. Hence the essential element
in human nature also is activity. Happiness is to be defined as
activity in accordance with the law of excellence. Rational pleasure
is experience of the perfecting of one’s activity.

Starting from the conception of pleasure which experiences itself as
activity, Aristotle is on the way to comprehend ethics as deepened
life-affirmation, and to attack the problem of leading the ancient
world up from a naïve and unreflecting world-affirmation to a thinking
one. But on the way he diverges from the high-road.

When he has to ask the decisive question as to what make activity
moral, he shrinks from discussing the problem of the basic principle
of the moral. Ethics are not some sort of knowledge which gives a
content to activity, he says in opposition to Socrates. The content of
the will is already given. No reflexion and no knowledge can put
anything new into it, or alter it.

Ethics consist, then, not in a guiding of the will by aims and objects
which knowledge puts before it, but in the will’s [pg 044] own
regulation of itself. The right thing to do is to establish the
correct balance between the different elements in the given contents
of the will. Left to itself, the latter rushes to extremes. Rational
reflexion keeps it in the correct middle path. Thus brought to a state
of harmony, human activity can be conceived as motived and ethical.
Virtue, therefore, is readiness to observe the correct mean which is
to be acquired by practice.

Instead of creating an ethic, Aristotle contents himself with a
doctrine of virtue. This depreciation of the ethical is the price he
pays in order to reach an ethic which ends neither in the abstract nor
in resignation. While he shirks the problem of the basic principle of
the moral, he still remains able to establish an ethic of activity,
though the latter contains indeed no live forces, only dead ones.

Aristotle’s ethic is therefore an æsthetic of the impulses of the
will. It consists in a catalogue of virtues and in the demonstration
that they are to be conceived as a mean. Thus courage lies between
rashness and cowardice, temperance between sensuality and
insensibility, truthfulness between boastfulness and irony,_(_7_)_
liberality between prodigality and avarice, high-mindedness between
conceit and small-mindedness, gentleness between quarrelsomeness and
characterless good-nature.

On this excursion through the field of the ethical, there open up many
interesting views. In an acute and living discussion Aristotle lets
his readers survey the questions of the relations of man to his
fellow-men and to society. How much that is deep and true there is in
the chapter on moral excellence and in that on friendship! How he
wrestles with the problem of justice!

No one can fail to feel the charm of the _Nicomachean Ethics_. There
is revealed in them a noble personality with abundant experience of
life, depicted with a magnificent simplicity. But just in proportion
as the method followed [pg 045] is advantageous technically, it is
valueless in itself. The ethical is reconciled with reality without
having first tried to come to clear understanding of itself. It is in
this reconciliation that the understanding is to be found, so
Aristotle thinks, but he is mistaken. His mind is seduced through his
having observed that some virtues—but even these more or less under
compulsion—allow themselves to be conceived as real means between two
extremes, and he is misled into developing on these lines the whole of
his ethical system.

But a more or less natural quality, which in ordinary speech is called
a virtue, is one thing, virtue in the really ethical sense is another.
The middle quality between prodigality and avarice is not the ethical
virtue of liberality, out the quality of rational economy. The middle
quality between rashness and cowardice is not the ethical virtue of
courage, but the quality of rational prudence. The combination of two
qualities only produces a single one. But virtue, in the ethical
sense, means a quality guiding itself by an ideal of self-perfection,
and being serviceable for some object which looks towards the
universal. Liberality as an ethical virtue means a process of spending
which serves some object recognized by the person practising it as
valuable in principle, and in such a way that any natural tendency to
prodigality, should there be such in the giver, plays no part, while
the tendency to avarice is paralysed.

Devotion of one’s property or one’s life to an object which is
valuable in principle is under all circumstances ethical, while
prodigality and avarice, rashness and cowardice as simple qualities
not inspired by any higher aim have never any ethical character; they
are merely something natural. Whether the devotion of one’s property
or of one’s life for an object valuable in principle is made more
completely than need be or exactly to the extent required by the
circumstances, does not alter in any way the ethical character of the
decision and the action. Such excess or defect only shows how much or
how little the ethical will has allowed [pg 046] itself to be at the
same time influenced by considerations of prudence.

Aristotle’s representation, then, rests on the fact that he allows
virtue in ordinary speech and virtue in the ethical sense to get mixed
up. He smuggles in the really ethical, and then offers it as the
resultant of two natural qualities, each of which is an extreme.

In the chapter on temperance—_Ethics_, Bk. III., 10—he has to allow
that the theory which makes the ethical a mean between two extremes
cannot be carried through completely. The love of beauty, he says
plainly, however strong it becomes, remains what it is; there can
never be any question of excess. He throws out this admission without
seeing that he thereby undermines his feeble definition of the ethical
as the appropriate relative mean, and, like Socrates and Plato,
acknowledges that there can be something which its content allows to
be reckoned as good in itself.

Aristotle is so firmly resolved not to let himself be entangled in the
problem of the basic principle of ethics, that he will allow nothing
to lead him to the discussion of it. He means to voyage along the
coast, keep to facts, and deal with ethics as if they were a branch of
natural science. Only he forgets that in science we can confine
ourselves to venturing from definite given happenings through
hypotheses to the nature of the Being which lies behind them, while in
ethics, on the contrary, we have to establish a basic principle
through the application of which we secure our happenings.

It is because he misunderstands their nature that Aristotle cannot
help ethics forward. Plato rides off over the head of Socrates and
loses himself in abstractions. Aristotle, in order to maintain the
connexion with reality goes down below Socrates. He brings together
material for a monumental building, and runs up a wooden shack. Among
teachers of virtue he is one of the greatest. Nevertheless, the least
of those who venture on the search for the basic principle of the
ethical, is greater than he.

[pg 047]

Ethical theory is no more ethics than cartilage is bone. But how
strange is this inability to establish the basic principle of ethical
action which Socrates regarded as the certain, and from the very first
sure and certain, product of thoughtful reflexion on the ethical! Why
do all the ancient thinkers who in succession to Socrates search for
it, always miss it? Why does Aristotle cease to concern himself with
it, and so condemn himself to a doctrine of virtue in which, as a
matter of fact, there is hardly any more living ethical force than
there is in the abstract ethical system of Plato or in the ethics of
resignation of the rest?

The Ideal of the Civilized State in Plato and Aristotle

How little Plato and Aristotle are capable of establishing an ethic of
action can be seen from the way in which they sketch their ideal of
the civilized State. Plato develops his in the _Republic_, Aristotle
his in the _Politics_. At this very time, Mencius (Meng-tse) is
putting before the princes of China a doctrine of the civilized State.

That the State must be something more than a union which regulates in
the most practical way the common life of a number of persons whom
natural conditions compel to depend upon one another, is quite clear
to both of them. They also agree in demanding that the State shall
promote the true prosperity of its citizens. This is, however,
unthinkable and impossible without virtue, and the State must
therefore develop into an ethical institution. “Honourable and
virtuous conduct is the object which the political community aims at,”
is the way Aristotle puts it.

The State, which is given by history, is therefore to come under the
influence of a representation of its nature as a political body which
is both ethical and rational. In the _Republic_ Plato puts in the
mouth of Socrates the following sentiment: “Unless it happen that
either philosophers acquire the kingly power in States, or those who
are to-day called kings and potentates cultivate philosophy truly and
sufficiently, and thus political power and philosophy [pg 048] become
as one . . . there can be no deliverance from evil for States, nor
ever, so I think, for the human race” (Bk. V, 473, C and D).

When, however, it comes to a more detailed carrying out of the ideal
of the civilized State, Plato and Aristotle betray remarkable
embarrassment. First of all, their vision of the State of the future
is not that of a community which embraces a whole nation, but is
always just a copy of the Greek city-republic with appropriate
improvements. That they think out their ideal within such narrow
limits is historically intelligible, but for the development of the
philosophical idea of the civilized State it is deplorable.

One result of these narrow limits is that both are anxiously concerned
to provide that the well-being of the city-republic shall not be
endangered by the increase of the population. The number of the
inhabitants is to be kept as far as possible always near the same
figure. Aristotle is not frightened by the proposal that weakly
children shall be allowed to die of hunger, and that unborn children
shall be got rid of by intentional abortion. That the Spartan State,
on the contrary, regards the increase of the population as desirable,
and exempts a citizen from all imposts as soon as he has four
children, does not seem to him to be reasonable.

Again, just as these two thinkers cannot work themselves up to a
general idea of a national State, so they are unable to reach the idea
of mankind. They make a strict line of division between the unfree on
the one side, and the free on the other. The former they regard merely
as creatures made for work, who are to maintain the material
well-being of the State. What becomes of them as human beings is to
them a matter of very little interest. Such beings as they are not
meant to have any share in the growth towards perfection which is to
be brought about by means of the civilized State.

Slavery was, indeed, attacked now and again by the Sophists from their
point of view, not, however, on the [pg 049] ground of humanity but
from a desire to raise doubts about the accepted justification of
existing institutions. Aristotle defends it as a natural arrangement,
but recommends kindly treatment.

Artisans, and in general all who earn their living by the labour of
their hands, are not to be allowed to be citizens. “One cannot
practise virtue, if one leads the life of an artisan, or of one who
labours for pay,” says Aristotle. An ethical valuation of labour as
such is still something unknown to him, even though he conceives of
happiness as “activity in accordance with the law of excellence.”
Plato and he are still entirely under the influence of the ancient
view that only the “free” man can have full value as a man.

In details of the ideal of the State, however, the two part company,
and Aristotle argues against Plato, though, unfortunately, just those
parts of the _Politics_ in which he sketches his ideal State have not
come down to us complete. The main difference is that Aristotle keeps
closer than Plato to the historically given. He builds his State upon
the family; Plato makes the State into a family. In his _Republic_ the
free men live with property, wives, and children owned in common. They
are to possess nothing as their own, so that they may not by private
interests be held back from working for the general welfare. Moreover,
the general welfare allows the State to breed its citizens
systematically. He prescribes the connections which men and women are
to form, and permits only such as allow the expectation of a new
generation which is sound both in body and mind. The offspring of
unions not approved by the authorities are either to be killed before
birth, or got rid of by starvation.

Aristotle contents himself with guaranteeing the quality of the
offspring by legal regulation of the age for marriage. Women may get
married at eighteen, men not till they are thirty-seven. Moreover,
marriages are to take place preferably in winter, and as far as
possible, when the wind is in the north.

[pg 050]

In what, then, does the good consist which is to be realized by this
civilized State? To this decisive question Aristotle and Plato have in
reality only the answer that it is meant to make it possible for a
number of its members, viz. the “free” men, to devote themselves
entirely to their own bodily and mental culture free from care about
material things, and to take the lead in public affairs. It is not
established with a view to the production of anything ethical in any
deeper sense, nor for the sake of an ideal of progress on lines which
could be described as in any sense great and noble. Nowhere do the
characteristic limitations of ancient ethics reveal themselves so
clearly as in the poverty of their ideal of the State.

The ethical valuation of man as man has not yet been reached. Hence
the State has for its object, not the growth to perfection of all, but
only that of a particular class.

The nation, too, is not yet recognized as a great entity both natural
and ethical, and therefore no consideration is given to the question
of uniting the various city communities for the joint pursuit of
higher objects. Each remains isolated. Plato thinks he has satisfied
the claims produced by membership of the same nation by requiring that
in wars waged by Greek States against one another the houses shall not
be destroyed nor the fields laid waste, as if the war were against
barbarians.

The idea of humanity as a whole has not yet come in sight. It is,
therefore, not possible for Plato and Aristotle to make their State
work in co-operation with others to promote the general progress of
mankind.

They therefore establish their civilized State on a type which is
hemmed in in every direction by narrow horizons. Moreover, the
political community which they adopt as the type is at the very time
when they are writing already a dying entity. While Aristotle is
writing his _Politics_, his pupil, Alexander the Great, is founding an
empire, and Rome is beginning to subject Italy to her rule.

More important still than all external faults in their ideal [pg 051]
of the civilized State is the fact that these two thinkers are unable
to introduce into the community the energies which are needed for its
maintenance. The idea of the civilized State is present with the
vitality needed, only when the individual is by the impulse contained
in his world-view moved so far as to devote himself to organized
society with enthusiastic activity. Without civic idealism no
civilized State! But to assume anything of that kind in the members of
their State is impossible for Plato and Aristotle, since both have
already reached the ideal of the wise man who withdraws himself
prudently and gracefully from the world.

Plato admits this. His wise citizens who are destined to be rulers
devote themselves to the service of the State only when their turn
comes, and are glad when they are set free and can again in retirement
busy themselves, as wise among wise, with the world of pure Being.

Aristotle, when he raises in the _Politics_ the question whether the
contemplative life is not to be preferred to that of political
activity, decides in theory in favour of the latter. “It is a
mistake,” he says, “to value inactivity higher than activity, since
happiness consists in activity.” But in the doctrine of virtue in the
_Nicomachean Ethics_ there is nothing which could lead the individual
to place his life at the service of the community.

Plato and Aristotle cherish undoubtedly the ancient conviction that
the individual ought to devote himself to the State, but they cannot
find a foundation for it in their world-view. Like Epicurus and the
adherents of the Porch, they are under the spell of an ethic in which
there is present no will to attempt a transformation of the world.

How much greater than the two Greeks is Mencius, when he is thinking
out the ideal of the civilized State! He can make it as large as he
likes and take men into its service with their best thoughts, because
it results in the most natural way from a large-scale world-view of
ethical activity.

Plato and Aristotle, lacking such a world-view, can do no more than
guess at the nature of a civilized State, and invent one for
themselves. Plato’s _Republic_ is a mere [pg 052] curiosity.
Aristotle’s _Politics_ is valuable, not on account of the theory of
the civilized State which is there presented, but only for his
magnificent practical analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of
the various State-constitutions, and of their economic problems.

The decadence of antiquity does not begin, then, with the suppression
of the individual by the Empire, and its destruction of the normal
mutual relations between the individual and the community. It sets in
immediately after Socrates, because the ethical thinking which started
with him cannot really lead the individual beyond himself, and set him
as an effective force in the service of the moralization and the
perfecting of social relations.

There is no middle term between the ethic of enthusiasm and that of
resignation. But an ethic of resignation cannot think out, much less
bring into existence, a system of social relations which can be called
really civilized.

Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius

“In imperial times Stoicism shrivels up into a moralizing popular
philosophy” is what we are usually told in treatises about ancient
philosophy. As a matter of fact what we have to deal with is by no
means a shrivelling up, but a serious struggle for a living ethic
which begins unexpectedly in the later period of Græco-Roman thought,
and leads to an optimistic-ethical nature-philosophy.

The pillars of this movement are L. Annæus Seneca (4 B.C.—A.D. 65),
Nero’s teacher, who at the command of his pupil had to open his veins;
the Phrygian slave, Epictetus (born _c_. A.D. 50), who in A.D. 94 was
with all philosophers banished from Rome by Domitian; the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 121-180) who, brought up by pupils of Epictetus,
defends the Empire at a time of great danger, and writes his
philosophical _Meditations_ while in camp._(_8_)_

[pg 053]

In their classical period Greek ethics offer us either egoistic
considerations of advantage, or cold doctrines of virtue, or ascetic
renunciation of the world, or resignation. In whichever direction they
turn, they never lead men out beyond themselves.

In Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius, they lose this
self-regarding character. Renouncing the spirit of the earlier time
they develop to an ethic of universal brotherhood, and busy themselves
with the immediate, altruistic relations of man to man.

Whence comes this understanding for humanity, which is never seen in
classical antiquity?

The older Greek moralists are concerned with the State. Their interest
is absorbed in the maintenance of the organization of society which is
embodied in the city-republic, so that the free citizens can continue
to live the life of freedom. The type of complete manhood is to be
realized. All around there is the activity of men who receive no
consideration except so far as they are means to this end.

But amid the mighty political and social revolutions which lead to the
creation of the Empire this mentality ceases to be accepted as a
matter of course. The fearful experiences it goes through cause
feeling to become more human, and the horizons of ethics are widened.
The city-republic, on which ethical thinking had been built up, has
disappeared, but an empire now crushes men down just in the same way.
Thus the individual man as such becomes the object of reflexion and of
ethics. The conception of the brotherhood of all men appears. A
disposition to humanity makes itself heard, and Seneca condemns the
gladiatorial shows. Nay more: even the [pg 054] inner relationship
between mankind and the animal world is recognized.

So now when they have caught sight of mankind as a whole and man as
such, ethics reach such a depth and breadth as allows them to try to
comprehend themselves in a universal world-will. Henceforth
nature-philosophy and ethics can work together. Stoicism had from the
very beginning a vision of this, but had not been able to make it a
reality, since it had not at its disposal the needful living and
universalist ethic.

But there is another reason why optimism and ethics can now in
nature-philosophy come into power. The old school of the Porch was
crushed down into resignation just in proportion as it submitted to
the necessity for critical thinking. But as time goes on, the
practical and religious instincts which were always present in its
world-view, gain in strength. The antiquity which is passing away is
no longer critical, but either sceptical or religious, and therefore
the later school of the Porch can let itself be guided by the ethical
demands of its world-view much more completely than the old one could.
It becomes at once deeper and more simple than the latter, and, like
Chinese ethical monism, rises to such freedom from limitations as to
be able to interpret the world-will as ethical. So now Stoics appear
who, like Confucius, like Mencius, and like Chwang-tse, and indeed,
like the Rationalists of the eighteenth century, preach ethics as
something grounded in the nature of the universe and of mankind. They
cannot prove the truth of this world-view any better than could Zeno
and his pupils, who also resorted to it, but they announce it with an
inner conviction which the former could not command, and produce their
results by means of an enthusiasm which was denied to their
predecessors.

When the later school of the Porch reaches the stage of exalting the
world-principle more and more to become a personal and ethical god, it
is following laws which are at work also in Hinduism.

[pg 055]

Yet the world-view of resignation, which it has inherited from the
older school, it never succeeds in rendering entirely impotent. In
Seneca and Epictetus this is still strongly maintained side by side
with the ethical conception of the universe. It is only in Marcus
Aurelius that the optimistic motives sound victoriously through.

Stoicism was from the beginning a multiform elemental philosophy, and
it is because it ventured to be this in such comprehensive measure
that the later Stoicism is so rich and so full of life.

Moral Sayings of Seneca

No man is nobler than his fellow, even if it happen that his spiritual
nature is better constituted and he is more capable of higher
learning. The world is the one mother of us all, and the ultimate
origin of each one of us can be traced back to her, whether the steps
in the ladder of descent be noble or humble. To no one is virtue
forbidden; she is accessible to all; she admits everyone, she invites
everyone in: free men and freedmen, slaves, kings, and exiles. She
regards neither birth nor fortune; the man alone is all she wants.

It is a mistake to think that the status of a slave affects the whole
of a person’s nature; the nobler part of it is not touched thereby.

Every single person, even if there is nothing else to recommend him, I
must hold in regard, because he bears the name of man.

In the treatment of a slave we have to consider not how much we can do
to him without being liable to punishment, but how much the nature of
right and of justice allows us to, seeing that these bid us treat
gently even prisoners and purchased slaves. Although in the treatment
of a slave everything is allowed, there is nevertheless something
which through the common right of every living being is stigmatized as
not permissible in the treatment of a man, because he is of the same
nature as thyself.

This, in fact, is the demand which is laid upon each man, viz. that he
works when possible, for the welfare of many; if that is
impracticable, that he works for the welfare of a few; failing that,
for the welfare of his neighbours, and if that is impossible, for his
own.

It is through untiring benevolence that the bad are won over, and
there is no disposition so hard and so hostile to loving treatment ...
as to refuse love to the good people whom it will in the end have to
thank again for something more. “Not a word of thanks did I get! What
am I now to begin to do?” What the gods do, . . . who begin to shower
benefits on us before we are aware of it, and continue them even
though we do not thank them.

Moral Sayings of Epictetus

Nature is wonderful, and full of love for all creatures.

Wait upon God, ye men. When He calls you, and releases you from [pg
056] service, then go to Him; but for the present remain quietly in
the position in which He has placed you.

You carry a god about with you, and do not know it, unhappy one! You
have him within yourself, and do not notice it when you defile him
with unclean thoughts or foul deeds.

Cultivate the will to satisfy yourself, and to stand right before God.
Strive to become pure, one with yourself and one with God.

Think silence best; say only what is necessary, and say it shortly.
Above all, do not talk about thy fellow-men, either to praise them, or
to blame them, or to compare them with others. Do not swear; never, if
possible, or at any rate as seldom as possible. Your bodily
wants—food, drink, clothing, housing, service—satisfy in the simplest
way. Avoid unseemly joking, for there is always a danger of becoming
vulgar, and joking away the respect of your fellow-men.

As you are careful when walking not to tread on a nail or to sprain
your ankle, so take care not to let your soul get hurt.

Moral Sayings from the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius

Everything that happens, happens right, and if you can observe things
carefully, you will recognize that it is so. I do not mean only in
accordance with the course of nature, but much more that they happen
in accordance with the law of righteousness, and as if controlled by a
Being who orders all things according to merit.

If I am active, I am so with due regard to the general welfare. If
anything happens to me, I accept it and consider it in relation to the
gods and the universal source from which, in close connection, come
all our happenings.

He who commits unrighteousness is godless, for universal nature
created rational beings for one another; to help each other where
there is need, but never to injure one another.

Love mankind; obey the godhead.

If thou art unwilling to get up in the morning, reflect thus: I am
waking in order to go and work as one of mankind.

Seek all thy joy and contentment in advancing, mindful always of God,
from one generally useful deed to another.

The best way to avenge oneself on anyone is to avoid returning evil
for evil.

It is a privilege of man to love even those who do him wrong. One can
reach this level by reflecting that all men are of one family with
oneself; that their shortcomings are due to ignorance, and against
their will; that in a short time both of you will be dead.

What is good is necessarily useful, and that is why the good and noble
man must be concerned about it.

Nobody gets tired of seeking his own advantage. But doing so procures
us an activity which is natural. Never get tired, then, of seeking
thine own advantage, provided thou procurest thus the advantage of
others also.

[pg 057]

Treat as befits a man endowed with reason, that is magnanimously and
nobly, the animals which are not so endowed, and indeed all creatures
whatever that can feel but have no reason. But other men, since they
are endowed with reason, treat with friendly affection.

Thou has existed till now as a fragment of the universe, and wilt some
day be absorbed in thy producer, or rather, thou wilt suffer a
transformation and reappear as a new germ of life.

Many grains of incense are destined for the same altar. Some fall soon
into the flame, others later, but that makes no difference.

The Optimistic-Ethical World-View of the later Stoicism

In their optimistic-ethical world-view the later Stoics find those
impulses to effort which were not available for the ancient ethics of
the classical age. Marcus Aurelius is an enthusiastic utilitarian like
the Rationalists of the eighteenth century, because, like them, he is
convinced that nature itself has bound up together what is ethical and
what is advantageous to the individual and to the community.

That being so, the classical question of ancient ethics whether the
thinking man is to busy himself with public affairs or not must again
be discussed. Epicurus taught that “the wise man has nothing to do
with State affairs unless exceptional circumstances arise.” Zeno’s
decision was that “he will take part in the business of the State
unless obstacles prevent it.” Both schools leave the retirement into
oneself to the decision of the Wise man, only one lets the grounds for
the decision be given somewhat earlier, the other somewhat later. The
thought of a devotion to the general good which is to be kept active
for its own sake and under all circumstances is outside the circle of
vision of their ethic.

With the later Stoics it emerges, because the conception of “mankind”
has come in sight. Man, as Seneca works out in his treatise on Leisure
(_De Otio_), belongs to two republics. One is a large and universal
one, extends as far as the sun shines, and embraces both gods and men;
the other is that into which through the fate assigned us by our [pg
058] birth, we have been adopted as citizens. Circumstances may bring
it about that the wise man cannot dedicate himself to the service of
the State, but, to escape the storm, must “take refuge in the
harbour.” It may happen—and Seneca has in mind his own time—that not
one of existing States is of such a character as to put up with the
activity of the wise man. Nevertheless, the latter does not wholly
withdraw into himself, but he serves the great republic by working to
improve the general outlook of mankind, and to hasten the coming of a
new age.

In Epictetus also this deepened and widened notion of duty is to be
found. Marcus Aurelius does not even consider any impossibility of
taking part in public life. In him there speaks the ruler who feels
himself to be the servant of the State. His ideal is the citizen who
“from one activity which makes his fellow-citizens happier goes on to
another, and undertakes with alacrity anything whatever that the State
lays upon him.” “Do what is needed, and what is bidden by the reason
of a being who is destined by nature to membership of a State, and do
it as it is bidden.”

In the middle of the second century A.D. ancient thought arrives at an
optimistic-ethical world-view which holds within itself living ideals
of civilization, and therefore anticipates those which later on in the
eighteenth century will bring into activity so mighty and universal a
movement of civilization. But for the men of the Græco-Roman world it
comes too late. It does not permeate the masses, but remains the
private possession of an _élite_.

It cannot permeate the masses, because there are forces at work among
them with which it cannot combine. It is true, indeed, that the ethic
of the later Stoicism is so near akin to the universal charity of the
Christian ethic, that by the tradition of later times Seneca is
declared to be a Christian, and that the Church father, Augustine,
holds up the life of the heathen emperor, Marcus Aurelius, as an
example for Christians.

Yet the two movements cannot amalgamate, but have [pg 059] to fight
each other. Marcus Aurelius is responsible for most terrible
persecutions of Christians, and Christianity on its side declares war
to the knife against the Porch.

Why this strange fatality? Because Christianity is dualistic and
pessimistic, the ethic of Stoicism is monistic and optimistic.
Christianity abandons the natural world as evil, the later Stoics
idealize it. It helps not at all that their ethical teaching is almost
identical. Each appears as part of a world-view which is
irreconcilable with that of the other. All contradictions in the world
may be concealed, but not that between two world-views, and the
struggle ends with the annihilation of the optimistic-ethical
world-view of the Stoics, which is defended by officers without an
army. The attempt that was undertaken as the ancient world was coming
to an end, to restore the Empire and make it an empire as wide as
mankind, was a failure.

The horizons of the philosophy of the ancient world had remained
narrow too long. No ethical thinkers had appeared who at the right
time might have led that world to an ethical optimism about reality.
It was a calamity, too, that the natural sciences, which had started
in such a promising way, came to a standstill, partly through the
fault of fate, partly because philosophy turned away from them, before
mankind discovered the law of the uniformity of nature, and obtained
thereby control over it. Hence the men of antiquity never acquired
that self-consciousness which in their descendants of modern times has
kept alive, even through the darkest periods of history, the belief in
progress—even though it be sometimes progress of the most superficial
kind. This psychological factor is of great importance.

It is true that artistic ability, which in the Greek spirit meets us
in such abundant measure, is also control over the material, but this
creative power was unable to draw the man of antiquity up to a higher
life-affirmation and to belief in progress. It served only to let him
express himself, in words and in form, in the antagonism between
primitive [pg 060] world- and life-affirmation, and thinking world-
and life-denial. It is the puzzling intermixture of serenity and
melancholy which produces the tragic charm of Greek art.

From every point of view, then, a strong ethical world- and
life-affirmation is made difficult for the ancient world. It therefore
falls more and more a prey to pessimistic world-views, which draw its
thoughts away from reality, and celebrate the liberation of the
spiritual from its bondage to the material in a succession of cosmic
dramas. Gnosticism, Oriental and Christian, Neo-Pythagoreanism, which
arose as early as the first century B.C., the Neo-Platonism which
originated with Plotinus (A.D. 204-269), and the great
Mystery-religions, all come to meet the religious, world-shunning
disposition of the masses during the breaking-up of antiquity, and
offer it that deliverance from the world of which it is in search. In
this chaos of ideas Christianity emerges victorious because it is the
most robust religion of redemption, because as a community it
possesses the strongest organization, and because beneath its
pessimistic world-view it has at its disposal living ethical ideas.

The optimistic-ethical monism of the later Stoics is like a sunbeam
breaking through in the evening of the long, gloomy day of antiquity
while the darkness of the middle ages is already drawing on, but it
has no power to waken any civilization to life. The time for that is
past. The spirit of antiquity, having failed to reach an ethical
nature-philosophy, has become the prey of a pessimistic dualism in
which no ethic of action is any longer possible; there can only be an
ethic of purification.

The thoughts of Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius are the winter
seed of a coming civilization.




[pg 061]

CHAPTER VI

OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW AND ETHICS IN THE
RENAISSANCE AND POST-RENAISSANCE PERIODS


Belief in Progress and Ethics

THE essential characteristic of the modern age is this, that it thinks
and acts in the spirit of a world- and life-affirmation which has
never before shown itself with such active strength.

This world-view breaks through in the Renaissance, first at the end of
the fourteenth century, and it arises as a protest against the
mediæval enslavement of the human spirit. The movement is helped to
victory by the increasing knowledge of Greek philosophy in its
original form which is the result of the migration to Italy about the
middle of the fifteenth century of learned Greeks from Constantinople.
Among the thinking men of that time there arises the belief that
philosophy must be something more elemental and more living than
Scholasticism made it.

But the thought of antiquity would not have been sufficient by itself
to keep alive this new world- and life-affirmation which appealed to
it. It has not, in truth, the mentality required. But another kind of
fuel is in time brought for the fire. Taking refuge from book-learning
in nature, the men of that time discover the world. As seamen they
reach countries whose very existence was not suspected, and they
measure the size of the earth. As inquirers they press on into the
infinite and the secrets of the universe, and learn by experience that
forces governed by uniform laws are at work in it, and that man has
power to make them serviceable to himself. The knowledge and power won
by Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), Copernicus [pg 062] (1473-1543),
Kepler (1571-1630), Galileo (1564-1642), and others are decisive for
the current world-view.

As a movement which draws its life solely from spiritual forces, the
Renaissance passes its bloom-time comparatively quickly, and without
forming much fruit. With Paracelsus (1493-1541), Bernardino Telesio
(1508-1588), Giordano Bruno (1548-1600), and others, an enthusiastic
nature-philosophy announces itself. It does not, however, reach full
growth. The Renaissance has not strength enough to bring to birth a
world- and life-affirming philosophy corresponding to their spirit.
Here and there their thought surges for a time, like a rough sea,
against the world-denying world-view of the Church. Then all is still.
What we know definitely as the philosophy of modern times begins
almost without any reference to the Renaissance. It springs not from
any nature-philosophy, but from the problem of the theory of knowledge
which was raised by Descartes, and from that starting-point philosophy
has once more had laboriously to seek its way to a nature-philosophy.

It is not, then, because it was enlarged during the Renaissance into a
fully thought out world-view that world- and life-affirmation made
good its position in the modern age. If it was able to hold out right
into the eighteenth century, when it triumphs against the world- and
life-denial which mediæval thought and Christianity kept working in
opposition to it, it owed this to the circumstance that progress in
knowledge and power never ceased. In them the new mentality had a
support which never gave way, but became continually stronger. Since
the new scientific knowledge cannot be suppressed nor its progress
arrested, belief in the power of truth becomes firmly established.
Since it becomes more and more evident that nature works with a
uniformity which never misses its aim, there grows up a confidence
that the circumstances of society and of mankind generally can be so
organized as to secure definite objects. Since man is ever obtaining
[pg 063] greater power over nature, he takes it more and more as
self-evident that the reaching of perfection in other spheres also is
only a question of a sufficiency of will-power and a correct way of
grappling with problems.

Under the steadily working influence of the new mentality the
world-view of Christianity changes, and becomes leavened with the
leaven of world- and life-affirmation. It gradually begins to be
accepted as self-evident that the spirit of Jesus does not give up the
world in despair, but aims at transforming it. The early Christian
conception of the Kingdom of God, which was born of pessimism and,
thanks to Augustine, prevailed through the Middle Ages, is rendered
impotent, and its place is taken by one which is the offspring of
modern optimism. This new orientation of the Christian world-view,
which is accomplished by a slow and often interrupted process of
change between the fifteenth century and the end of the eighteenth, is
the decisive spiritual event of the modern age. During this period
Christianity takes no account of what is happening to itself. It
believes that it is remaining unchanged, whereas in reality, by this
change from pessimism to optimism, it is surrendering its original
character.

The man of modern times, then, becomes optimistic, not because
deepened thought has made him understand the world in the sense of
world- and life-affirmation, but because discovery and invention have
given him power over it. This enhancement of his self-appreciation and
the consequent strengthening of his will and his hopes, determine his
will-to-live in a correspondingly pronounced and positive sense.

In the ancient world man’s natural disposition to world- and
life-affirmation could not be worked out to a complete world-view of
the same, because at that time deep thought about the world and life
pressed resignation upon him as a necessity of thought. In the man of
the modern age the mentality produced by discovery and invention
unites with his natural disposition to world- and life-affirmation,
and establishes him in an optimistic world-view [pg 064] without
leading him to deeper thought about the world and life.

The spirit of the modern age is not the work of any one great thinker.
It wins its way gradually by reason of the unbroken series of triumphs
won by discovery and invention. Hence it is not a result of chance
that an almost unphilosophic and moreover somewhat antiquated
personality like Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam (1561-1626), is the man
who drafts the programme of the modern world-view. He founds it upon
the sentence: “Knowledge is power.” His picture of the future he
develops in his _New Atlantis_, in which he describes how the
inhabitants of an island, through the practical application of all
known discoveries and inventions and all possible rational reflexion
on the purposive organization of society, find themselves in a
position to lead the happiest possible lives._(_9_)_

Christian and Stoic Elements in Modern Ethics

What is the relation between ethics and the mentality of belief in
progress, and how were they influenced by it?

When the ethical thought of antiquity wanted to come to clearness
about itself, it fell a victim to resignation, because it tried to
determine the moral as that which is rationally profitable and
pleasurable to the individual. It remained shut up within the circle
of the egoistic, and never reached the thought of social
utilitarianism. From such a fate modern ethics are protected in
advance. They have no need to produce from their own resources the
thought that the ethical is action directed to promoting the welfare
of others, for they find it as something already accepted as true.
That is the gift of Christianity. The thought of Jesus that the
ethical is the individual’s active self-devotion to others has won its
way to acceptance. Ethics, [pg 065] which are making themselves
independent of religion, keep, as a result of their passage through
Christianity, a pronouncedly active and altruistic mode of thought.
What they have to do now is to provide this possession with a rational
foundation.

It is extraordinarily significant that to meet modern ethics there
comes in the Late Stoicism a philosophical ethical system in which
there appear, as the result of rational thinking, thoughts which run
side by side with Christian morality. There is now coming up for the
benefit of modern times the seed sown by Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus
Aurelius. Cicero, too, counts with modern times for so much, because
its thinkers find in his writings noble morality based upon thought.
The discovery of Late Stoicism’s ethic of humanity is for modern times
akin to their discovery of nature. They identify it with the real
Christian ethic, and contrast it with the scholastic, in which Jesus
is expounded according to Aristotle. It is through Late Stoicism that
modern times become aware that the moral is something direct. Because
Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius speak to such an extent just as
Jesus did, they help to spread the conviction that the truly rational
ethic and the ethic of the Gospels coincide with one another.

When antiquity came to an end, Late Stoicism and Christianity, in
spite of the identity of their moral teaching, had torn each other to
pieces. In modern times they unite in order to produce together an
ethical world-view. Why is that now possible which before was
impossible? Because the chasm which lay between their respective
world-views has been bridged. Christianity now treats world- and
life-affirmation as valid.

But how could this volte-face of Christianity be brought about?
Because of the fact that in spite of its pessimistic world-view it
upholds an ethic which, so far as it touches the relation of man to
man, is an activist ethic. The pessimistic world-view, if it thinks
itself out to a consistent conclusion, must end with a purely
world-denying ethic, [pg 066] divorced from action, as it has in
India. The peculiar character, however, of the world-view of Jesus
which is determined by the expectation of the end of the world and the
coming of a supernatural kingdom of God, together with the directness
of his ethical feeling, entail his proclaiming of an ethic of active
devotion to one’s fellow-Man in spite of his pessimistic attitude
towards the natural world. This activist ethic is what is wanted to
provide the cardinal-point of an evolution from a
Christian-pessimistic world-view to one of Christian optimism. The
modern age, following its instinct, assumes it as self-evident that an
ethic which deals with the active relations of man to man is
pre-supposed to be an ethic which assigns a positive value to action
as such, and, further, that such an ethic of action belongs to a
world-view which is optimistic and which wills and hopes for a
transformation of relationships.

It is, then, the ethic of active self-devotion taught by Jesus which
makes it possible for Christianity to do what is suggested by the
spirit of the modern age, and modulate from the pessimistic to the
optimistic world-view. This result finds expression in the way the new
conception of Christianity, when it has to come to an understanding
with the old one, contrasts itself as “the religion of Jesus” with
“the Christianity of dogma.”

A way is prepared, then, in Erasmus and individual representatives of
the Reformation, shyly at first but then more and more clearly, for an
interpretation of the teaching of Jesus which corresponds to the
spirit of modern times, an interpretation which conceives the teaching
as a religion of action in the world. Historically and in actual fact
this is a wrong interpretation, for the world-view of Jesus is, so far
as concerns the future of the natural world, thoroughly pessimistic.
His religion is not a religion of world-transforming effort, but the
religion of awaiting the end of the world. His ethic is characterised
by activity only so far as it commands men to practise unbounded
devotion to their fellow-men if they would attain to that inner
perfection [pg 067] which is needed for entrance into the supernatural
kingdom of God. An ethic of enthusiasm, and therefore presumably
focused upon an optimistic world-view, forms part of a pessimistic
world-view! That is the magnificent paradox in the teaching of Jesus.

But the modern age was right in overlooking this paradox and in
assuming in Jesus an optimistic world-view which corresponded to an
ethic of enthusiasm and met with a welcome the spirit of Late Stoicism
and of modern times. For the progress of the spiritual life of Europe
this mistake was a necessity. What crises the latter must have gone
through, if it had not been able without embarrassment to place the
new world-view under the authority of the great personality of Jesus!

The mistake was such a natural one that till the end of the nineteenth
century it was never seriously shaken. When historical criticism, at
the beginning of the twentieth century, proclaimed its discovery that
Jesus, in spite of his activist ethic, thought and acted under a
pessimistic world-view dominated by the expectation of the end of the
world, it aroused indignation. It was accused of degrading Jesus to a
mere enthusiast, while it after all only put an end to the false
modernising of his personality._(_10_)_

What we at the present time have to do is to go through the critical
experience of being obliged to think as modern men under a world-view
of world- and life-affirmation, and yet let the ethic of Jesus speak
to us from out of a pessimistic world-view.

Of this problem which is disclosing itself to-day the early period of
the modern age suspects nothing. Jesus and the moralists of Late
Stoicism together are its authorities for an ethical world- and
life-affirmation.

What the Late-Stoic ethic is for the modern age is shown by Erasmus of
Rotterdam (1466-1536), Michel de [pg 068] Montaigne (1533-1592),
Pierre Charron (1541-1603), Jean Bodin (1530-1596), and Hugo Grotius
(1583-1645), and that whether their ideas run predominantly on
Christian or on freethinking lines. To the Later Stoics Erasmus owes
it that he can understand the simple gospel of Jesus which was being
discovered behind the Church’s dogmas, as being the essence of all
ethical philosophizing. It is by finding support in them that
Montaigne in his _Essays_ (1580) is saved from falling into complete
ethical scepticism. Because he is inspired by the Later Stoics, Bodin
in his work _De la république_ (1577), puts forward an ethical ideal
of the State to combat the ideas of Machiavelli’s _Prince_
(_Principe_) (1515). Because he draws from the same source, Pierre
Charron in his work _De la sagesse_ (1601), ventures to assert that
ethics are higher than traditional religion, and can maintain
themselves in an independent position in face of it without losing
anything of their essential nature or of their depth. Because the work
of Marcus Aurelius has preceded him, Hugo Grotius is able in his
famous work, _De jure belli ac pacis_ (1625) to lay so securely the
foundations of natural and international law, and thereby to champion
the claims of reason and humanity in the domain of jurisprudence.

Other considerations apart, it would have been the first task of the
rising power of natural science to restore to currency the world-view
of Epicurus, and Pierre Gassendi (1592-1655)_(_11_)_ attempts it. He
fails, however, to accomplish his purpose. By its inward belief in
progress the mentality of the modern age is driven in elemental
fashion beyond scepticism and sceptical ethics. What is great in
Epicurus, viz. that in obedience to the deepest demands of truth he
tries to think ethically within a nature-philosophy which does not
interpret nature as embodying any purpose, can neither be comprehended
nor be put before his own age by the philosopher’s all too clever
modern prophet.

[pg 069]

For the weighty questions of absolute truth that time is by no means
ripe. Its capacity is only that of the uncritical. Typical for its
spirit is Isaac Newton (1643-1727), who in his investigation of nature
is purely empirical, and in his world-view remains simply Christian.

Against the difficulties which crop up for ethics and world- and
life-affirmation out of a nature-philosophy which works without any
presuppositions, the Renaissance and the Post-Renaissance are secure.
The belief in progress which arises from the achievements of discovery
and invention, and the joy felt in action itself are their world-view.

Thanks to belief in progress, new life streams into ethics. The inner
relations between ethics and world- and life-affirmation begin to have
their effect. The elementary impulses to activity which are embodied
in the Christian ethic are set free, and the belief in progress gives
them an aim and object: the transformation of the circumstances of
society and of mankind.

It is not any really deeper ethical thinking that brings the modern
age in, but the influence exerted by the belief in progress, which
arose out of the achievements of discovery and invention, on the ethic
which drew its life from Stoic and Christian thought. The cart is
drawn by the belief in progress, and at first ethics have only to run
along beside it. But as the cart gets heavier and the road more
difficult to negotiate, so that ethics ought to lend their strength to
help, they refuse, because they have no strength of their own. The
cart begins to run backward, and carries belief in progress, and
ethics with it, down the hill.

The task before philosophy was to change the world- and
life-affirmation which arose out of enthusiasm over the attainments in
discovery and invention into a deeper, inner one arising out of
thought about the universe and the life of man, and on that same
foundation to build up an ethical system. But philosophy could do
neither.

About the middle of the nineteenth century, when it has become
perfectly clear that we are living with a world- and [pg 070]
life-affirmation which has its source merely in our confidence in
discovery and invention and not in any deeper thinking about the world
and life, our fate is sealed. The modern optimistic-ethical
world-view, though it has done so much for the material development of
civilization, proves to be like a building erected already to a
considerable height but on rotten foundations, and has to collapse.




[pg 071]

CHAPTER VII

LAYING THE FOUNDATION OF ETHICS IN THE
SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES


Hartley, Holbach. Devotion as Enlightened Egoism

MODERN times find world- and life-affirmation so self-evident that
they feel no need to give them a sure foundation, and to deepen them,
by thought about the world and life. Pessimism they brush aside as
reactionary folly, without suspecting how deep down into thought it
has sent its roots.

They do, however, see the necessity of establishing the nature of the
ethical. How do they proceed to do this?

That the ethical means action directed to promoting the common good is
their firm belief from the first, and they are safe from the fate of
ancient thought, viz. sticking fast in the mud of resignation while
trying to give the ethical a proper foundation. Instead of that they
have to answer the question how the unegoistic makes it appearance
beside the egoistic, and in what inner relation they stand to each
other.

A performance now begins like that which went on after the appearance
of Socrates, only the task is proposed this time not by an individual
but by the spirit of the time. Another attempt is made to consider the
ethical problem in isolation, as if it consisted in reflexions on the
relation of the individual to himself and to society, these having no
need to settle their position with regard to ultimate questions of the
meaning of the world and of life. The ethical problem seems, too, to
be a much easier one than it was then, because world-affirmation and
activity directed towards the general welfare no longer have to be
proved, but appear among the presuppositions which are taken for
granted.

[pg 072]

There are three ways in which the relations between the egoistic and
the altruistic can be made clear. Either one assumes that the egoistic
in the thought of the individual is automatically converted into the
altruistic by consistent meditation. Or one supposes the altruistic to
have its beginning in the thought of society and thence to pass over
into the convictions of the individual. Or one retires to the position
that egoism and altruism are both among the original endowments of
human nature. All three explanations are attempted, each with most
varied arguments. They are not always carried to a conclusion without
intermixture, and with many thinkers there is interplay of one with
another.

The attempt to deduce devotion to the common welfare from egoism by
psychological considerations is made in the most systematic way by
David Hartley (1705-1757)_(_12_)_ and Dietrich von Holbach
(1723-1789)._(_13_)_

Hartley, a theologian who betook himself to the practice of medicine,
claims to see in altruism a purposive ennoblement of original
selfishness which comes into play under the influence of rational
thought. The much-reviled Holbach ascribes its origin to the fact that
the individual, if he rightly understands his own interest, will
always form his conception of it in connection with the interest of
society, and therefore direct his activities to the latter as well.

Both attempt to carry up their building, so far as it goes, with
materialistic considerations and then to roof it with idealist ones.
But neither with the coarser nor with the finer considerations nor
with both together can the psychological derivation of altruism from
egoism produce any convincing result.

The coarser ones do not carry us very far. It is acknowledged, [pg
073] of course, that the prosperity of society depends upon the moral
disposition of its members and that the better the moral condition of
society the better is the individual’s expectation of prosperity. But
it does not follow that the individual becomes more moral, the better
he understands his own interests. The mutual relation between him and
society is not of such a character that he derives benefit from the
latter just in proportion as he himself by his moral conduct helps to
establish its prosperity. If the majority of its members are with
short-sighted egoism intent only on their own good, then the man who
acts with wider outlook makes sacrifices from which there is no
prospect of gain for himself, even if the best happens and they are
not lost without benefiting the community. If, on the other hand,
through the moral conduct of the majority of its members the condition
of society is favourable, the individual profits by it even if he
fails to behave towards it as morality demands. By conduct which
disregards both past and future, he will carve for himself an unduly
big share of personal prosperity out of the prosperity of the
community, milking the cow which the rest feed. The influence of the
individual on the prosperity of the community and the reaction of
social prosperity on that of the individual do not stand in a simple
relation to each other which acts equally in both directions. The
consideration, therefore, that egoism, rightly understood, will oblige
the individual to resolve on activity which is directed to promoting
the common good, is a ship which sails well, but leaks.

The psychological derivation of altruism from egoism must, then, in
some way or other, make an appeal to the self-sacrifice of the
individual. This it does by inducing him to consider that in happiness
there is a spiritual element as well as a material. Man needs (it is
said) not only external prosperity, but to be respected by others and
to be satisfied with himself, and he can have this double experience
only when he concerns himself about the [pg 074] prosperity of others.
Even Holbach, who tries to be inexorably matter-of-fact, lets these
considerations speak loudly.

The attempt is made, therefore, above the prolonged bass note of the
conception of happiness derived from ordinary egoism, to modulate into
the spiritualized conception of it.

The path which this attempt has to follow runs parallel to that which
led the successors of Socrates into the abyss of the paradoxical. In
order to get from egoism into altruism and so think out to a
conclusion the ethic of the rationally-pleasurable, the Epicureans
wished to use the same scale of values for spiritual and material
pleasure alike. The only result was that their ethic transformed
itself into resignation. Now again, in modern times, and again for the
sake of ethics, spiritual happiness is to be regarded as happiness in
the same way as material happiness is, and here again the result is a
paradox.

Material and spiritual happiness are not so related that the one can
find its continuation in the other. If the second is for the sake of
ethics called in with the first, it does not strengthen the first, but
paralyses it. The man who does earnestly try to guide himself by the
light of spiritual as well as material happiness, ends by finding that
the recognition accorded him by his fellow-men, which at first seemed
to him to make almost the whole of spiritual happiness, becomes more
and more meaningless. It is to him a miserable lump of solder which
drops down between material and spiritual happiness without being able
to fasten them together. More and more exclusively he experiences
spiritual happiness as the condition in which he is at one with
himself and therefore can justifiably accord himself a certain amount
of self-appreciation.

Spiritual happiness is sufficient unto itself. Either the man is led
to resolve on ethical conduct because he expects from it a moulding of
the outward circumstances of his being which will bring him profit and
pleasure; or he chooses it because he finds his happiness in obeying
his inner compulsion to ethical action. In the latter case he [pg 075]
has left far behind him all calculations about the interdependence of
his morality and his material happiness. The fact that he is a moral
man is in itself his happiness, even though it land him in the most
disadvantageous situations.

But if spiritual happiness can never be welded into union with
material, it is useless trouble to try to depict altruism as an
ennobling of egoism.

If the ordinary conception of pleasure, that it may be brought into
union with ethics, is submitted to a process of refining, it ends by
being refined away. In ancient ethics, in which the refining is done
under the influence of an ethical system which is definitely egoistic,
it transforms itself into the pleasure of being without pleasure, and
allows ethics to end in resignation. In modern ethics, in which the
pleasure to be refined is under the influence of altruism, it works
itself up into an irrational and immaterialistic enthusiasm. In both
cases there is the same paradoxical proceeding, only that in one case
it goes in the negative direction, in the other in the positive.

Whenever, then, thought wishes to conceive ethics as springing from
pleasure or happiness, it arrives at resignation or enthusiasm, at
spiritualised egoistic or at spiritualised expansive conduct.

There is no way in which natural pleasure can, in really deep
thinking, be brought into connexion with ethics.

Hobbes, Locke, Helvetius, Bentham

The explanation that altruism is a principle of action which the
individual takes over from society is to be found expressed in
characteristic ways by Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679),_(_14_)_ John Locke
(1632-1704),_(_15_)_ Adrien Helvetius (1715-1771)_(_16_)_ and Jeremy
Bentham (1748-1832)._(_17_)_

[pg 076]

Hobbes represents the State as commissioned and empowered by the
majority of the individual citizens to engage the whole body in action
for the common advantage. In this way alone, he asserts, is it
possible to realise the common good in which the egoism of individuals
finds the highest possible degree of prosperity. Left to themselves,
men would never be able to get free from their short-sighted egoism,
and would, therefore, miss prosperity. Their only possible course,
then, is to join in setting up an authority which will drive them into
altruism.

With external means only, however, organized society cannot engage the
individual in all the activities which are needed for the common good.
It must strive to ensure its power over him by means of spiritual
conviction as well. Locke takes this need into consideration.
According to him it is God and society together who force altruism
upon the individual by appealing at the same time to his egoism. These
two authorities have, that is to say (as our reason enables us to
recognize), so ordered the course of things that actions beneficial to
society are rewarded, and those injurious to it are punished. God has
at his disposal rewards and punishments of endless duration. Society
works in two different ways: through the power given to it by the
criminal law, and through the law of public opinion in which it uses
praise and blame as spiritual means of compulsion. Man being guided
both by pleasure and absence of it, he manages to accommodate himself
to those rules which defend the general good so effectually, and he
thereby becomes moral.

In spite of all their differences on single points, Hobbes and Locke
agree in having this external conception of ethics. The essential
point of distinction between them is [pg 077] that with Hobbes society
alone plies the whip, while with Locke God and society handle it
together.

Helvetius, who belonged to a family which had migrated from the
Palatinate into France, is more refined and more inward. In his life
as a farmer of taxes and a property-owner, he always tried, along with
his noble-minded wife, to act with kindness and justice as he explains
them in his book. It is clear to him that ethics means somehow or
other enthusiastic action, that is, action which springs out of
feeling._(_18_)_ Society cannot, therefore, force these virtues into
the individual; it can only educate him into them, and it does in fact
apply all the means and devices which are at its disposal to influence
his egoism in their direction. Above all it makes good use of his
striving to win recognition and fame. The praise which it pours on
that which is “good” in its own sense of the word is for the mass of
men the strongest inducement to take up work for its interests.
Helvetius would perhaps have offered a less external conception of how
ethical action is realized, if he had not, with the best intentions,
taken so much trouble to depict morality as something which can be
taught.

In the view that morality is enthusiastic action to which the
individual is roused by society, Bentham agrees entirely with
Helvetius, but he carries it through in a much deeper way. Out of the
_Romanza_ he makes a hymn.

The part played by society in bringing morality into existence cannot,
according to Bentham, be emphasized too strongly. In vehement words he
opposes the view that the human conscience can decide between good and
evil. Nothing can be left to subjective feeling. Man is truly moral
only when he receives his ethics at the hand of society and works them
out with ardour.

But if society is to decide about ethics, it must first bring order
into its own ethical views, and therefore, says Bentham, must learn to
combine clear and definite notions [pg 078] with its presentation of
the general good. That done, it must make up its mind to apply this
principle with absolute consistency as a foundation for legislation
and the establishment of ethical standards, excluding all
considerations of a different character. A “moral arithmetic” should
be constructed which allows the calculating in correct utility values
of all decisions that have to be made.

Dealing in a dry, practical way with all cases of penal legislation,
and of establishment of standards by the moral law, Bentham then shows
that the principle of the greatest good of the greatest number is
applicable in all of them, and guides us safely and accurately in
questions of good and evil.

“Moral philosophy, in its general meaning, is the theory underlying
the art of so directing the actions of men that there is produced the
greatest possible amount of happiness.”

It is legislation that decides what moral actions the community can
order to be performed, and if it is to exert an educative influence it
must be humane through and through.

“But there are many actions which, though useful to the community,
legislation may not command. There are even many injurious actions
which it may not forbid, although moral philosophy does so.
Legislation is, in a word, a circle with the same centre as moral
philosophy, but its circumference is smaller.”

When law ceases to be available, there is nothing that society can do
except be continually putting before the individual personally how
greatly he contributes to his own welfare by furthering that of
others. Bentham does not make it do this with educative guile as does
Helvetius. Society appeals to his feeling for truth. It throws itself
at his feet and entreats him for the sake of the general welfare to
listen to the voice of reason. Thus the dry way in which Bentham
writes about ethics has in it something peculiarly impressive, and
explains the powerful influence which this [pg 079] eccentric member
of the House which looks across the Park at Westminster has exercised
all over the world through the individuals who were inspired by him.

The most influential parts of his work are those in which he
intensifies the seriousness of men and sharpens their outlook by
leading them to reflect not only on the immediate but also on the more
distant consequences of anything done or left undone, and, further,
not only on the material consequences but on the spiritual ones. It
does one good to note the courage with which this fanatic for utility
ventures to represent material blessings as the foundation of
spiritual ones.

Bentham is one of the most powerful moralists who have ever appeared
in the world, but his mistakes are as great as his insight. The latter
is shown in this, that he conceives morality as a kind of enthusiasm.
His mistake is that he thinks he must guarantee the rightness of this
enthusiasm by making it nothing higher than a judgement of society
which is taken over by the individual.

This compels us to rank Bentham with Hobbes, Locke, and Helvetius,
although in other respects he stands high above them. He, like them,
makes morality arise outside the individual. He, like them, in order
to find his explanation of the altruistic, puts out of action the
ethical personality which is in man, and, to compensate for this,
raises society to an ethical personality that he may then by a
transmission of energy connect individuals with this central
power-station. The difference is only that with the other commonplace
moralists the individual is a marionette directed by society on
ethical principles, whereas in Bentham he carries out with deep
conviction the movements suggested to him.

Ethical thought falls from one paradox into another. If, as in
antiquity, it thinks out a system in which the activity that must be
directed to the common good is not sufficiently represented, it
arrives at ethics which are no longer ethics, and ends in resignation.
If it assumes and starts from such an activity directed to the common
good, [pg 080] it arrives at an ethic in which there is no ethical
personality. It is, strange to say, unable to mark out the middle
course and let an activity which is directed to the promotion of the
common good spring out of the ethical personality itself.

Altruism as a natural quality. Hume, Adam Smith

The explanations of altruism as an ennobling of egoism which has a
spontaneous origin through the activity of reason, or which is brought
into existence through the influence of society, are obviously
unsatisfying both psychologically and ethically. Utilitarianism must
therefore necessarily come to admit that altruism is somehow or other
given independently in human nature side by side with egoism. It is
true that it always appears there as the backward twin-brother who can
be reared only with the most careful nursing, and therefore the
upholders of the third alternative given above appeal to the
considerations used for the first two. They continually allow the
capacity for altruistic feeling to be exposed to the influence of
considerations which seem calculated to let egoism discharge its
waters into altruism. The two first views are taken into service as
wet-nurses for the third. David Hume (1711-1776)_(_19_)_ and Adam
Smith (1723-1790)_(_20_)_ must be named here.

Hume agrees with the other utilitarians in allowing that the principle
of seeking to promote the common good must be accepted as the dominant
principle of morality. Whether actions are good or bad is decided
solely by whether they are directed towards the production of general
happiness [pg 081] or not. There is nothing which is in itself ethical
or unethical.

To the idea that ethics can have as their object the self-perfecting
of the individual as little weight is given by Hume as by the other
utilitarians. Like them, he opposes asceticism and other life-denying
demands of Christian ethics, because he cannot discover in them
anything profitable for the general welfare.

But what makes men decide to work together for the common good?
Consistent utilitarians answer: Reflexion about what the common good
means. Of this one-sidedness Hume is not guilty, because he does not
find it to be in accord with psychological facts. It is not out of
high-minded reflexion, he asserts, but out of direct sympathy that the
emotions and actions of benevolence arise. The virtues which serve the
common good have their origin in feeling. We can resolve on acts of
love only because there is in us an elementary feeling for the
happiness of men, and a dislike of seeing them in misery. We become
moral through sympathy.

It would not have been a big step further to explain this sympathy as
a form of the egoistic need of happiness, more or less through the
assumption that in order to be really happy a man must see happiness
all round him. But Hume does not use such roads as that. He does not
aim at constructive thought but at stating facts, and it is enough for
him that direct sympathy with other men be proved to be a principle
inherent in human nature. We have to stop somewhere or other, he says
in one place, in our search for causes. In every science there are
certain general principles beyond which there is no more general
principle still for us to discover.

Among the elements which are effective in developing moral feeling,
Hume attributes great importance to the love of fame. This keeps us
considering ourselves in the light in which we wish to appear in the
eyes of others, for the effort to secure the respect of others is a
potent educator in virtue. On this point he thinks like Frederick the
Great, from whom comes the sentence: “The love of fame [pg 082] is
innate in noble souls; you have only to arouse it and urge it on, and
men who till then merely vegetated, will seem to you, when explained
by this happy instinct, to be changed into demi-gods.”_(_21_)_

Adam Smith wishes to trace out the idea of sympathy in all its
manifestations, and in doing so he discovers that our capacity for
sympathy covers more than participation in the weal or woe of others.
It brings us, he says, to a community of thought with those who are
doing something. We feel ourselves directly attracted or repelled by
the actions of others and the motives at the back of them. Our ethics
are the product of these sympathetic experiences. We come in time to
take care that an impartial third party can justify and sympathise
with the mainspring and the tendency of our actions. Innate sympathy
not only with the actions but also with the experience of others is
thus the beneficent regulator of the behaviour of men to one another.
This feeling God has implanted in human nature that it may keep men
faithful to work for the common good.

How far this somewhat artificial extension of the notion of sympathy
through the doctrine of the impartial third party really means a step
forward beyond Hume we may leave undiscussed.

In his famous work, _An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations_ (1776), Adam Smith founds this prosperity purely
upon the entirely free and intelligent activity of egoism. About the
part to be played by ethics in economic questions he says nothing.
Economic development he leaves to be determined by its own internal
laws, and is confident that, if these are left a free course, the
result will be favourable. Adam Smith, the moral philosopher, is also,
because he is endowed with a rationalistic optimism, the founder of
the _laissez-faire_ form of economic [pg 083] doctrine, that of the
Manchester school, as it is called. He led industry and commerce in
their struggle for liberation from the petty and injurious tutelage of
authority. To-day, when economic life among all peoples is again
delivered over to the most short-sighted ideas of authorities who
never think in terms of economics, we can measure the greatness of his
performance.

Like Adam Smith, Bentham also is an adherent of the principle of
freedom in economic life. At the same time he has an ethical
conception of society, and demands from it that in a spirit of
progress it shall help to level out as far as possible the differences
between rich and poor.

What, then, do Hume and Adam Smith mean for ethics? They introduce
into the treatment of them the element of empirical psychology. They
believe that through the value they give to the significance of
sympathy they are giving a natural foundation to utilitarianism,
though in reality this psychology begins to correct it and to
undermine its position. There hovers before the mind of utilitarianism
the great conception that ethics are a result of reflexion. It thinks
to make men moral by keeping their attention fixed on the deep nature
of ethics and the necessity of the ends at which it aims.

This conception draws its life from the conviction that thought has
been given complete control over the will. The absolute rationality of
the ethical is the foundation on which it builds, and if it is not to
get quite bewildered about its own nature, it cannot allow itself to
recognize as presuppositions of the ethical, facts which are given it
by psychology and cannot be verified independently.

With Hume and Adam Smith, who trace ethics back to something given in
human nature which resembles instinct, there crops up the problem how
ethics can be something natural, and at the same time something
subordinate to thought, for that they are subordinate to thought has
to be assumed even by the champions of this psychological
utilitarianism. If they were nothing but the exercise of an instinct,
they would not be capable of widening and [pg 084] deepening, nor
could they be imparted to all and sundry with convincing force. Yet
how is it conceivable that thought influences the sympathetic
instinct? What have the two in common that the work of one can be
carried further by the other?

If Hume and Adam Smith had suspected the far-reaching character of
this great problem of ethics which they brought into the field of
discussion, they would have had to go on and settle the extent and the
depth of this sympathy which they adopted in their scheme, in order to
understand how it continues to function in the domain of thought.

But they fail to notice the far-reaching character of what they lay
down, and believe they have done nothing but give by means of
psychology an explanation of altruism which is superior to these
currents. The spirit of the time, in its wonderful capacity for
holding various ideas side by side, takes possession of their view,
and the popular utilitarianism now confidently appeals to it as
declaring that altruism is to be conceived as a rational ennobling of
egoism, as a result of the influence of society, and in addition as a
manifestation of a natural instinct.

It is, really, only in appearance that the psychological conception of
ethics imparts new life to utilitarianism. It is rather a consumption
germ which the latter absorbs. The establishment of a natural element
in ethics, when the consequences of it begin to make themselves felt,
can only end in its devouring rationalist utilitarianism, as becomes
evident in the nineteenth century when biological thought becomes
influential in ethics. The funeral procession of rationalist
utilitarianism begins to assemble with Hume and Adam Smith, though it
is a long time before the coffin is taken to the cemetery.

The English ethic of self-perfecting

Against the utilitarians, who would derive from the content of the
moral the essential nature of it, and the [pg 085] obligation to
morality, the “Intellectualists” and the “Intuitionists” enter the
lists. The empirical derivation of ethics seems to them to be an
endangering of the majesty of the moral. Morality—this is the thought
before their minds—is a striving after perfection, and this develops
itself in us because it is implanted in us by nature. Action for the
common advantage does not by any means constitute ethics; it is only a
manifestation of the struggle after self-perfecting.

To this deeper and more comprehensive conception of ethics, however,
the Intellectualists and Intuitionists do not give correct expression.
For that they are still too much entangled in a lifeless and
semi-scholastic philosophizing.

Their chief strength lies in their showing up of the weaknesses of the
foundation which Hobbes and Locke give to ethics, and to these they
principally devote themselves, bringing to their task a great deal
that is correct about the directly and absolutely binding character of
the moral law. That the meaning of the moral is not to be found merely
in the useful character of the actions inspired by it but also in the
self-perfecting of the agent which is effected by them, and that
morality presupposes a moral personality, is emphasized by them in
many happy turns of expression.

When, however, the task before them is to describe exactly in what way
men carry in them the idea of the good as a force which works
effectively upon their character, the Intellectualists and the
Intuitionists land themselves in a psychologizing which is sometimes
ingenious, but often artificial and commonplace. They occupy
themselves with logical distinctions instead of investigating in a
practical fashion the nature of man. Instead of really developing the
problem in answer to the innovators, they work at it with data taken
from an out-of-date philosophy. They hark back largely to Plato, and
again they argue largely, anxiously or unconsciously, not as
philosophers, but as theologians.

On individual points they diverge from each other, and [pg 086] attack
each other’s positions according as they would have the foundations of
the ethical more intellectualist, or more sentimental and mystical, or
more theological.

The majority of these anti-utilitarians belong to the Cambridge
Platonizing school. We must name here Ralph Cudworth
(1617-1688),_(_22_)_ Henry More (1614-1687),_(_23_)_ the Rev. Samuel
Clarke (1675-1729),_(_24_)_ Bishop Richard Cumberland
(1632-1718),_(_25_)_ and William Wollaston (1659-1724)._(_26_)_

According to Cudworth the truths of morality are just as evident as
these of mathematics. For More the ethical is an intellectual power of
the soul meant for the control of natural impulses. Cumberland finds
the moral law given in the reason which has been bestowed upon man by
God. Clarke, living in the thought world of Isaac Newton, sees it as
the spiritual phenomenon which corresponds to the law of nature.
Wollaston defines it as that which is logically right.

Pressed back to their fundamental meaning, these thinkers do nothing
but amplify the statement that the ethical is ethical. They assert
that the utilitarian view of ethics is pitched too low, but they do
not succeed in establishing, in contrast to it, a more exalted
principle in such a way that a higher and more comprehensive content
of ethics can be derived from it. As to content their ethic does not
really differ from that of the utilitarians. It merely lacks the great
enthusiastic driving-force which shows itself in the latter. To
establish a living ethic of self-perfecting is beyond the capacity of
the Intellectualists and the Intuitionists.

What is the inner connexion between the struggle for self-perfecting
and action for the common advantage? That [pg 087] is the weighty
question of ethics which crops up in the settlement of differences
between the utilitarians and their conservative opponents. At first it
remains veiled, and it does not come to clear expression till we reach
Kant.

       *       *       *       *       *

A peculiar position in the ethical thought of the eighteenth century
is held by Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftesbury
(1671-1713)._(_27_)_ He opposes not only the utilitarians, but the
Intellectualists and the Intuitionists as well, and tries to secure a
mediating position between them. That the content of ethics is
utilitarian he openly admits, but he derives the ethical neither from
considerations of usefulness nor from the intellect; he places its
origin in feeling. At the same time he emphasizes, as does Adam Smith
also a few years later, its relationship to the æsthetic.

But the important thing is that he puts forward a living philosophy of
nature which connects itself with ethics. He is convinced that harmony
reigns in the universe and that man is meant to experience this
harmony in himself. Æsthetic feeling and ethical thinking are for him
forms of a growing union with the divine life, which struggles to find
expression in the spiritual being of man as it does in nature.

With Shaftesbury ethics descend from a rocky mountain range into a
luxuriant plain. The utilitarians know as yet nothing of a world.
Their ethic is contained in considerations about the relation of the
individual to society. The anti-utilitarians have some idea of a
world, but not a correct one. They elaborate ethics with a formal
theology and a formal philosophizing about the All, but Shaftesbury
plants ethical thought in the universe of reality, which he himself
contemplates through an idealising optimism, reaching thereby a direct
and universal notion of the moral.

[pg 088]

A mysticism based on a philosophy of nature begins to spin its magic
threads through European thought. The spirit of the Renaissance rules
again, no longer, however, like a raging storm, as in Giordano Bruno,
but as a gentle breeze. Shaftesbury thinks pantheistically, more
pantheistically than he confesses to himself, but his is not a
pantheism which throws his age into struggles about world-views, and
comes into conflict with theism. It is the pantheism which rules in
Hinduism and in Late Stoicism also; one which is not dangerous, and
raises no question of principle, desiring only to be regarded as a
vivifying of belief in God.

Shaftesbury exerts also a liberating influence on the spiritual life
of his time by giving ethics a much freer attitude towards religion
than anyone had ventured to do up to that time. Religion, according to
him, has not to give decisions about ethics, but on the contrary must
test its own claims to be true by its relation to pure ethical ideas.
He even ventures to represent the Christian teaching about rewards and
punishment as not consistent with pure ethical considerations.
Morality, he says, is pure, only when good has been done simply
because it is good.

His optimistic-ethical philosophy of nature is offered by Shaftesbury
only as a sketch. He throws out his ideas without proving that they
are well founded, and without feeling any necessity for thinking them
out to a conclusion. He steps with an easy stride across all problems.
What a difference between his philosophy of nature and Spinoza’s! Yet
his meets the needs of his time. He offers what is new to it, and what
inspires it: ethics bound up with a living world-view.

The belief in progress now clothes itself in a living world-view which
really suits it. This is the process which, thanks to Shaftesbury,
began in the first decades of the eighteenth century and went on
developing till the end of it. Hence the appearance of his writings,
which were immediately spread abroad through the whole of Europe, [pg
089] is the great event for the spiritual life of the eighteenth
century. Voltaire, Diderot, Lessing, Condorcet, Moses Mendelssohn,
Wieland, Herder, and Goethe too, are under his influence, and he
dominates popular thought completely. Hardly ever has any man had so
direct and so powerful an influence on the formation of the world-view
of his time as the invalid whose life ended at Naples when he was only
forty-two.

Direct continuators of Shaftesbury’s ethic are found in Francis
Hutcheson (1694-1747)_(_28_)_ and Bishop Joseph Butler
(1692-1752),_(_29_)_ but they take from it just that soft
indefiniteness which gives it its charm and its strength. Hutcheson,
who strongly emphasizes theology’s independence of ethics, the
relationship of the latter to the æsthetic, and their utilitarian
content, stands nearer to his teacher than does Butler, who does not
go as far in his welcome of utilitarianism, and also opposes, from the
Christian standpoint, the optimism of Shaftesbury’s world-view.

But Shaftesbury’s true successor is J. G. Herder (1744-1803). In his
_Ideas on the Philosophy of Human History_ (4 vols., 1784-1791), he
carries the optimistic-ethical nature-philosophy on into a
corresponding philosophy of history.




[pg 090]

CHAPTER VIII

LAYING THE FOUNDATIONS OF CIVILIZATION IN THE AGE OF RATIONALISM


The Mentality and the Achievements of the Ethical Belief in Progress

THANKS to the fully worked out optimistic-ethical world-view with
which the belief in progress surrounds itself in the course of the
eighteenth century, these generations prove capable of thinking out
the ideals of civilization and advancing towards their realization.
The fact that all attempts to give ethics a foundation in reason have
turned out on the whole unsatisfactory does not move them, if indeed
they give the point any consideration at all. By the conviction that
they have formed a rational conception of the world which gives it an
optimistic-ethical meaning, they are carried on over all the inner
problems of ethics. The alliance which belief-in-progress and ethics
have in the course of modern times contracted with one another is
sealed by means of their world-view, and now they set to work
together. Rational ideals are to be realized.

The ethical and the optimistic come into power, therefore, in the
world-view of the eighteenth century, although they have not yet
received any real foundation. Scepticism and materialism range around
the fortress like hordes of unconquered enemies, though at first
without being dangerous; as a rule they have themselves absorbed no
small amount of belief-in-progress and of ethical enthusiasm. Voltaire
is an example of the sceptic who stands under the restraint exercised
by the prevalent optimistic and ethical thought.

So far as its elements are concerned the world-view of rationalism
hides itself under the optimistic-ethical monism [pg 091] of Kungtse
(Confucius) and the Later Stoics, but the enthusiasm which supports it
is incomparably stronger than any felt by them. The circumstances,
too, amid which it appears are far more favourable, and so it becomes
an elemental power throughout a whole people.

In a world-view which springs from a noble faith, but is remarkable
also for the extent of its knowledge, the men of the eighteenth
century begin to think out ideals of civilization and to realise them
in such measure that the greatest epoch in the history of human
civilization now dawns.

The great feature of the mentality of this belief in progress which is
ever showing itself in works is its magnificent want of respect for
all existing things, whether belonging to the past or the present.
These are to it in all their various forms the imperfect, which is
destined to be replaced by a perfect.

The eighteenth century is thoroughly unhistoric. In what is good as in
what is bad it cuts itself loose from whatever was or is, and is
confident of being able to put in its place something that is more
valuable, because more ethical or more in accordance with reason. In
this conviction the age feels itself so creative that it has no
understanding for creations of original genius. Gothic buildings,
early painting, J. S. Bach’s music, and the poetry of earlier ages,
are felt by these generations as art which was produced at a time when
taste had not yet been purified. Activity which follows rules in
accordance with right reason will, they think, introduce a new art
which will be superior in every respect to any that has preceded it.
Full of this self-confidence, a mediocre musician like Zelter in
Berlin works over the scores of Bach’s Cantatas. Full of this
self-confidence, honourable poetasters re-write the texts of the
wonderful old German chorales and replace the originals in the hymn
books with their own wretched productions.

That they so naïvely push forward right into the sphere [pg 092] of
art the boundaries of the creative faculties with which nature endowed
them is a mistake made by these men for which they have often been
laughed at. But mockery cannot do them much harm. In those departments
of life in which the important matter is the shaping of things
according to ideals given by reason—and work done upon such things
means for the establishment of civilization very much more than any
work spent in the promotion of art—they are as creative as any
generation ever has been, and as scarcely any will be in the future.
They are frightened by nothing which has to be undertaken in this
sphere, and in every department they make the most astonishing
advance.

They venture also to deal with religion. That religion should be split
up into various antagonistic confessional bodies is to them an offence
against reasonable reflexion. Only a relative, not any absolute
authority, they maintain, can be allowed to the belief which is handed
down in historical formulas. Finding expression in so many and such
varied forms it can, of course, be nothing but a more or less
imperfect embodiment of the ethical religion taught by reason, which
must be equally intelligible to all men. The right thing is,
therefore, to strive after the religion of reason, and to accept as
true only such parts of the various confessions as are in harmony with
it.

The churches, naturally, put themselves on the defensive against this
spirit, but against the strong general convictions of the age they are
unable in the long run to hold out. Protestantism succumbs first,
because the elements already within it allow such considerations to
find easy access. It carries within itself impulses to rationalism,
inherited from Humanism, from Huldreich Zwingli (1484-1531) and from
the Italians Lælius (1525-1562) and Faustus Socinus (1539-1604), and
these impulses, hitherto suppressed, now find themselves set
free._(_30_)_

[pg 093]

Catholicism shows itself more capable of resistance. Nothing in its
past makes it inclined to enlist under the banner of the spirit of the
age: its strong organization serves as a protection against this. Yet
it, too, has to yield considerably, and to allow its doctrines to
pass, so far as may be, for a symbolic expression of the religion of
reason.

While utilitarian ethics are on the whole the product of the English
spirit, the whole of Europe takes part in the expounding of the
religion of reason. Herbert of Cherbury (1582-1648), John Toland
(1669-1722), Anthony Collins (1676-1729), Matthew Tindal (1655-1733),
David Hume (1711-1776), Pierre Bayle (1647-1706), Jean-Jacques
Rousseau (1712-1778), Voltaire (1694-1778), Denis Diderot (1713-1784),
Hermann Samuel Reimarus (1694-1768), Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
(1646-1716), Christian Wolff (1679-1754), Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
(1729-1781), Moses Mendelssohn (1729-1786), and a host of others,
whether standing nearer to or further from the Church, and whether or
not going further than others in systematic criticism, all bring
stones for the erection of the great building in which the piety of
illuminated mankind is to live._(_31_)_ The researches in the history
of religion made by the Germans, like Johann Salomo Semler
(1725-1791), Johann David Michaelis (1717-1791), and Johann August
Ernesti (1707-1781), provide scientific data which throw light upon
the division between eternal truths and the time-conditioned
convictions of religion.

The creed of the religion of reason is simply the optimistic-ethical
world-view reproduced in a Christian phraseology, that is in one
preserving within it the Christian theism, and the belief in
immortality. An all-wise and wholly benevolent Creator has produced
the world, and he upholds it in [pg 094] corresponding fashion. Men
are endowed with free will, and discover in their reason and their
heart the moral law which is meant to lead individuals and mankind to
perfection, and to accomplish in the world God’s highest purposes.
Every man has within him an indestructible soul, which feels his moral
life as the highest happiness, and after death enters a state of a
pure, spiritual existence.

This belief in God, in virtue, and in immortality was held to have
been taught in its purest form in previous ages in the teaching of
Jesus, but it was acknowledged that elements of the same beliefs were
to be found in all the higher religions._(_32_)_

If the eighteenth century attained to an optimistic-ethical world-view
which preached itself so confidently and was so widely accepted, the
reason is that it was able to re-interpret Christianity—which had by
that time got rid of the world- and life-denial that was originally
inherent in it—in that sense. Jesus was to it a teacher who even in
his own age and then through all the intervening centuries had been
misunderstood, and was now first rightly accepted as a revealer of the
religion of reason. Let anyone read a rationalistic Life of Jesus,
such as those of Franz Volkmar Reinhard (1753-1812) or Karl Heinrich
Venturini (1768-1849)._(_33_)_ They hold Jesus up to admiration as the
champion of enlightenment and of blessings for the common people. This
transformation of the historical picture is made easier for them by
the fact that the chief component element of the Gospel narrative is
ethical teaching, while the late-Jewish pessimistic world-view which
it presupposes is hardly more than hinted at.

[pg 095]

As an immediate result of the wiping out of confessional differences
the middle of the eighteenth century sees the beginning of a period of
tolerance in place of the persecution of all rejecters of orthodoxy
which had been common till then. The last serious act of confessional
intolerance was expulsion of all evangelicals from the Salzburg
district by the Archbishop of that town, Count von Firmian, in the
years 1731 and 1732.

About the middle of the century there begins also the movement of
opposition to the Jesuits, who were recognized as the enemies of
tolerance, and this led to the suppression of the order in 1773 by
Pope Clement XIV._(_34_)_

But the religion of reason fought superstition as well as intolerance.
In 1704 the philosopher and jurist of Halle, Christian Thomasius
(1655-1728), published his essays condemning trial for
witchcraft,_(_35_)_ and about the middle of the century the law courts
in most of the States of Europe refused to concern themselves any
longer with the crime of magic. The last death sentence on a witch was
passed in 1782 at Glarus, in Switzerland.

About the end of the century it became good form to detest anything
which had even a remote connexion with superstitious convictions.

Again, the will-to-progress of the eighteenth century deals with
nationalist prejudices in the same way as it deals with religious
ones. Above and beyond individual nations it points to mankind as the
great object towards which ideals are to be directed. Educated people
accustom themselves to see in the State not so much an organ of
national feeling as a mere organization for legal and economic
purposes. Cabinets may carry on war with each other, but in the
thought of the common people there grows up a recognition of the
brotherhood of nations.

In the sphere of law, too, the will-to-progress acquires [pg 096]
strength. The ideas of Hugo Grotius get accepted. The law of reason is
exalted in the convictions of the men of the eighteenth century to a
position above all traditional maxims of jurisprudence. It alone is
allowed to have permanent authority, and legal decisions have to be in
harmony with it. Fundamental principles of law, but principles equally
indisputable everywhere, have to be deduced from human nature. To
protect these and to ensure to every human being a human value with an
inviolable measure of freedom of which he can never be robbed, is the
first task of the State. The proclamation of “the Rights of Man” by
the States of North America, and the French Revolution, do no more
than give recognition and sanction to what, in the convictions of the
time, had already been won.

The first State in which torture was abolished was Prussia, and this
was secured by an administrative order of Frederick the Great’s in
1740. In France a certain amount of torture was practised down to the
Revolution— and somewhat later, for the thumb-screw was used under the
Directory during the examination which the royalist conspirators had
to undergo._(_36_)_

Side by side with the fight against absence of law and the existence
of inhuman laws, go efforts to adapt law to circumstances. Bentham
raises his voice against laws which tolerate usury, against senseless
customs duties, and against inhuman methods of colonization.

There dawns an age in which the purposive and the moral are the ruling
authorities. Officialdom acquires during these generations familiarity
with the notions of duty and honour, which later become natural to it.
Far-reaching beneficial reforms are introduced into administration
without any outcry.

The education of mankind in citizenship makes splendid progress. The
general good becomes the criterion of [pg 097] excellence both for the
commands of rulers and the obedience of their subjects, while at the
same time a beginning is made of securing that everyone shall be
educated in a manner corresponding to his human dignity and the needs
of his personal welfare. The war against ignorance is begun.

The way is prepared, too, for a more rational method of living. Houses
are built so as to be more comfortable, and the land is better
cultivated. Even the pulpit uses its influence to promote improvements
of this kind. The theory that reason has been given to man to be used
consistently and in every department of life plays at this time an
important and beneficent part in the preaching of the Gospel, even if
the way in which this is done often makes queer demands on our belief.
Sermons, for example, often treated incidentally of the best methods
of manuring, irrigating, and draining the fields. That Jenner’s
discovery of vaccination was so readily adopted in many districts was
due to the enlightenment which was spread abroad by the clergy.

Characteristic of the age of rationalism are the private societies
formed to promote the moral and utilitarian progress of mankind. In
1717 members of the higher ranks of society in London reorganize as
“The Order of Freemasons” the brotherhood which in earlier times had
been built up by the union in a single body of the members of the
mediæval building-lodges, but was now in a state of decay, and to this
new organization was assigned the duty of labouring to build up a new
humanity. About the middle of the century this order had spread all
over Europe, and reached the zenith of its success. Princes,
officials, and intellectuals alike joined it in great numbers, and
were inspired by it to the achievement of a huge amount of reform.

Similar aims were pursued by the “Order of the Illuminate” (or
enlightened) which was founded in Bavaria in 1776, but was suppressed
in 1784 by the reactionary Bavarian Government, which was still under
the influence [pg 098] of the Jesuits. It is said to have been the
intellectual counterpart of the Jesuit order, on the model of whose
organization it was formed.

That private societies aiming at the rational and moral perfecting of
mankind should work effectively seemed to the men of the eighteenth
century so much a matter of course that they assumed them to have
existed in earlier times. In a series of rationalist descriptions of
the life of Jesus it is assumed that the sect of the Essenes, near the
Dead Sea, of whom we learn from Josephus, the Jewish writer of the
first century A.D., was such an order, and that it was in touch with
similar brotherhoods in Egypt and India. Jesus, it is said, was
trained by them, and then helped by them to carry through the _rôle_
of the Messiah, in order that with the authority given by a holy yet
popular personality he might work to spread true illumination. The
famous _Life of Jesus_ by Karl Venturini carries this assumption out
in complete detail. According to him, the miracles of Jesus were
staged by brothers of this secret association.

Be that as it may, the fact that the will-to-progress of the
eighteenth century created for itself in these private societies
organizations which spread throughout Europe, contributed much to its
ability to influence the age.

It must be admitted indeed that the men of the rationalistic period
were smaller than their achievements. True, they all possessed
personality, but it did not reach very deep. It was produced by the
enthusiasm which they found in the mentality of the time and which
they shared with all their contemporaries. The individual imbibed
personality through the taking over of a ready-made world-view, which
gave him firm standing-ground together with ideals. His own
contribution was really nothing more than the capacity for enthusiasm.
That is why the men of this age are so remarkably like one another.
They all graze side by side in the same nourishing pasture land.

Nevertheless, the ideas of the purposive and the ethical [pg 099] have
never exercised so much influence over reality as they did among these
men of shallow optimism and sensitive morale. No book has been written
yet which fully describes their achievements, doing justice to their
origin, their character, their number, and their significance. We can
then only really comprehend what they accomplished when we recognize
the tragic fact that the most valuable part of it is lost to us, while
we do not feel in ourselves any ability to reproduce it. They were
masters of the facts of life to an extent which we are to-day quite
unable to realize.

Only a world-view which accomplishes all that rationalism did has a
right to condemn rationalism. The greatness of that philosophy is that
its hands are blistered.

Obstacles to the reform movement. The French Revolution

The great work of reform is never completed, partly because external
circumstances arise which check it, but also because the world-view of
rationalism becomes convulsed from within. In its confidence in the
enlightening power of all that is in accordance with reason the
will-to-progress was inclined to underestimate the resisting power of
the traditional, and to wish to carry through reforms where minds had
not been sufficiently prepared for their reception. On these
unsuccessful advances followed reaction which permanently injured the
work. This was the case in south-eastern Europe. Joseph II. of
Austria, who was emperor from 1764 to 1790, is the type of the
reforming prince. He discontinued the use of torture, opposed the
infliction of the death penalty, abolished serfdom, gave the Jews full
civic rights, introduced a new method of legislation and a new system
of legal administration, took away all class privileges, contended for
the equality of all before the law, protected the oppressed, founded
schools and hospitals, guaranteed the freedom of the Press and freedom
of domicile, abolished all State monopolies, and promoted the
development of agriculture and industry.

[pg 100]

But he is a ruler in the wrong place. He decrees these reforms and
then similar shocks, one after another, in countries which, being in
spiritual things still wholly under the dominion of the Catholic
Church of that time, are not prepared for them, and moreover in other
things as well display a specially backward attitude, because they
belong to the zone in which the Europe of that day passed over into
Asia. The Emperor is therefore unable to count upon either any
willingness to make sacrifices in the classes which are to give up
their privileges, or upon any understanding of his ideas in the common
people. In his attempts to organize the monarchy as a unity and in an
effective way for practical purposes, he comes into conflict with the
nationalities themselves of which it is composed. The reduction in the
number of the religious houses, which he undertakes out of economic
considerations, with the introduction of the freedom of the Press and
of a system of State education, bring on him the hostility of the
Church. Finally, because he is a ruler in the wrong place, this noble
reforming emperor dies of a broken heart, while Europe, because the
will-to-progress in Austria can accomplish nothing even at the time of
its greatest strength, owing to unfavourable circumstances, is
condemned to a period of the deepest misery over the problems of that
huge State, which have in this way been rendered insoluble, and over
the portion of Asia beyond it along the southern Danube.

In France, too, the wrong men are in control. There the spread of the
new ideas prepares the way splendidly for reform, but the reforms are
not undertaken, because its rulers cannot understand the signs of the
times, and allow the State to collapse in ruin. Consequently the
reform movement has to take the road of violence, whereby it slips
away from the guidance of the educated, and falls into the hands of
the mob, from which it is taken by the powerful genius of Napoleon.
Native of an island in which the Europe of that day passed over into
Africa, and lacking all [pg 101] deeper education, he is uninfluenced
by the valuable convictions of his time. Guided solely by the force of
his own personality, he decides what is to happen in Europe, and hurls
it into wars through which it sinks into misery. Thus from East and
from West alike disaster overtakes the work of the will-to-progress.

The French Revolution is a snowstorm falling upon trees in blossom. A
transformation which promises great things is in progress, but
everywhere softly and slowly. Extraordinarily valuable results are
being prepared in the thoughts of men. Provided that circumstances
remain even tolerably near the normal, there stands before humanity in
Europe an extraordinarily desirable development. But in place of that
there sets in a chaotic period of history in which the
will-to-progress has to cease more or less completely from its work,
and becomes a bewildered spectator. The first stage of the advance of
reforming thought, thought bent with full consciousness of its aims on
securing the practical and the ethical, comes to a complete stop.

An experience for which it was in no wise prepared now falls to the
lot of the will-to-progress. Up to this time it had always been a more
or less obsolescent reality with which it had had to come to terms. In
the French Revolution, however, and in the following period, it
becomes familiar with a reality which has at its disposal elemental
forces. Up to this time the only factor to be reckoned with had been
the force of originality exercised by rational thought. In Napoleon it
has to learn to recognize as power a personality with creative genius
of its own.

By his reorganization of France, a magnificent work but concerned only
with the technical matters of administration, Napoleon creates a new
State. His work, too, has had the way prepared for it by the labour of
rationalism, so far as this upset the equilibrium of the old and made
current the idea of something new but necessary. But the new State
which now comes into existence is not the State [pg 102] which is
ethical and in harmony with reason, but merely the State which works
well. Its achievements compel our admiration. In the nursery garden
which the will-to-progress was laying out in order to plant it with
noble flowers an individual ploughs for himself a piece of ordinary
arable land which at once produces an excellent crop. With the
elemental creative forces of reality revealing their power in so
imposing a fashion, the noble but unoriginal spirit of the age, with
all its higher aims, finds itself in a state of instability from which
it never completely recovers. Hegel, who saw Napoleon ride past after
the Battle of Jena, tells us that he then saw the World-spirit on
horseback. In these words we can hear all the confused spiritual
experience of that time expressing itself.

The undermining of the rationalistic world-view

There now sets in a development which works against the spirit of the
times, and the hitherto unopposed authority of the rational ideal is
undermined. Forces in reality which are not guided by it, obtain
recognition.

While the will-to-progress remains an amazed spectator of events,
respect for what is historical recovers itself, though it seemed to
have been banished for ever. In religion, in art, and in law, men
begin, though at first only quite shyly, to look again with other eyes
on the traditional. It is no longer reckoned as merely something which
is to be replaced, but men venture to admit to themselves that it
conceals within itself original values. The forces of reality, which
had been taken by surprise, now begin everywhere to act on the
defensive, and a guerilla warfare develops against the
will-to-progress.

The various religious bodies revoke the abdications which they had
made before the religion of reason. The law which has grown up in the
course of time begins to set itself in opposition to the law laid down
by reason. In the atmosphere of passion produced by the Napoleonic
wars, [pg 103] national thought takes on a new character, directing on
itself, and beginning to absorb, the universal enthusiasm for ideals.
The struggles carried on no longer by chancelleries but by whole
nations are fatal to the ideals of cosmopolitanism and national
brotherhood, and by this awakening of national thought a whole series
of political problems affecting the whole of Europe are rendered
insoluble. Just as the organization of Austria as a unified modern
State has now become impossible, so also has the civilizing of Russia,
and the destiny of Europe, viz. to be shipwrecked over these
territories which are in it but not of it, begins to reveal itself.

At the close of the Napoleonic era the whole of Europe is in a
condition of misery. Far-seeing ideas of reform can be neither thought
out nor worked out; only extemporized palliative measures suit the
time. The will-to-progress is therefore unable to recover its former
vigour.

It is fatally affected, too, by the fact that everybody with any
capacity for independent thought feels himself attracted by this new
valuation of things and facts, and thereby drawn on to irritation at
the one-sided, doctrinaire character of the rationalist way of looking
at life.

Nevertheless, the position of the will-to-progress is far from being a
critical one. The first attacks are made by Romanticism and the
feeling for reality, but are mere outpost-skirmishes, and for a long
time yet the will-to-progress remains master of the field. Bentham
remains still the great authority. Alexander II. of Russia, Tsar from
1801 to 1825, instructs the legislative commission which he sets up to
obtain on all doubtful points the opinion of the great Englishman.
Madame de Staël expresses the opinion that the fateful period she has
lived through will one day be called by posterity not the Napoleonic
age but the Benthamite._(_37_)_

The noblest men of the period still live in the unshaken [pg 104]
conviction that nothing can delay the speedy and conclusive victory of
the purposive and moral. The philosophically minded mathematician and
astronomer, the Marquis Marie Jean de Condorcet (1743-1794), though
put by the Jacobins upon the list of the proscribed, writes, while
living in concealment in Paris in a dismal room in the Rue des
Fossoyeurs, his _Historical Sketch of the Progress of the Human
Spirit_._(_38_)_ Then, having been betrayed, he wanders about the
Clamart quarries, is recognized by the labourers, in spite of his
disguise, as an aristocrat, and while confined in the prison of Bourg
la Reine, puts an end to his life by poison. The document in which he
gave his exposition of the ethical belief in progress concludes with a
forward glance at the time, now soon to appear, when reason, having
attained a position of permanent sovereignty, will put every human
being in possession of the rights which belong to man as man, and will
establish purposive and ethical relations in every department of life.

There is one thing, it must be admitted, which Condorcet and those who
share his views overlook. Their belief that the final result will be
good might be considered justifiable if the will-to-progress had been
endangered only through unfavourable outward circumstances, the
revival, that is, of the higher estimation of reality, and the
romantic idealizing of the past. But it is threatened far more
seriously by something else than it is by them. The assurance
displayed by rationalism rests on the fact that it regards the
optimistic-ethical world-view as something proved to be correct. But
it is not that. It rests like the world-views of Confucius and the
Later Stoics on a naïve interpretation of the world. All deeper
thought, therefore, even if it is not directed against rationalism, or
even if it aims at strengthening its position, must in the long run
have a damaging effect upon it. Hence Kant and Spinoza mean doom to
it. Kant undermines it by his attempt to [pg 105] provide a deeper
foundation for the essence of the ethical. Spinoza, the thinker of
the seventeenth century, brings it to confusion when his
nature-philosophy begins, a hundred years after his death, to occupy
people’s attention.

It is about the beginning of the new century, the nineteenth, just
when the pressure exerted by material and spiritual circumstances
alike begins to make itself felt, that the optimistic-ethical
world-view begins to suspect the existence of the serious problems
which are cropping up within it.




[pg 106]

CHAPTER IX

THE OPTIMISTIC-ETHICAL WORLD-VIEW IN KANT


Kant’s ethics, deepened, but lacking content

SO far as the general tendency of his thought goes Immanuel Kant
(1724-1804) lives entirely in the optimistic-ethical world-view of
rationalism._(_39_)_ He has, however, a feeling that its foundations
are not deep and firm enough, and he regards it as his task to put
them on ground which is in every respect more secure. For this purpose
a deeper ethic, and a less naïve positiveness in assertions about
world-view which touch upon the supra-sensible, seem to him desirable.

Like the English intellectualists and intuitionists, Kant is offended
by the idea that the ethic in which the modern age finds satisfaction
and its impulse to activity is rooted merely in considerations of the
universal advantage of morally good actions. Like them, he feels that
it is something more than this, and that in the ultimate analysis it
has its origin in the compulsion which men experience to strive for
self-perfecting. But while his predecessors stick fast in the matter
provided by semi-scholastic philosophy and theology, he attacks the
problem along the lines of pure ethical thought. It follows for him
that the fundamental origin and the exalted character of the moral can
be preserved only if we always consciously make it an end in itself,
and never merely a means to an end. Even if moral conduct prove itself
to be always advantageous and practical, our motive to it must
nevertheless always be a [pg 107] purely inward compulsion. The
utilitarian ethic must abdicate before that of immediate and sovereign
duty. That is the meaning of the doctrine of the categorical
imperative.

The English anti-utilitarians had in common with the utilitarians the
thought that the moral law was related in its essence to empirical
natural law. Kant, however, asserts that it has nothing to do with the
order of nature, and has its origin in supra-natural impulses. He is
the first since Plato to feel, like him, that the ethical is the
mysterious fact within us. In powerful language he proves in the
_Critique of the Practical Reason_ that ethics are a volition which
raises us above ourselves, makes us free from the natural order of the
world, and attaches us to a higher world-order. That is his great
discovery.

In the development of it, however, he is not happy. Whoever asserts
the absoluteness of moral duty, must also give the moral an absolute
and completely universal content. He must specify a principle of
conduct which shows itself as absolutely binding, and as lying at the
foundations of the most varied ethical duties. If he does not succeed
in doing this, his work is only a fragment.

When Plato announces that ethics are something supra-natural and
puzzling, his world-view provides him with a basic principle of the
ethical which corresponds to these qualities, and also has a definite
content. He is in a position to define ethics as a process of becoming
pure and free from the world of sense. This, his own special ethic, he
develops in the passages where he is consistent with himself. Then,
when he cannot complete his argument without an active ethic, he has
recourse to the popular theory of virtue.

Kant, however, as a child of the modern spirit, cannot let world- and
life-denial rank as an ethic. Therefore, since he can go only a part
of the way with Plato, he sees himself faced with the confusing task
of letting a purposive, activist ethic which is directed on the
empirical world originate in impulses which are not determined by any
adaptation to the empirical.

[pg 108]

He can find no solution of the problem thus set. In the form which he
gives it it is in fact insoluble. But he never even realises that he
has arrived at the problem of finding a basic principle of the moral
which is a necessity of thought. He is content with formally
characterizing ethical duty as absolutely binding. That duty, unless a
real content is at once given to it, remains an empty concept, he is
unwilling to admit. For the exalted character of his basic principle
of the moral he pays the price of having it devoid of all content.

Beginnings of an attempt to establish a basic moral principle which
has a content are to be found in his treatise, _Prolegomena to a
Metaphysic of Morals_ (1785), and again later in _A Metaphysic of
Morals_ (1797). In the 1785 volume he arrives at the dictum: “Act in
such a way that you use every human being both in your own person and
in everyone else’s always as an end, never merely as a means.” But
instead of seeing how far the totality of ethical duties can be
developed out of this principle, he prefers in the 1797 treatise to
set before ethics two ends to be aimed at, viz. the perfecting of
oneself and the happiness of others, and to enlarge upon the virtues
which promote them.

In his investigation of the ethic which aims at personal perfecting,
he drives his gallery with sure instinct towards the recognition that
all virtues which contribute thereto must be conceived of as
manifestations of sincerity and of reverence for one’s own spiritual
being. He does not, however, go the length of comprehending these two
as a unity, just as little does he concern himself to make clear the
inner connexion between self-perfecting and effort directed to the
common good, and in that way to dig down to the roots of the ethical
as such.

How far Kant is from understanding the problem of finding a basic
moral principle which has a definite content can be seen from the fact
that he never gets beyond an utterly narrow conception of the ethical.
He persists obstinately in drawing the boundary of his ethic as close
[pg 109] as possible, making it concerned with no duties beyond those
of man to man. The relation of man to non-human existences he does not
draw within it. It is only indirectly that he includes in it the
prohibition of cruelty to animals, putting this among the duties of
man to himself. By inhuman treatment of animals, he says, sympathy
with their sufferings is blunted in us, and thereby “comes a weakening
of a natural disposition which is very helpful to our morality in
relation to other men, and it gradually dies out.”

Again as to the vandalism of the destruction of what is beautiful, in
the form, that is, of natural objects which are viewed as entirely
without feeling, this is said to be unethical only because it violates
the duty of man to himself by undermining the desire—itself a support
to morality—of having something to love without regard to utility.

If the sphere of the ethical is limited to the relations of man to
man, then all attempts to reach a basic principle of the moral with an
absolutely binding content are rendered hopeless beforehand. The
absolute demands the universal. If there really is a basic principle
for the moral, it must be concerned in some way or other with the
relations between man and life as such in all its manifestations.

Kant, then, does not essay the task of developing an ethic which
corresponds to his deepened conception of the ethical. On the whole he
does nothing more than put the current utilitarian ethic under the
Protectorate of the Categorical Imperative. Behind a magnificent
façade he constructs a block of tenements.

His influence on the ethics of his time is twofold. He furthers it by
challenging it to profounder reflection on the nature of the ethical
and the ethical destiny of man. At the same time he is a danger to it
in that he robs it of its simplicity. The strength of the ethic of the
age of reason lies in its naïve utilitarian enthusiasm. It directly
enlists men in its service by offering them good aims and objects.
Kant makes it insecure by bringing this directness in question and
calling for an ethic which is derived from much less elementary
considerations. Depth is gained at [pg 110] the cost of vitality,
because he fails to establish at the same time a basic moral principle
with a content, a principle which compels acceptance from deep and yet
elementary considerations.

Several times Kant actually makes it his object to block the natural
sources of morality. He will not, for example, allow direct sympathy
to be regarded as ethical. The inner feeling for the suffering of
another as if it were one’s own is not to count as duty in the real
sense of the word, but only as a weakness by which the evil in the
world is doubled. All help to others must have its source in a
reasoned consideration of the duty of contributing to the happiness of
others.

By taking from ethics their simplicity and directness, Kant also
loosens the connexion which they and the belief in progress had formed
with one another, and through which the two together had proved so
productive of good. The disastrous separation between them which later
on, in the course of the nineteenth century, became complete, was
partly due to him.

In consequence of his wishing to drive out the naïve rationalistic
conception of the ethical in favour of a deepened one without at the
same time being in a position to establish a basic principle of it
which has been correspondingly deepened, has a definite content of its
own, and is directly convincing, Kant brings the ethics of his time
into danger. He labours at the provision of new foundations without
remembering that the house will develop cracks, if it is not propped
up sufficiently.

Kant’s attempt to reach an ethical world-view

Kant passes by the problem of finding a basic principle of the moral
with a definite content, because, while attempting to deepen the
concept of the ethical, he pursues an object which lies outside
ethics. He wishes to bring ethical idealism into connexion with an
idealistic representation of the world which has its source in a
theory of knowledge. But [pg 111] from that source he hopes there will
come an ethical world-view able to satisfy critical thought.

Why has Kant with a rigorism which intentionally depreciates ordinary
moral experience ventured forward to the discovery that the moral law
has nothing to do with the natural world-order, but is something
super-sensible? Because he refuses, similarly, to let the sensible
world which is experienced by us in space and time be accepted as
anything more than a manifestation of something nonsensible which
makes up true reality. The concept of a moral which contains none but
inward and spiritual duties is for him the expanding ladder which he
draws out so as to reach by means of it the region of Being in itself.
He has no feeling of dizziness when in company with ethics, he mounts
above all empirical experience and all empirical aims and objects. He
is determined to go right up with her, and she can never be
sufficiently _a priori_ for him, because he sets up another ladder of
the same length, that of epistemological idealism, and tries to lean
one against the other, so that they may give each other mutual
support.

How does it come about that the theoretical assumption that the world
of sensible phenomena has a non-sensible world of Being lying behind
it, has any importance for world-view? Because within the notion of
absolute duty which man experiences at work within himself there lies
a fact of the world-order of that same non-sensible world. Hence
arises the possibility, so Kant thinks, of raising to certainty by
means of ethics those great elements in the non-sensible world which
are of value for the optimistic-ethical world-view, viz. the ideas of
God, of the ethical freedom of the will, and of immortality, which
otherwise would always remain merely problematical.

So far as rationalism affirms unhesitatingly from the standpoint of
theoretical knowledge the ideas of God, of the ethical freedom of the
will (_i.e._, of virtue), and of immortality, which make up its
optimistic-ethical world-view, it builds upon a foundation which
cannot bear the weight of critical thought. Kant wishes, therefore, to
erect the [pg 112] optimistic-ethical world-view as a lake-dwelling
upon piles rammed into place by ethics. These three ideas are to be
able to claim real existence for themselves as necessary postulates of
the ethical consciousness.

This plan, however, of thus securing the position of the
optimistic-ethical world-view cannot be carried out. It is only the
idea of the ethical freedom of the will that can be made a postulate
of the moral consciousness. To establish the ideas of God and
immortality as equally “postulates,” Kant has to abandon all
honourable logic and argue with bold and ever bolder sophisms.

There is no way of uniting epistemological and ethical idealism,
however enticing the undertaking looks at first sight. When they are
set side by side, the happenings which take place according to a law
of causation subordinate to freedom, and become conscious in man
through the moral law, become identified with the happenings which are
universal in the world of things in themselves. There ensues a
disastrous confusion of the ethical with the intellectual. If the
sensible world is only a manifestation of an immaterial world, then
all the happenings which come about in the space and time sphere of
causation produced by necessity are only parallel appearances of the
events which are brought about in the intellectual sphere of causation
produced by freedom. All happenings, therefore, human activity just as
much as natural happening, are, according to the point of view, at
once intellectual and free, and at once natural and necessary. If
ethical activity produced by freedom is represented as analogous with
the results of epistemological idealism, then either everything that
happens in the world, conceived as intellectual happening, is ethical,
or there is no such thing as an ethical happening. Because it has
chosen to put side by side these two things, human activity and
natural happening, Kant’s way of looking at the question has to
renounce all ability to maintain the difference between them. But the
very life of ethics depends on this difference being there and
effective.

[pg 113]

Epistemological idealism is a dangerous companion for the ethical. The
world-order of immaterial happening has a supra-ethical character.
From the setting side by side of ethical and epistemological idealism
there can never result an ethical world-view: it will always be a
supra-ethical one.

From epistemological idealism, therefore, ethics have nothing to
expect, but everything to fear. By its depreciation of the reality of
the empirical world the ethical world-view is not helped: it is
injured.

Ethics have materialist instincts. They want to concern themselves
with empirical happenings and transform the circumstances of the
empirical world. But if that world is only “appearance,” derived from
an intellectual world which functions within it or behind it, ethics
have nothing on which to act. To wish to influence a self-determined
play of appearances has no sense. Ethics can therefore allow validity
to the view that the empirical world is mere appearance only with the
limitation that activity exerted upon the appearance does at the same
time influence the reality lying behind it. But thereby they come into
conflict with all epistemological idealism.

Kant is defeated by the same fate which rules in Stoic, Indian, and
Chinese monism alike. As soon as thought tries in any way to
comprehend ethics in connexion with the world-process, it falls at
once, whether it is conscious of it or not, into the supra-ethical
manner of regarding it. Fully to shape ethics to an ethical world-view
means letting them come to terms with nature-philosophy. Ethics are
thereupon, as a matter of fact, devoured in one way or another by that
philosophy, even if they are in word saved from that fate. The
coupling of ethical idealism with epistemological is only bringing
ethics and nature-philosophy into relation with one another in a
roundabout way by which it is hoped to outwit the logic of facts. But
this logic cannot be outwitted. The tragical result lies in the
identification which has been made of the ethical with the
intellectual.

[pg 114]

The ethical is not something irrational which becomes explicable when
we betake ourselves from the world of appearance to the region of
immaterial Being that lies behind it. Its intellectual character is of
a peculiar kind, and rests upon the fact that the world-process, as
such, comes in man into contradiction with itself. It follows that the
ethical will and ethical freedom of the will are not explicable by any
theory of knowledge, and cannot, moreover, serve as a support to any
such theory.

As a result of conceiving the moral law and empirical obedience to
natural law as in absolute opposition to each other, Kant finds
himself on the road which leads to a dualistic world-view. Afterwards,
however, in order to satisfy the claims of the unitary and optimistic
world-view which the spirit of the age prescribes to him, he manages
with the stratagems which are provided for him by the combination of
ethical and epistemological idealism, to work himself back on to the
road which leads to the monistic point of view.

Kant is great as an ethical thinker, great too with his theory of
knowledge, but as shaper of a world-view he is not in the first rank.
By his deepened conception of the nature of the ethical, a conception
which lands him in dualistic thought, the problem of the
optimistic-ethical world-view is unfolded in an entirely new way.
Difficulties reveal themselves which till then no one could have
imagined to exist. But he does not deal with them. He is blinded by
his ambition to be the Copernicus of the optimistic-ethical
world-view, believing that he can show the difficulties inherent in
that view to be misunderstandings which explain themselves away as
soon as, by means of his epistemological idealism, actual
circumstances and relations take the place of these which are apparent
but inexplicable. In reality he does nothing but replace the naïve
optimistic-ethical interpretation of the world which was the basis of
action for the rationalists by an artfully contrived one.

He does not take the trouble to ask in what the optimistic [pg 115]
ethical world-view consists, to what final items of knowledge and
demands it leads, and how far these are confirmed by experience of the
moral law. He takes it over without examination in the formula: “God,
Freedom (or Virtue), and Immortality,” which was supplied to it by
rationalism, and wishes to raise it in this naïve form to a certainty.

There is thus in Kant’s philosophy the most terrible want of thought
interwoven with the deepest thinking. New truths, weighty in their
novelty, make their appearance in it. But they get only half-way on
their journey. The absoluteness of ethical duty is grasped, but its
content is not investigated. Experience of the ethical is recognized
as the great secret by means of which we comprehend ourselves as
“other than the world”; but the dualistic thinking which goes with it
is not worked out any further. That the final items of our knowledge
of our world-view are assertions of the ethical will is admitted, but
the consequences of this supremacy of the will over knowledge are not
thought out to a conclusion.

Kant stimulates powerfully the men of his time, but is unable to make
secure for them the optimistic-ethical world-view in which they have
lived. His mission is, although both he and they are content to
deceive themselves in the matter, to deepen it, and ... to let it
become less secure than before.




[pg 116]

CHAPTER X

NATURE-PHILOSOPHY AND WORLD-VIEW IN
SPINOZA AND LEIBNIZ


Spinoza’s attempt to reach an optimistic-ethical nature-philosophy

JUST when Kant is beginning to influence men’s minds, the entirely
different ideas of a thinker who had now been dead for a century,
Baruch Spinoza (1632-1677),_(_40_)_ begin to interest those who are
searching for a world-view. The _Critique of Pure Reason_ appears in
1781. In 1785 F. H. Jacobi in his letters addressed to Moses
Mendelssohn, _Concerning the Teaching of Spinoza_, draws attention
once more to the philosopher whom hitherto everyone had attacked
without making any effort to understand him.

Spinoza desires to obtain an ethic from a real nature-philosophy. He
makes no attempt to give an optimistic-ethical interpretation of the
universe, or to refashion it with any theory of knowledge. He accepts
it just as it is in every respect. His philosophy is therefore
elementary nature-philosophy, but his method of expounding it is by no
means elementary. Acquiescing in the way Descartes puts the problem
and the language he uses, he makes his own thought about the universe
proceed “in geometrical fashion” in a series of axioms, definitions,
precepts, and proofs. Nature-philosophy is embodied in his
philosophizing in a magnificent way, but it is as stiff as an
ice-bound landscape.

His chief work—published after his death, because he could not venture
to publish it himself—he entitles _Ethics_. The [pg 117] title is
confusing, because the nature-philosophy in it is developed almost as
completely as the ethics. It is only when the reader has shaken
himself free of all naïve conceptions in his thought about the
universe that he can be permitted, according to Spinoza, to begin upon
ethics. The fact that ethics too are broken up into precepts which are
given as proved is very prejudicial to their exposition.

In his attempt to found ethics upon nature-philosophy, Spinoza
proceeds as follows. Everything that exists, he says, is given in that
infinite Being, which may be called either God or Nature. For us, and
to us, it presents itself in two forms: as thought (spirit) and as
corporeity (matter). Within this divine nature everything, human
activity included, is determined by necessity. There is no such thing
as doing, there are only happenings. The meaning of human life,
therefore, cannot consist in action, but only in coming to an ever
clearer understanding of man’s relation to the universe. Man becomes
happy when besides belonging to the universe naturally, he also
surrenders himself to it consciously and willingly, and loses himself
spiritually within it.

Spinoza demands therefore a higher experience of life. With the Stoics
and the thinkers of India and China, he belongs to the great family of
the monistic and pantheistic nature-philosophers. Like them, he
conceives of God merely as the sum-total of nature, and accepts as
valid only the notion of God which makes him in this way an
independent unity. The attempts, made in the interests of the ethical
world-view, to allow God to be at the same time an ethical personality
standing outside the universe, are to him an offence against thought.
Their only object is, of course, to obtain with the help of a
confessed or unconfessed dualism a starting-point for an
optimistic-ethical world-view. They are striving to reach along
naïve-religious by-roads the goal for which the rationalistic
optimistic-ethical interpretation of the universe is making along the
direct, but not less naïve, main-road.

[pg 118]

The tragic result of monistic thinking in the Stoic, the Indian, and
the Chinese philosophies is that nature-philosophy, when consistent,
arrives only at resignation, not at ethics. Has Spinoza escaped this
fate?

Like Lao-tse, Chwang-tse, Lie-tse, and the Chinese thinkers as a body,
Spinoza champions an optimistic monism without suspecting that under a
far-away heaven and in a far-off age, he had such great
predecessors._(_41_)_ His resignation is of a world- and
life-affirming character. He conceives of infinite Being not as
something devoid of qualities, as the Indians do, but as life with a
full content. The self-perfecting, therefore, for which man is to
strive is not for him, as it is for them, in any way an anticipation
of a state of death, but a living out of life which is guided by deep
reflexion. An elegantly egoistic world- and life-affirmation speaks
through him, as through Chwang-tse.

The efforts of the man who refuses to deceive himself about himself
are not directed, therefore, to any sort of action which is recognized
as serviceable, but are concerned with maintaining his own Being and
giving it the fullest possible experience of life. Whatever good he
does to others he never does for their sakes, but always for his own.

Spinoza rejects the achievement of modern ethics as influenced by
Christianity, viz. the regarding of altruism as something that belongs
to the essence of ethics, and confines himself to the thought that in
the last resort all ethical action aims at our own interests, though
it may be at our highest spiritual ones. In order to avoid thinking
anything which is not a necessity of thought, he goes back of his own
free will into the captivity in which ancient ethics lived.

If he could let himself go, he would, like Chwang-tse, conduct a
campaign against the morality of love and duty. But since he already
has as thoroughgoing opponents the [pg 119] authorities, the
theologians, whether Jewish or Christian, and almost every
philosopher, he has to speak cautiously and offer mankind without
attracting notice the life-view which advocates profound and thinking
egoism.

Just as God, the totality of universal Being, acts not with any aim or
object but from an inner necessity, so also does the man who has
attained to insight. He does only what contributes to complete
experience of life, nothing else. Virtue is capacity for
self-maintenance at the highest level, and this self-maintenance is
attained to when reason is the highest motive to action, and efforts
after knowledge and freedom from passion take possession of the man
and make him free, that is, allow his conduct to be determined by
himself alone and on purely inward grounds. The ordinary man is
unstable, moved hither and thither in all sorts of ways by outward
causes, with no idea of his future fortune or his final fate, like a
ship that is tossed about, now here, now there, on a stormy sea.
Ethics, therefore, consists in living our life more in the form and
fashion given it by thought than in bodily actuality.

Acting, therefore, with a deep, enlightened egoism and purely from
intellectual impulses, a man behaves nobly in every relation of life.
He strives to requite hatred, indignation, and contempt with love and
noble feeling, because he knows that hatred causes him discomfort. He
seeks at any price to create around him an atmosphere of peace. He
never acts deceitfully, but always straightforwardly. He has no need
to feel sympathy. Since he lives entirely under the guidance of
reason, he does good whenever the opportunity offers, on principle,
and therefore does not need to be roused to noble feeling by any
experience of discomfort. In fact he avoids sympathy. Again and again
he makes it clear to himself that everything that happens is brought
about by some necessity in the divine nature and in obedience to
eternal laws. Just as he finds nothing in the world which deserves
hatred, mockery, and contempt, so he finds in it nothing to evoke
sympathy. [pg 120] Man must be ever striving to be virtuous and happy,
and if he is conscious of having done good within the limits of what
is commanded him, he can with an easy mind leave his fellow-men and
the world to their fate. Beyond the possibilities of his own immediate
activities he need have nothing to do with them.

The wise man who practises the higher life-affirmation possesses
power. He has power over himself, power over his fellow-men, and power
over circumstances. How very similar is the tone of Spinoza’s thought
to that of Lao-tse, Chwang-tse, and Lie-tse!

Spinoza lives out his own ethic. In contented independence he passes
his life, till consumption brings it to an early close. He declines an
invitation to be lecturer in philosophy at Heidelberg University. He
is strict with himself, but his resignation is lighted up by a mild
trait of considered humanity and friendliness. The persecutions to
which he is exposed fail to embitter him.

Intent though he is on thinking only in accordance with pure
nature-philosophy, Spinoza does not concern himself so exclusively
with the two natural entities, nature herself and the individual man,
as do many of his Chinese predecessors, but maintains an interest in
organized society. He is convinced that it betokens progress when men
change, from the “natural” stage of society to the “civic.” Being
formed for living with his fellows, man is freer if he settles by
general agreement what belongs to each, and what the relations are to
be between himself and society. The State must, therefore, have power
to issue general orders as to how people are to live, and to secure
respect for its laws by means of penalties.

A real devotion of oneself to the common weal appears, however, to
Spinoza not to be called for. According to him the perfect human
society appears of itself just in proportion as its individual members
live according to reason. In contrast, therefore, to his contemporary,
Hobbes, Spinoza looks for the progress of society not to the [pg 121]
measures taken by the authorities, but to a growth towards perfection
in the dispositions of their subjects. The State is to educate its
citizens not to submissiveness, but to the right use of freedom. In no
way must it do any injury to their sincerity, and it must therefore
tolerate all religious views.

Far as Spinoza goes to meet the spirit of the age, there is one point
on which he cannot agree with it, viz. that there are ethical aims and
objects, aims and objects practical and purposive, to be realized in
the world.

Advancing far ahead of his contemporaries, he reaches a universal
notion of ethics, and recognizes that from the standpoint of
consistent thinking, every ethical relation is nothing but an
expression of the relation of the individual to the universe. When,
however, ethics have in this way become universal, they are faced by
the question how the relation of the individual to the universe is
conceivable as producing an effect upon the universe. On the answer to
this question it depends whether a real activist ethic can be
established, or whether the ethical is only so far present as
resignation can be explained as ethical.

That is the reef which threatens danger to all nature-philosophy, and
whenever a thinker imagines that with clever seamanship and a
favourable wind he can sail round it without coming to grief upon it,
he is nevertheless finally driven upon it, as by submarine currents,
and suffers the same fate as his predecessors. Like Lao-tse and
Chwang-tse, like the Indians, the Stoics, and all self-consistent
thinkers before him, Spinoza is unable to furnish what ethics demand,
viz. that the relation of man to the universe shall be conceived of as
not merely a spiritual relation, but as active devotion to it in the
world of sense. The opponents of this solitary thinker are
instinctively conscious that with the re-establishment of an
independent nature-philosophy there appears something which means
danger to the optimism and the ethics of their world-view. Hence [pg
122] we find in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries everyone
uniting to suppress Spinoza’s philosophy.

It is on behalf of optimism that the age is most troubled. The
terrible earthquake which in 1755 destroyed Lisbon, sets the mass of
men asking whether the world is really ruled by a wise and kindly
Creator. Voltaire, Kant, and many other thinkers of the age seize on
the occurrence as a topic for discussion, partly confessing their
perplexity, partly seeking new ways out of the difficulty for their
optimism.

Leibniz’s optimistic-ethical world-view side by side with
nature-philosophy

How little optimism and ethics have to expect from a real
nature-philosophy is shown not only in Spinoza, but also in Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716)._(_42_)_ In his _Theodicée_ (1710) he
tries to be fair to the optimistic world-view. He is helped in this by
the fact that his nature-philosophy is much more living and adaptable
than Spinoza’s. He is also determined to employ every possible device
to attach an optimistic meaning to reality. He nevertheless gets no
further than a laborious establishment of the conclusion that the
actually existing world is the best of all possible ones.

Moreover, so much of optimism as he rescues is useless for his
world-view because it contains no energies which can be directed to
ethical action upon the world. When he is consistent with himself he
remains, like Spinoza, a prisoner within nature-philosophy. All the
difficulties for ethics which Spinoza’s deterministic
nature-philosophy contains within itself, are to be found also in his.
Owing to the fact that he does not put the union of thought (spirit)
and extension (matter) far away in the Absolute, but allows it to be
realized in countless tiny individualities [pg 123] which in their
totality constitute the universe—he calls them monads—his
nature-philosophy corresponds to the multiform character of reality
much better than Spinoza’s does. He anticipates to a considerable
extent the modern nature-philosophy which is based on the cell-theory
of matter. Yet he, too, remains under the spell of the way the problem
is put by Descartes. He does not allow the individualities in which
thought and extension are united, to enter into living relations with
each other, but limits their existence to being merely forces with
powers of conception. Their being consists in being conscious of the
universe, more clearly some, more confusedly others, but each
independent of the rest.

In Spinoza there is a possibility of reaching an ethic, inasmuch as an
attempt can be made to give an ethical interpretation to the mystical
relation between man and the Absolute. Leibniz bars this path against
himself in that he does not recognize such an abstract Absolute as the
content of the universe. It is, therefore, not the result of chance
that he nowhere philosophizes searchingly about ethics. In no way can
an ethic be deduced from his nature-philosophy.

Instead of admitting to himself this result and unfolding the problem
of the relation between ethics and nature-philosophy, he weaves into
his philosophy traditional dicta about ethics, and defines the Good as
love to God and man.

In nature-philosophy Leibniz is greater than Spinoza, because he deals
with living reality more thoroughly than the latter does. In the
struggle for a correct world-view, however, he is far behind him,
because Spinoza, a man with a simpler mental endowment than his,
recognizes the reconciliation of ethics and nature-philosophy as the
central problem of world-view, and proceeds to deal with it.

If Leibniz had remained consistent, he would have ended in atheism, as
does the Indian Samkhya philosophy, which similarly makes the world
consist of a multiplicity of [pg 124] eternal individualities. Instead
of that, he introduces into his nature-philosophy, in order to rescue
for himself a satisfactory world-view, a theistic notion of God, and
by giving it an optimistic, ethical, and theistic expression, he makes
it acceptable to the eighteenth century. His philosophy, popularized
till it is almost unrecognizable by Christian Wolff (1679-1754), helps
to lay the foundations of German rationalism.

But in spite of the treason of which he is thus, though with the best
intentions, guilty against nature-philosophy, Leibniz cannot undo the
fact that thinking on nature-philosophy lines awoke at that time to
activity through him. Without wishing it, he too contributes to making
Spinoza an influence.

But to let oneself be mixed up with nature-philosophy is for the
spirit of the time to step into the dangerous unknown. It therefore
resists as long as possible. At last, however, since Kant and Spinoza
together are undermining the optimistic-ethical world-view of
rationalism which has been built upon the real world and so
conveniently fitted up, it has to make up its mind to rebuild, and
attempt the process of arriving at a conception of optimism and ethics
by direct thinking on the essential nature of the world. For the
carrying out of this undertaking the German speculative philosophy
offers its services.




[pg 125]

CHAPTER XI

J. G. FICHTE’S OPTIMISTIC-ETHICAL WORLD-VIEW


Speculative philosophy and Gnosticism

THE vision of an optimistic-ethical philosophy cast in one mould
hovers in front of speculative philosophy, which hopes to discover the
meaning of the world by the most direct route. It will have nothing to
do with analysing the phenomena of the universe in order to deduce its
nature from them. It proceeds deductively, not inductively. In pure
abstract thinking it hopes to learn for itself how the real world has
evolved out of the notion of Being. It is imaginative
nature-philosophy in a logical dress.

The right to deal with the world in this fashion is derived by
speculative thought from the results of the theory of knowledge,
according to which the world as we observe it is more or less our own
representation of it. We have, somehow or other, a creative share in
its coming into existence. It follows that the logic which is the rule
with the finite ego is to be conceived as an emanation of that which
holds good with the Absolute. The individual is therefore entitled to
disclose in his own thinking the motives and the process of the
emanation of the empirical world out of the notion of Being.
Speculation, or in other words constructive logic, is the key to the
secret door into knowledge of the world.

Generically, speculative German philosophy is essentially related to
the Græco-Oriental Gnosticism, which in the first centuries of the
Christian era advances its views concerning the emergence of the
sensible world from the world of pure Being._(_43_)_ The Gnostic
systems aim at establishing a world-view [pg 126] of redemption. They
concentrate on the question how the spiritual individualities which
find themselves in the material world came there, and how they can
return from it into the world of pure Being. Speculative German
philosophy on the other hand tries to obtain such a knowledge of the
world as shall give a meaning to the activities of the spiritual
individualities in the world. Speculative thinking at the beginning of
the Christian era is dualistic and pessimistic; that at the beginning
of the nineteenth is monistic and optimistic. In both cases, however,
the method of obtaining the world-view is the same.

Among the representatives of the speculative philosophy the most
eminent are: Johann Gottlieb Fichte (1762-1814), Friedrich Wilhelm
Joseph Schelling (1775-1854), and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
(1770-1831). It is only Fichte and Hegel, however, who produce
world-views with a characteristic stamp of their own. Schelling gets
no further than a nature-philosophy, and stands almost completely
aside from the struggle for an optimistic-ethical world-view with
which his age is occupied. Kept in a perpetual state of flux, his
thinking makes use of all possible starting-points one after another
and is now more concerned with natural science, now more akin to
Spinoza’s thought, and now to Christian. He never makes a definite,
conscious attempt to found an ethic.

Fichte’s speculative founding of an ethic and of optimism

Fichte begins as the antipodes of Spinoza._(_44_)_ He aims at
extracting from the universe a confession that it is a purely [pg 127]
optimistic ethical one, by thinking Kant’s thoughts out to a
conclusion.

Kant, according to him, made the mistake of not bringing his two
discoveries, viz. epistemological idealism and the ethic of the
categorical imperative into that inward connexion with one another in
which they really stand.

What is the meaning of the fact that the moral law and the sensible
world both become actual in me? That is the starting-point of Fichte’s
philosophizing.

Through the categorical imperative I experience that my particular ego
is a self-determined will to activity. Correspondingly, every “thing
in itself” which I assume to exist behind phenomena as the real on
which they are based, is similarly a self-determined will to activity.
The essential nature of infinite Being also can consist of nothing
else. The universe is, therefore, the phenomenal form of an infinite,
self-determined will to activity.

Why does the absolute Ego appear as a phenomenon in a sensible world?
Why is Being revealed as Becoming? If I understand this, I have
comprehended the meaning of the world and of my own life.

Now the absolute Ego, because it is infinite will to activity cannot
persist in being merely an Ego. It establishes a non-Ego to be a limit
to itself in order that it may again and again overcome it, and
thereby become conscious of itself as will to activity. This
proceeding takes place amid the multiplicity of finite rational
beings. In their power of intuition the sensible world becomes actual,
and in their overcoming of it they recognize a duty which makes itself
mysteriously felt within them and unites them with the world-spirit.
This is the meaning of the philosophy of the identity of Ego and
non-Ego.

It is not only, then, that the world exists merely in my mental
creation of it: it is, further, only produced in me in order that I
may have something on which my will to fulfilment of duty can exercise
itself. The phenomena of becoming and disappearing which I project out
of myself [pg 128] exist only that I may through them comprehend
myself as an ethical being. In this way epistemological idealism and
the categorical imperative, when they act together and one climbs on
the shoulders of the other, can look behind the curtain which hides
the secret of the world.

Kant protests against the idea that Fichte’s system is to be
considered the completion of his philosophy. As a matter of fact,
however, Fichte does with ingenious art continue the lines which were
begun in the _Critique of Pure Reason_ and the _Critique of the
Practical Reason_, and think out the ideas of the philosopher of
Königsberg to a self-contained world- and life-affirming ethical
world-view. He presents them in a generally intelligible form in _The
Destiny of Man_, published in 1800. This book is one of the most
powerful documents produced by the struggle for an ethical world-view.

Fichte gives a content to the abstract, absolute duty of Kant, making
it consist in this, that man, as the instrument of the ever-active
absolute Ego, assigns to himself the destiny of working with the
latter “to bring the whole sensible world under the sovereignty of
reason.”

Since his fundamental moral principle possesses a content, Fichte is
able to deduce particular demands from it, but that content is so
general and vague that the code of duty which is drawn out from it has
but little vital force. Nothing can really be got out of this
fundamental principle beyond the demand that man shall in every
situation of life fulfil the duties which from time to time fall to
him as a result of his destiny of having to help forward the
sovereignty of reason over nature. Fichte therefore distinguishes the
general duties which man, as such, has to fulfil, and the special ones
which are incumbent on him according to his natural gifts, his social
position, and his profession. The latter are emphasized as specially
important.

By defining ethics as activity which aims at subjecting the sensible
world to reason, Fichte gives a cosmic formulation to the utilitarian
ethic of rationalism, and thus [pg 129] produces a comprehensive and
deep foundation for the ethical enthusiasm which was a discovery of
his time. In this matter also he carries through something which
hovered before the mind of Kant.

Thereby he opposes the representatives of the popular philosophy of
the Illumination, and in a polemical pamphlet he criticizes very
severely Christoph Friedrich Nicolai. At bottom, however, the only
reproach he can level at them is that they wish to go on housing
ethics and belief in progress in the naïve world-view arrived at by
the healthy human reason instead of accepting both of them from the
world-view produced by the union of epistemological idealism and the
categorical imperative. To persist in imperfect rationalism when the
perfect has been made a reality by Kant and himself is, in his
opinion, a crime against truth. To him the beginning of wisdom is
insight into the paradox that “consciousness of the world of actuality
springs from our need of action and not, _vice versâ_, our need of
action from our consciousness of the world.”

The spirit of Fichte’s world-view, then, is completely that of
rationalism, only that it believes it has found itself at home with
him in the real nature of Being, and now comes forward with still
stronger conviction and a still more burning enthusiasm. In Fichte’s
writings, men are positively driven with the lash to work for the
improvement of the world. With impressive pathos he teaches them to
obey the inner voice which urges them on to activity, and indicates to
them their definite duty whatever may be the special circumstances of
their existence, and to recognize in so doing that they are thus
fulfilling the highest, and indeed the only destiny of their lives.

It is as the result of this inner urge to activity that we long for a
better world than the one which we see around us, and belief in that
better world is the food by which we live. Fichte makes confession of
unbounded optimism. “All those outbreaks of untamed force before which
human power is annihilated, those devastating hurricanes, [pg 130]
those earthquakes, those volcanic eruptions, can be nothing else than
the last wrestlings of the wild mass of nature against the uniformly
progressive, purposive, and life-promoting course to which, in
opposition to its own tendencies, it is being compelled.” . . .
“Nature is to become to us more and more transparent and capable of
examination even to its innermost secret, and enlightened human power,
armed with its own inventions, is destined to master it without
trouble, and then to exploit peacefully its once for all made
conquest.”_(_45_)_ Here Fichte gives us the triumphant pagan of the
belief in progress which the spirit of the modern age, that lives on
the achievements of its knowledge and power, has been composing since
the Renaissance. He is as thoroughly convinced as the staunchest
rationalist that nature is the buffalo which has remained refractory
so long, but will at last be brought beneath the yoke.

That mankind will perfect itself and reach a condition of unbroken
peace, is to him as certain as the perfection that nature will one day
arrive at. At present, it is true, we are in a period of arrested
progress with temporary setbacks, but when this is past, and all
useful things which have been discovered at one end of the world, get
known to and distributed to all, then mankind, using its powers in
complete co-operation and marching forward in step, will raise itself
uninterruptedly, without arrest of progress or setback, to a culture
of which we can form no conception.

To the State Fichte assigns in his early writings a not very important
_rôle_, but in his later ones a great one. In _The Foundations of the
Law of Nature_ (_Grundlage des Naturrechts_) (1796), it is for him
only the maintainer of law and order. In his work _The Complete
Commercial State_ (_Der geschlossene Handelsstaat_), which appeared in
1800, he allows it to organize industry and to take over social
duties. In his _Addresses to the German Nation_ (_Reden an die
deutsche Nation_, 1808), he makes it a moral educator and a protector
of the virtue of humanity.

[pg 131]

The man who, with the help of epistemological idealism, has made his
way through to the higher rationalism, is safe from losing his
optimism, even though he goes through the cruellest experiences. He
has grasped the fact that the sensible world is only the limit which
the infinitely active will has created on purpose to be overcome. This
lends him inward independence in the face of all happenings. He has no
need to understand them individually. He can let a large proportion of
them be put aside as puzzling to his finite spirit. What is essential
he knows: viz. that what is real in the world is not matter, but
spirit only.

Partaking of the eternally active spirit, man is raised above the
world, and is eternal. The sufferings he meets with afflict nature
only “with which he is connected in a marvellous way,” but not
himself, the being who is exalted above the whole of nature. Of death
he has no fear. He does not die to himself, but merely to those who
survive him. . . . “All death in nature is birth. . . . Nature is
throughout nothing but life. It is not death which kills, but the
living life which, concealed behind the old one, now begins and
proceeds to develop. Death and birth are nothing but the struggle of
life with itself in an effort to reveal itself more and more clearly
and more and more like its real self.” It is in similar words that the
Chinese monist, Chwang-tse, announces that life is eternal and the
dying of an individual only means that one existence is being re-cast
to form another. .

Fichte’s mysticism of activity incapable of being carried through

Fichte’s philosophy of absolute activity is the expression of his own
strong ethical personality, which with impetuosity and self-sacrifice
takes problems in hand, and uses itself up in the strain involved. But
even he is unable to make a genuine combination of epistemological
idealism and ethical so as to produce an ethical world-view which is a
[pg 132] necessity of thought. The impossibility of the undertaking
reveals itself everywhere.

In order to conceive ethics as a part of the normal course of
world-happenings, Fichte, like all others who make the same attempt,
gives up as hopeless any differentiation between human action and
world-happenings. The world-spirit’s impulse to activity, he says,
experiences itself in man as will to ethical action. But, indeed, the
whole world is filled with this will to activity which is for ever
surging against the limitations it has set up for itself. Everything
that happens is only an expression of it. What difference, then, is
there between natural happenings and ethical? Between activity in
itself and ethical activity? Purposive activity directed with
knowledge and intention to the subjection of the sensible world to
reason is ethical, decides Fichte. But what does that mean, when
closely examined? It means that the finite spirit becomes moral by
entering into and taking seriously the play of the infinite spirit
which aims at overcoming its own self-created limitations. Looking in
this way at Fichte’s thought, we see clearly that with the world-view
which results from the combination of ethical and epistemological
idealism, ethics have no longer any meaning.

Again, what is the meaning of “bringing the whole of the sensible
world under the sovereignty of reason”? This conception of the ethical
is not only too wide, but fantastic also. To a limited extent man is
able to harness the forces of nature for his service, and with a
little stretching of language he can, with Fichte, describe such
action as not purposive merely, but also in the widest sense ethical.
Upon this terrestrial globe he has some “influence,” but upon the
world none. That he gives names to the mighty heavenly bodies and can
calculate the orbits of many of them, cannot mean that he brings them
under the sovereignty of reason. Upon deep-sea life, too, he exercises
no other influence than catching specimens of it and giving them
names.

That he may be able to assert that there is such a thing [pg 133] as
an ethical purpose in the world, Fichte falsifies the world’s birth
certificate, and gives it the categorical imperative for father and
epistemological idealism for mother. But this is of no use. The
ethical purpose thus produced cannot satisfy ethical thought.

By conceiving the infinite spirit, in which the finite spirit has a
share, as will to activity, Fichte tries to make possible a world-view
of ethical world- and life-affirmation. In reality, however, this
takes him no further than a more emphatic world- and life-affirmation,
into which, with the help of speculative thought, he smuggles the idea
of duty, thereupon proclaiming it to be ethical. It fares with him
just as with the Chinese philosophers, who similarly exert themselves
in vain to produce an ethic out of world- and life-affirmation.

Absorption in the Absolute by means of action is, as Fichte thinks,
something prodigious, but, just like its counterpart, absorption in
the Absolute which is effected by an act of thought, it is not ethical
but supra-ethical. The element which is needed by the mysticism of
absorption in the Absolute to make it ethical cannot be secured either
by enhancing or by depreciating the will to activity.

Fichte’s mysticism of activity in which man lets loose his energy in
the world is related to the ethic of deed, just as Spinoza’s mysticism
of knowledge in which man is absorbed in the world is related to that
of self-perfecting, but it is only very incompletely that either can
develop itself into a real ethic.

The absorption in the Absolute which comes into actuality in an act of
thought lies nearer to nature-philosophy than that which completes
itself in an active deed. The Brahmans, the Buddha, Lao-tse,
Chwang-tse, Spinoza, and the mystics of every age, have experienced
the becoming one with the Absolute as a coming-to-rest in it. Fichte’s
mysticism of activity lies more in the path of dualistic thinking than
in that of real nature-philosophy. It is something which has been
extorted by enthusiasm, but Fichte [pg 134] is devoted to it, and
rightly, because he has a feeling that the interests of an active
ethic are better guarded by it than by the other. Since, however, he
thus once and for all decides for a nature-philosophy, he comes,
dominated though he is by the ideal of an active ethic, more and more
to the natural quietist consequences of a nature-philosophy. He goes
through a process of evolution which brings him nearer to Spinoza’s
world-view. In his _Instruction Concerning the Blessed Life_, which
appeared in 1806, six years later than _The Destiny of Man_, it is to
him no longer the ethical which in itself is the highest, but the
religious. The ultimate meaning of life, as he now recognizes, is not
to act in God, but to be merged in Him. “Self-annihilation is the
gateway into the higher life.”

He believes, indeed, that he is thereby merely deepening his
world-view without diminishing its ethical energy, and he remains
himself, right to the end, the fiery spirit which consumes itself in
activity for promoting the progress of the world. But his thought has
bent under the weight of nature-philosophy. Without clearly admitting
it to himself, he recognizes that out of nature-philosophy there can
be drawn only an intellectual, not an ethical meaning for the world
and life. Spinoza observes with a smile how he retires upon the
thought beyond which a nature philosophy cannot advance.

Fichte is the first philosopher to declare plainly that no world-view
is ethical which does not enable man to explain that an enthusiastic
active devotion to the universe is something grounded in the nature of
the world and of life. But the road he takes in order to develop this
thought leads him astray. Instead of going more deeply into the
question how ethical happenings, though coming from the world-spirit,
and directed upon the world, are nevertheless different from normal
world-happenings, and investigating the nature of this difference, he
employs the trick, which had been made possible by Kant, of declaring,
with the help of epistemological idealism, that the ethical world-view
is a necessity of thought. Many of his contemporaries [pg 135] believe
with him that it has thereby really reached a position of supremacy,
and even those who cannot go with him the whole length of the
philosophy of the Ego and Non-Ego, are gripped by the force of the
ethical personality which speaks from Fichte’s writings.

The direct effect, then, of Fichte’s philosophy is that the
optimistic, ethical spirit of rationalism maintains its position and
becomes stronger and deeper. His philosophy is a source of inspiration
which produces a mighty impulse to ethics and civilization. But the
vessel in which, with a magnificent wind behind him, he starts with
his companions on a voyage over the sea of knowledge is a leaky one. A
catastrophe is only a question of time.

Fichte’s belief that he has obtained from the nature of the universe
the living compulsion to ethical duty and ethical work which he feels
within himself, is an illusion. The manner, however, in which he
conceives the problem of the optimistic-ethical world-view, and
perceives that for its solution the ordinary processes of life afford
no help, so that more or less violent ones must be allowed to take
their turn, reveals him as a great thinker.




[pg 136]

CHAPTER XII

SCHILLER; GOETHE; SCHLEIERMACHER


Schiller’s ethical world-view; Goethe’s world-view based on
nature-philosophy

VERY important is the fact that the deepened optimistic-ethical
world-view of Kant and Fichte finds a champion in Friedrich von
Schiller (1759-1805), who brings it to the mass of the people with the
force, added by poetical language. He is himself philosophically
gifted, and undertakes in addition to develop it further. He wishes to
broaden the foundation of the ethical by showing its relation to the
æsthetic.

In his _Letters Concerning the Æsthetic Education of Mankind_ (1795),
he works out the idea that art and ethics belong together as far as
this, that man maintains with the sensible world a relation which is
free and creative. “The transition from the passive condition of
feeling to the active one of thinking and willing comes about in no
other way than through an intermediate condition of æsthetic freedom.
. . . There is no way of making the sentient man rational other than
first making him æsthetic.” In what way the capacity for freedom which
is built up in man by æsthetic practice really disposes him to
morality, Schiller does not work out in further detail. His treatise,
in spite of all the notice it attracted and deserves, is more
rhetorical than substantial. He has not gone to the bottom of the
problem of the relations between the æsthetic and the ethical.

In contrast to Schiller, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832),
stands in almost as cold an attitude to the world-view of the deepened
rationalism as he does to that of ordinary rationalism. To him it is
impossible to share [pg 137] the confidence with which others, looking
around, regard optimistic and ethical convictions as well founded.
What separates him from Kant, and Fichte, and Schiller, is reverence
for the reality of nature. Nature is to him something in herself, not
merely something existing with a view to mankind. He does not require
from her that she shall fit herself completely into our
optimistic-ethical designs. He does no violence to her either through
epistemological and ethical idealism or through presumptuous
speculation, but lives in her as a human being who looks at existence
with wonder and does not know how to bring her relation to the
world-spirit within any formula.

Descartes led modern philosophy astray by cutting the world up into
objects which have extension and objects which think, and by going on,
moreover, to refuse to each of them the possibility of influencing the
other. Following in his steps, thinkers rack their brains over the
problem of these two parallel kinds of existence, and try to embrace
the world in formulas. That the world is life, and that in life lies
the riddle of riddles, never enters their minds. Hence they overlook
in their philosophizing what is most important. Because Descartes
preceded them, the two great spirits who adhere to nature-philosophy,
Spinoza and Leibniz, cannot get further than a nature-philosophy which
is more or less dead. Being in the line of descent from Descartes,
Kant and Fichte renounce all philosophizing over the real world.

Descartes and the ethical belief-in-progress, therefore, agree in a
common neglect of nature. Both alike overlook the fact that she is
living, and that she exists for her own sake, and it is because he
cannot join them in this that Goethe dares to confess that he
understands nothing about philosophy. His greatness is this: that in a
time of abstract and speculative thought he had the courage to remain
elemental.

Overwhelmed by the mysterious individual life in nature, he persists
in maintaining a magnificently imperfect [pg 138] world-view. With the
spirit of an investigator he looks within into everything; in that of
an inquirer he looks around upon everything. He wants to think
optimistically. Shaftesbury’s thoughts exercise their charm upon him
also. But in the chorus of optimism which makes itself heard so loudly
around him, he cannot join. World- and life-affirmation is for him not
such a simple thing as it is for Fichte and Schiller. He strives to
reach an ethical world-view, but admits to himself that he cannot
carry it through, and he therefore does not venture to attribute a
meaning to nature. To life, however, he will attribute one. He seeks
it in serviceable activity. To make the world-view of activity at home
in nature-philosophy is to him an inner necessity. The conviction that
activity provides the only real satisfaction that is to be found in
life and that therein lies the mysterious meaning of existence is
shown by him in _Faust_ as something which he has laboriously gained
during his pilgrimage through existence and to which he will hold
fast, without being able to explain it completely.

Goethe struggles to arrive at a conception of ethical activity, but
cannot reach one because nature-philosophy is unable to provide him
with any criterion of what is ethical. What that philosophy had to
refuse to the Chinese monists and to Spinoza, she cannot give to him
either.

The range of this world-view of Goethe’s which deals thus with reality
remains hidden from his contemporaries. Its incompleteness alienates
their sympathies and irritates them. For knowledge of the world and of
life which cannot be reduced to a system, but sticks fast in facts,
they have no understanding. They hold to their optimism and their
ethic.

Schleiermacher’s attempt at a nature-philosophy

Daniel Ernst Schleiermacher (1768-1834), stands apart both from the
ordinary and from the deepened rationalism because he cannot free
himself from the influence of [pg 139] Spinoza._(_46_)_ His life-work
is directed to preaching the Spinozan nature-philosophy as being, as
far as he can make it so, both an ethic and the Christian religion.
Hence he always dresses it up as one or the other of these.

The accepted ethical code, in Schleiermacher’s opinion, makes man
merely run about the earth as an ethical individual bent on improving
the world. Living in this way, in a constant state of enthusiasm, he
becomes in danger of losing himself and becoming unpersonal. He
forgets that his primary duty is, first of all to be alone with
himself, to look within himself, and, instead of being a mere human
creature, to make himself into a personality.

This renunciation of rationalism’s enthusiasm for activity is to be
found in the _Monologues_, those splendid introspective meditations
meant for the first New Year’s Day of the nineteenth century. One
seems to hear in them Lao-tse and Chwang-tse criticising the moralism
and the fanaticism for progress of Confucius.

Man’s first task is, according to Schleiermacher, to realize his
oneness with the Infinite and in the Infinite to see the world. Only
that which results from this as action is really significant, and has
importance for morality.

Spinoza’s ethic consisted in keeping oneself at the highest level and
living one’s life more after the fashion of a life of thought than
after that of a life of corporeal existence. Schleiermacher’s ethic
has the same objective except that he seeks to combine with it a more
comprehensive interest in the world than is to be found in Spinoza. He
is helped in this direction by his belief that progress is something
immanent.

We have, he says, no other perfecting to bring about in things than
that which is inherent in them. Ethics, therefore, are not a setting
up of laws, but the recognition and the description of the tendencies
working for perfection which appear in the world itself, together with
behaviour [pg 140] in accord with their spirits. The moral law is not
distinct from the law of nature and pursues no other aims than the
latter does. It is only the law of nature arriving in man at the
consciousness of itself.

Schleiermacher, therefore, feels that his task is not, as Fichte
conceived his to be, the bringing of the universe under the
sovereignty of reason; it consists solely in supporting the oneness of
nature and reason in the sphere of human action, which is ever
striving to realize itself within that universe. “All ethical
knowledge is the expression of the ever-beginning but never completed
efforts of reason to become nature.” Ethics are a contemplative
“science.” They revolve around the two poles of natural science and
human history.

The ethic which results from this fundamental conception is, like
those of Lao-tse and Chwang-tse, so toned down that there is no longer
any real power in it. However completely Schleiermacher may try to
conceal this fact by his wonderful powers of description, it plays
only a subordinate _rôle_. What gives a meaning to human existence is
something which is independent of deeds; it is the oneness with the
Infinite which is experienced in feeling.

With its clever dialectic, but not in reality, Schleiermacher’s ethic
shows itself finally to be superior to that of Spinoza. His world-view
is that of Spinoza, only enriched by his belief in the immanence of
the power of progress. Hence his ethic is iridescent with somewhat
more brilliant colours.

Thus do a living nature-philosophy in Goethe and a Spinozan one in
Schleiermacher undermine the ground on which stand the men of the now
beginning nineteenth century, whose thinking is so enthusiastically
optimistic-ethical. The crowd pays no attention to their dangerous
proceedings. It gazes at the fireworks which Kant and Fichte let off,
while Schiller recites his poetry. And now there begin to rise bursts
of rockets which throw a peculiarly brilliant light. The past-master
in the art of firework display, Hegel, has come into action!




[pg 141]

CHAPTER XIII

HEGEL’S SUPRA-ETHICAL OPTIMISTIC WORLD-VIEW


Ethics in Hegel’s nature-philosophy, and in his philosophy of history

IN his speculative philosophy Fichte’s first and chief interest was
ethical. Hegel, deeper and more objective than he, aims at truth
before everything._(_47_)_ While using any helpful considerations
which are provided by facts, his aim is to discover the meaning of
Being. He therefore cannot join Fichte in the violent procedure,
suggested by his ethic, of giving the world the categorical imperative
for father and epistemological idealism for mother. Before going so
far as to write out a birth-certificate for the world, he undertakes
some material investigations. He studies the laws which govern events,
as they are revealed in history. He then lays these as the foundation
for the constructive operations which are to explain the origin of the
world out of the notion of Being. His philosophy, therefore, is a
philosophy of history become cosmic. The building, so far as one can
measure it externally, is solidly constructed. That is why it is still
convincing even where its lines lose themselves in infinity.

What, then, does Hegel discover to be the principle underlying the
course of events in history? He discovers that every process of
becoming advances with natural progress, and that this progress
realizes itself in the occurrence of a consecutive series of
contradictions which invariably issue in reconciliation! In thoughts
as in facts, [pg 142] every thesis evokes an antithesis. Then these
unite in a synthesis which preserves what is valuable in either of
them. Every synthesis that is reached becomes again a thesis for a new
antithesis. From these there results again a new synthesis, and so on
for ever.

With the aid of this scheme Hegel can expound the course of history.
From it he is also able to develop the basic principles of logic.
Hence he is sure that from it it must be possible to make intelligible
how the notional world which can be logically developed out of the
notion of Being passes over into being the world of reality. He
carries this fancy through to its conclusion in such magnificent
fashion, that even we, who are proof against its charm, can understand
how it was possible to become intoxicated with it.

While Fichte seeks to give an ethical meaning to the expansion of pure
Being into the world of reality, Hegel from the very outset takes his
stand upon the assertion that in its ultimate analysis the meaning of
the world can only be an intellectual one. The Absolute has no other
object in bringing a world into existence than to become conscious of
itself. It is infinitely creative spirit, but not, as in Fichte’s
thought, with the object of endlessly working, but with that of
returning into itself by the road of its own creations.

In nature the Absolute comprehends itself only very dimly. It is first
in man that it really experiences itself, and that in three ascending
stages. In the man who is concerned merely with himself and nature it
is still subjective spirit. In the communal spirit of men who
cooperate for the legal and ethical organization of human society, it
expands to objective spirit and at the same time, on a basis of
notions provided within this spirit, shows itself capable of being
creative. In art, in religion, and in philosophy it becomes conscious
of itself as absolute spirit, existing in and for itself and having
overcome the contradictions of subject and object, thought and Being.
In art it contemplates itself as such; in religious devotion [pg 143]
it presents itself as such; in philosophy, which is pure thought, it
comprehends itself as such. With the world represented as thought, the
Absolute experiences itself.

Before the destiny to which Spinoza submits with a smile, against
which Fichte and Schleiermacher rebel, Hegel bows in courageous
reverence for truth. His world-view is supra-ethical mysticism. The
ethical is to him only a phase in the development of intellectuality.
Civilization he conceives not as something ethical, but only as
something intellectual.

For proof that the ethical is nothing in itself but only a phenomenon
of the intellectual, Hegel appeals to French usage. “The moral,” he
says, “must be taken in the wider sense in which it signifies not the
morally good alone. ‘Le moral’ is in French opposed to the physical
and means the spiritual, the intellectual, or the non-material in
general.”_(_48_)_

The notion of the ethical with which Hegel works is extraordinarily
wide. It consists in “the will having for its objects not subjective,
_i.e._, selfish, interests, but a universal content.”_(_49_)_ It is
the business of thought to define this universal content in particular
instances.

If Hegel had fully explored the fact that the individual will comes to
assign itself universal objects, and had felt this fact to be the
mysterious one that it is, he could not have passed so lightly as he
does over the ethical problem. He would have had to admit to himself
that the spiritual element which manifests itself in it is unique in
character, and cannot be included in any higher one, or classified
under any other at all. The problem of the mutual relationship between
the spiritual and the moral would have been clearly posed.

But Hegel is so anxious to find some sort of shelter for his
speculative optimistic world-view that he estimates the birth of the
ethical in man not by and for itself, but simply [pg 144] as a
phenomenon of the rise of the supra-individual spirit. Instead of
directing his thought to the question of how the individual spirit in
each several person can be at the same time supra-individual and
conscious of its oneness with the Absolute, Hegel sets out to make
intelligible the higher experience of the individual by means of the
mutual relations between it and the universal spirit of the collective
body to which it belongs. He says it is presumption for the individual
spirit as such to seek, as it does in Indian thought, to comprehend
its relation to the Absolute. Becoming one with the Absolute is an
experience of the universal spirit of collective humanity when it has
reached its loftiest height. Only when it stands in connection with
this, as a river with the waters of a lake through which it had
flowed, can the individual spirit obtain experience of the Absolute.
This is the fatal turning towards the general and supra-personal at
which the Hegelian philosophy makes itself superficial.

Ethics, then, for Hegel have at bottom only the significance that they
make possible the growth of a society in the collective spirit of
which the absolute spirit can come to a consciousness of itself. Man
becomes moral by submitting voluntarily to the demands which society
recognizes as expedient with a view to the creation of the higher
spirituality.

Hegel has no ethic for the individual. The deep problems of ethical
self-perfecting and of the relations between man and man do not
concern him. When he does come to talk about ethics his subject is the
family, society, and the State.

With Bentham ethics complete law. Hegel works the two in together. It
is significant that he wrote no treatise on ethics. All that he does
publish about ethics is to be found in his philosophy of law.

His first concern is to show that the State, correctly conceived, is
not merely a legal, but a legal-ethical body. Fichte had made it the
ethical educator of the individual. For Hegel it is the essential
element in all moral happenings, [pg 145] “the self-conscious moral
substance,” as he expresses it. What is most valuable in the moral
comes to actuality in it and through it. This overvaluing of the State
is a natural consequence of his low valuation of the spiritual
significance of individuality as such.

Hegel’s supra-ethical world-view. His belief in progress

With Fichte’s idea, which he found it impossible to work out
completely, of giving ethics a cosmic foundation in such a way that
its content might be the bringing of the world under the sovereignty
of reason, Hegel can have nothing to do. His feeling for the real
debars him from anything so fantastic. But that he altogether gives up
the cosmic notion of ethics is fatal. Instead of allowing ethics and
nature-philosophy to come to an understanding together in his
speculative thought, he makes a sacrifice of ethics from the start. He
refuses them the liberty (which they enjoyed with Spinoza, Fichte, and
Schleiermacher), of trying to get themselves conceived as the relation
of the individual to the universe. They are forbidden, further, to try
(as they can do with the Chinese monists), to get accepted as a
relation which forms part of the meaning of the universe. They are
restricted to being a standard for the regulation of the relations
between individuals and society. They may not be active as a formative
idea in the creation of a world-view upon a foundation of
nature-philosophy. They are simply built into the edifice as an
already shaped and dressed stone.

In consequence of Hegel’s allowing ethics no significance beyond that
of a preparatory motive to realizing the spiritual meaning of the
world, his teaching becomes remarkably analogous to the Brahmanic.
Hegel and the Brahmans are akin because, as consistent thinkers, they
venture to admit that thought about the world and the Absolute which
lies behind it can reach only an intellectual, never an ethical
meaning in the union of the finite spirit [pg 146] with the infinite,
and therefore value ethics only as a preparatory motive thereto. With
the Brahmans ethics prepare the individual for the intellectual act in
which he experiences the Absolute in himself and himself dies in it.
With Hegel they help in the formation of society, in the communal
spirit of which the Absolute first becomes capable of experiencing
itself.

It is only a relative difference between Hegel and the Brahmans that
the latter make their intellectualist mysticism individualist and
world- and life-denying, while Hegel carries his through as world- and
life-affirming, and makes the intellectual act take place only when a
society has produced the requisite spirituality. The inner similarity
in character of the two world-views is not affected thereby. One is
the complement of the other. Both give value to ethics only as a phase
of intellectuality.

With Hegel, as with the Brahmans, ethics are indeed given a shelter,
but they are not shown to be necessary. For the production of the
consciousness of oneness with the Absolute the decisive element for
the Brahmans is, in the last resort, only a sufficient advance in
world- and life-denial, and depth of meditation. With Hegel, society,
which has to produce the spirituality in which the absolute spirit
experiences itself in the finite, could come into existence just as
well by means of law alone, as by means of ethics and law together.
His ethic is, in truth, only a species of law.

With the Brahmans ethics are a colouring which their world- and
life-denial takes on for a certain distance; with Hegel they are a
similar mode of self-manifestation of his world- and life-affirmation.
Hegel’s world-view is in and by itself supra-ethical mysticism with
world- and life-affirmation, just as that of the Brahmans is
supra-ethical mysticism with world- and life-denial.

That his world-view is this and nothing else Hegel admits in the fit
of brutal frankness under the influence of which he wrote on June
25th, 1820, the famous Preface to his _Philosophy of Law_. Our task
(he there explains,) is not to [pg 147] re-fashion reality in
accordance with ideals which have arisen in our spirit, but we have to
listen to the way in which the real world affirms itself, and us
within itself, in its own immanent impulse to progress. “What is
rational is real, and what is real is rational.” The eternal which is
present under the form of the temporal and transient and is developing
within this, it is worth our while to recognize and thereby to become
reconciled with reality. It is not for philosophy to set up ideas
about what is to be. Her task is to understand what is. She does not
produce any new age, but is only “her own age comprehended in
thought.” She always arrives too late to be an instructor as to what
the world ought to be, and she begins to speak only when reality has
completed its process of construction. “Minerva’s owl does not begin
her flight till darkness is closing in.” Beneficent peace will be
brought us by the sincere recognition of reality.

Rationalism is an ethical belief in progress combined with an ethical
will-to-progress. It was as such that Kant and Fichte had undertaken
to deepen it. After passing through Hegel’s mind it is only a belief
in progress . . . belief in a progress which is immanent in things. It
is this alone that this powerful speculative thinker believes himself
able to place upon a cosmic foundation, and in this he is in contact
with Schleiermacher. On the whole, and reduced to the simplest
possible expression, his world-view and Schleiermacher’s lie not very
far apart. The secret feud in which the two thinkers lived with one
another had in reality no objective justification.

The extent of the strategical retreat on which Hegel enters remains
hidden from his contemporaries. They rejoice unreservedly at the
magnificent energy which his system displays, and with the less
reservation because he himself only once, viz. in the Preface to his
_Philosophy of Law_, expresses himself freely about the final results
of his thinking. The fact that with him the moon of ethics is obscured
does not evoke the excitement that might [pg 148] normally have been
expected, because, in compensation, he allows the sun of the
cosmically founded belief in progress to shine all the brighter. Being
still under the influences of rationalism, the men of that time are so
accustomed to regard ethics and belief in progress as organically
connected that they look on the strengthening of optimism effected by
Hegel as being also a strengthening of ethics.

Hegel’s formal assumption that progress comes about through a
succession of antitheses which are always finally reconciled in
valuable syntheses has kept optimism alive through most critical times
right on to the present day. Hegel is the creator of that confident
feeling for reality with which Europe staggered into the second half
of the nineteenth century without becoming aware that ethics have at
some point or other been left behind. And that being so, he is able to
hold his optimistic philosophy of history out of which his world-view
grows, only because he lives in a period when a general temper which
works with ethical energies of extraordinary strength is carrying
Humanity forward in an extraordinary way. Whence the progress comes,
which he experiences all around him, the great philosophic historian
does not recognize. He explains as produced through natural forces
what has originated from ethical ones.

In Hegel’s world-view the connexion between ethics and belief in
progress, in which the spiritual energy of modern times has always
rested, is broken, and with the separation both are ruined. Ethics
languish, and the belief in progress, now left to itself, becomes
spiritless and powerless because it is now only a belief in immanent
progress, and no longer a belief in progress of all kinds which is
produced by enthusiasm. With Hegel there rises the spirit which
borrows its ideals empirically from reality and believes in the
progress of Humanity more than it labours to promote it. Hegel stands
on the bridge of an ocean liner and explains to the passengers the
wonders of the machinery in the vessel that is carrying them, and the
mysteries of the [pg 149] calculation of its course. But he gives no
thought to the necessary maintenance as before of the fires under the
boilers. Hence the speed gradually diminishes until the vessel comes
at last to a standstill. It no longer obeys the helm, and becomes a
plaything of storms.




[pg 150]

CHAPTER XIV

THE LATER UTILITARIANISM. BIOLOGICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL ETHICS


Beneke, Feuerbach, Laas, Auguste Comte, John Stuart Mill

THE fact that speculative philosophy also is unable to establish the
optimistic-ethical world-view upon nature-philosophy is not felt with
all its weight in the intellectual life of Europe. In that philosophy
we have, indeed, a form of thought which flames out like a flash of
lightning and vanishes as quickly, but it is confined to Germany. The
rest of Europe takes hardly any notice of Fichte and Hegel, just as,
indeed, it paid scarcely any attention to Kant. It does not understand
that these adventurous advances in the struggle for the
optimistic-ethical world-view have been undertaken by leaders who see
clearly that the battle is not to be won on the usual lines. The
universal conviction is, of course, that the victory was won long
before, and can no longer be disputed. It is only later that people in
France and England see what Kant, Fichte, and Hegel aimed at, and what
their significance was in the struggle for world-view.

For the intellectual life of Europe, then, the world-view of
rationalism still stands upright at a time when it has, in truth,
already collapsed. Generally speaking a generation lives, of course,
less by the world-view that has been produced within it than by that
of the previous age. The light of a star is still visible to us when
it has long ceased to exist. There is hardly anything in the world
that clings so toughly to life as a world-view does.

It never becomes clear, then, to the popular utilitarian ethic that in
the course of the first half of the nineteenth century it is being
gradually robbed of its world-view by [pg 151] new modes of thought,
those of historical science, romanticism, nature-philosophy, and
natural science. Certain that it is still in favour with the healthy
human reason, it remains unmoved at its post, and still does a
considerable amount of work. Whenever, too, it considers its future
prospects, it assumes that if it should ever have to give up all
connexion with rationalism, it will be able to come to terms with
positivism, that world-view which has been sobered by exact sciences.
As a matter of fact, rationalism does merge imperceptibly into a kind
of popular positivism. The optimistic-ethical interpretation of the
universe is still relied on, but less unreservedly and less
enthusiastically than previously. In this weakened form rationalism
maintains itself till the end of the nineteenth century, and even till
somewhat later, always working to produce the temper that desires
civilization, whether independently or accompanied by popular
religiousness.

While, then, Kant, Fichte, and Schleiermacher are struggling with the
ethical problem, Bentham supplies the world with an ethic. The
periodical entitled _The Utilitarian_ (_L’Utilitaire_) is started in
Paris in 1829 to propagate his views. In England the _Westminster
Review_ works for him. In 1830 Friedrich Eduard Beneke’s translation
of his _Principles of Civil and Criminal Legislation_ paved a way for
him in Germany. At his death—which occurred in 1832, a year after
Hegel’s—Bentham could take to the grave with him the conviction that,
thanks to him, an ethic which provided enlightenment both for the
reason and for the heart had proved victorious everywhere.

All the earlier methods followed to establish utilitarianism continue
at work in the nineteenth century. Friedrich Eduard Beneke
(1798-1854),_(_50_)_ the translator of Bentham, [pg 152] and Ludwig
Andreas Feuerbach (1804-1872)_(_51_)_ take up with confidence the
attempts of David Hartley and Dietrich von Holbach to derive the
unegoistic directly from the egoistic, and try hard to complete them
in a deepened psychology. Beneke believes himself able to show how
through the continuous influence of reason on the feelings of pleasure
and non-pleasure, there builds itself up in man a capacity for moral
judgement which holds up before him as the highest goal for his
activity the all-round perfecting of human society. Feuerbach derives
altruism from the possession by man of an impulse to think himself
into the personality of others and to put himself in their place.
Thereby, he says, his impulse to seek happiness loses its original
independence, and suffers if the happiness of others is spoilt. At
last, under the influence of habit, man forgets altogether that his
relation of helpfulness with his fellows was originally meant to
satisfy the impulse to seek his own happiness, and he conceives his
own care for their welfare as duty.

Ernest Laas (1837-1885),_(_52_)_ repeats the view that ethics consist
primarily in the individual’s acceptance of the rules laid down by
society, an acceptance which from being a matter of habit becomes at
last unconscious and automatic.

In general, however, the utilitarianism of the nineteenth century
props itself up with the assumption which is first made by David Hume
and Adam Smith, that from the very beginning the non-egoistic is given
in human nature side by side with the egoistic.

Auguste Comte (1798-1857)_(_53_)_ in his _Physiology of Society_
praises as the greatest achievement of his time the then commencing
recognition of the fundamental social tendency in human nature. The
future of mankind depends in his opinion on intelligence working
correctly and perseveringly [pg 153] on this endowment, and so
rendering man’s natural benevolence capable of achieving the noblest
and most beneficial objects. If devotion to the universal good remains
at work in the multitude of individuals so as to provide the necessary
complement to their natural egoism, there will arise out of the
rational understanding between the two a society which is ever
bringing itself nearer to perfection in its economic and social
relations.

A great defender and developer of utilitarianism in England was John
Stuart Mill (1806-1873),_(_54_)_ who in this followed in the footsteps
of his father, James Mill (1773-1836).


Darwin and Spencer

Utilitarian ethics receive unexpected help from natural science.
Biology declares itself able to explain by reference to its origin the
devotion to others which thinkers had decided to accept as inherent in
man by the side of the egoistic, but not further derivable from it.
The unegoistic, so it teaches, does as a matter of fact grow out of
the egoistic, only it does not issue from it afresh on every occasion
as a result of conscious reflexion by the individual. The change has
taken place in the species by a long and slow process, and is now
revealed as an acquired faculty. The conviction that the welfare of
the individual is best secured if the whole body of individuals is
also active in promoting the common good has been established by
experience in the struggle for existence. Action on this principle has
thus become a characteristic of individuals which develops more and
more in the course of generations. We possess this devotion to others
as descendants of herds which maintained themselves in the struggle
for existence while others succumbed in it, because the social
impulses were developed in them the most strongly and the most
universally.

[pg 154]

This thought is developed by Charles Darwin (1869-1882)_(_55_)_ in his
_Descent of Man_, and by Herbert Spencer (1820-1903)_(_56_)_ in his
_Principles of Ethics_. Each of these thinkers refers to the other.

Altruism is therefore now regarded as something natural and at the
same time as something which has come into existence through
reflexion, and the relation subsisting between it and egoism as having
admittedly become rational. On this judgement is founded at the same
time the conviction that the co-operation of these two impulses, as it
developed in the past, will allow itself also to be perfected in the
future. More and more will these two impulses show clearly their
mutual dependence on each other. From sporadic altruism, developing in
the animal kingdom for the production and maintenance of new
generations, we have advanced to a settled altruism which serves the
maintenance of the family and society. To bring this to completion
must now be our aim. We shall succeed if the compromise between egoism
and altruism continues to grow better adjusted and more purposive. We
must advance to the view which at first seems to be a paradox that (to
use Spencer’s language) the general prosperity can be reached mainly
through a corresponding struggle of all individuals for their own
prosperity and that of individuals, on the other hand, partly through
their struggle for the general prosperity.

Comte’s _Physiology of Society_ is thus given a foundation in natural
science by Darwin and Spencer.

Utilitarianism now continues on its way full of satisfaction at having
found itself conceived by modern biology and in the history of
evolution as something natural. But it has not thereby become either
fresher or more capable. It advances more and more slowly. Its breath
fails. What is the matter with it? Its ethical energy leaves it
because [pg 155] it has conceived itself to be something natural. The
fatal fact that ethics cease to be ethics in proportion as they are
brought into harmony with natural happenings, is fulfilled not only
when ethics are developed out of nature-philosophy but also when they
are explained by biology.

Ethics consist in this: that natural happenings in man are seen, on
the basis of conscious reflexion, to carry within them an inner
contradiction. The more this contradiction is removed into the sphere
of that which goes back to instinct, the weaker do ethics become.

The origin of ethics is assuredly this: that something which is
contained as instinct in our will-to-live is taken up through
conscious reflexion and further developed. The great question is,
however, what this last and most original element in the instinct of
solidarity is, this element which by thinking is developed far beyond
everything instinctive, and in what way this development is
accomplished. By proclaiming developed herd-mentality to be ethics,
Darwin and Spencer show that they have not gone to the root of the
problem of the relation between instinct and thinking reflexion in
ethics. If nature wishes to have a perfect herd, she does not appeal
to ethics, but gives the individuals, as in the ant- or the
bee-kingdom, instincts by the force of which they are wholly merged in
the society.

But ethics are the putting into practice the principle of solidarity
on a basis of free reflexion, and this practice, moreover, directs
itself not only to individuals of the same species, but to everything
living in general. The ethics of Darwin and Spencer are a failure from
the first, because they are too narrow and do not leave the irrational
its rights. The social impulse which they put in the place of the
sympathy which is assumed by Hume and Adam Smith is set at a lower
pitch than the latter, and is correspondingly less calculated to
explain real ethics.

The transition from egoism to altruism, then, it is equally impossible
to carry through if one transfers the proceeding from the individual
to the species. The fact that the process is thereby prolonged allows
numerous series of [pg 156] most delicate transitions to be taken into
account and their results to be summed up as inheritance of acquired
characters. Nevertheless, that does not explain truly ethical
devotion. The fruits of ethics are hung upon the bush of social
impulse, but the bush itself did not bear them.

The weak points in biological and sociological utilitarianism

The strength of utilitarianism lies in its simplicity. Bentham and
Adam Smith still show this quality. They have society in their minds
as the sum of a number of individuals, not as an organized body. Their
efforts are directed to inducing human beings to do as much good as
they can to each other.

With John Stuart Mill this simplicity disappears. To him, and then in
still stronger measure to Spencer and others, it occurs that the ethic
of the conduct of an individual to his fellows cannot be carried
through as a matter of reasoning. Hence, they conclude, “scientific
ethics” has to do only with the relations between individuals and
organized society as such.

Bentham’s simple utilitarianism puts before the individual an estimate
of the manifold ways in which society needs his devotion if it is to
see all its members prosperous, and appeals to his enthusiasm. The
utilitarianism which has become biological and sociological tries to
reckon up for the individual the correct balance between egoism and
devotion. It pretends to be social-science transformed to sentiment.

Adam Smith keeps ethics and sociology still apart in such a way that
he is not a sociologist when he speaks as a moralist, and not a
moralist when he puts forward sociological theories. Now, however, the
two points of view are worked in together, and indeed in such a way
that ethics are merged in sociology.

The ethic of the simple utilitarianism is concerned with actions
produced by enthusiasm, the biologico-sociological ethic with the
conscientious employment of the complicated [pg 157] machinery of
organized society. In the former an occasional piece of ineffective
action means at worst a waste of power, in the latter a disturbance of
the organism. Hence thorough-going utilitarianism comes to a
depreciatory estimate of the ethic of the individual which springs
from ethical convictions in the individual and does not think
biologically and sociologically.

That in the sphere of individual ethics there are no more discoveries
to make, passes with the later utilitarians for admitted. They regard
them as an uninteresting hinterland, to advance into which is not
worth while. They therefore confine themselves to the fertile coast
land of social ethics. They see, no doubt, that the streams which
water this lower ground come from the hinterland of individual ethics.
But instead of following them up to their sources their only care is
to make the lower ground safe from occasional inundations which may be
caused by them. They therefore lead the streams into such deep-lying
channels that the land gets parched.

Scientific ethics undertakes the impossible, viz. to regulate devotion
from outside. It tries to drive water-mills without any head of water,
and to shoot with a bow which is but half-bent.

How tortured are Spencer’s disquisitions on absolute and relative
ethics! For the natural, ethical point of view absolute ethics
consists in this: that a man experiences directly in himself an
absolute ethical “must.” Because absolute ethics thinks of devotion
without limits and would lead straight to a self-sacrifice which would
in some way or other suspend life and activity, it has to come to an
understanding with reality and decide what measure of self-sacrifice
is to be made, and how far that minimum of compromise can be allowed
which is necessary to ensure a continuation of life and activity. In
this origin out of absolute ethics of applied, relative ethics the
scientific, biological point of view cannot acquiesce. Spencer
transforms the conception of absolute ethics and turns it into [pg
158] the conduct of the perfect man in the perfect society. We have no
need, he says, to picture to ourselves the ideal man except “as he
would exist in ideal social surroundings.” “According to the evolution
hypothesis the two mutually condition each other, and only where both
are to be found, is such ideal action also possible.”

The ethic which thereby comes into consideration is produced,
therefore, from outside. It is determined by the relation in which
society and the individual stand to one another in their mutual state
of imperfection. Into the place of the living conception of absolute
ethic there steps a fiction. It is only relative standards, subject to
the changes produced by time and relations with others, that the ethic
of sociological utilitarianism provides for men. That means that it
can only feebly rouse his will to the ethical. It even reduces him to
a state of confusion because it takes from him the elementary
conviction that he has to exert himself without regard to what the
given relations are in a state of perfection, and must contend with
circumstances from an inward compulsion, even without the certainty of
any result at all.

Spencer is more biologist than moralist. Ethics are to him merely the
setting in which the principle of utility comes to us after it has
been worked up in the brain-cells together with the experiences it has
produced, and after it has been passed on by heredity. Thus he gives
up all the inward forces by which ethics live. The urge to attain to a
perfecting of the personality which has to be reached through ethics
and the longing for a spiritual bliss which is to be experienced
within them, are deprived of their office.

The ethic of Jesus and of the religious thinkers of India withdraws
itself completely from social to individual ethics. The utilitarianism
which has become scientific ethics gives up individual ethics in order
that social ethics may alone have currency. In the first case ethics
can survive because it keeps possession of the mother-country, and has
sacrificed only its foreign possessions. In the [pg 159] other it
wishes to exert its authority in the foreign possessions while the
mother-country belongs to it no more. Individual ethics without social
ethics are imperfect, but they can be very deep and living. Social
ethics without individual ethics are like a limb with a tourniquet
round it, into which life no longer flows from the body. They become
so impoverished that they really cease to be ethics any longer.

The reduction to impotence of scientific, biological ethics shows
itself not only in the fact that it finally makes all ethical
standards merely relative. Such ethics can no longer uphold the duty
of humanity as they ought to.

A sinister uniformity prevails in the evolution of ethics. The ethics
of antiquity began to teach humanity after they had lost in the Later
Stoicism their interest in organized society as they found it existing
in the ancient state. Modern utilitarianism, conversely, loses its
sensitiveness to the duty of humanity in proportion to the consistency
with which it develops into an ethic of organized society. It cannot
be otherwise. The essence of humanity consists in this: that
individuals never allow themselves to think impersonally in terms of
expediency as society does, or to sacrifice individual existences in
order to attain their object. The outlook which seeks the welfare of
organized society cannot do anything but compromise with the sacrifice
of individuals or groups of individuals. In Bentham, with whom
utilitarianism is still simple and concerns itself with the conduct of
individuals to the multitude of other individuals, the idea of
humanity has not been tampered with. Biological, sociological
utilitarianism is obliged to give it up as being sentimentality which
cannot maintain itself in the face of matter-of-fact ethical
reflexion. Thus sociological ethics contribute not a little to the
disappearance from the modern mind of any shrinking from inhumanity.
It allows individuals to adopt the mentality of society instead of
keeping them in a state of tension with regard to it.

[pg 160]

Society cannot exist without sacrifice. The ethics which start from
individuals try to distribute this in such a way that through the
devotion of individuals as many as possible are voluntary sacrifices,
and that the individuals who are most severely hit are relieved of
their burden as far as possible by others. This is the doctrine of
self-sacrifice. The sociological ethics which no longer reach back at
individual ethics can only lay it down that the progress of society
advances according to inexorable laws at the price of the freedom and
prosperity of individuals and groups of individuals. This is the
doctrine of being sacrificed by others.

If followed out consistently, biological and sociological
utilitarianism arrives finally, even if with hesitation, at the
conviction that in reality it no longer has for its object the
greatest possible happiness of the greatest possible number. To this
object, which was thus formulated by Bentham, it must now assign, as
being sentimental, a place behind one which corresponds more exactly
to reality. What is to be realized in the ever more complete
development of the mutual relations between the individual and society
is not, if one dares to admit it, an increase in the welfare either of
the individual or of society but . . . the enhancing and perfecting of
life as such. However much it may struggle against it, utilitarianism,
as soon as it has become biological and sociological, undergoes a
change in its ethical character, and enters the service of
supra-ethical aims. Spencer still fights to keep it in the path of
natural ethical feeling.

Developed utilitarianism, directed to the enhancing and perfecting of
life, can no longer regard the claims of humanity as absolutely
binding, but must make up its mind in certain cases to go outside
them. Biology has become its master.

Sociological ethics and socialism. Mechanical belief in progress

If it be granted that progress in the welfare of society depends on
the application of the conclusions of biology [pg 161] and scientific
sociology, it is not as a matter of course necessary to leave to the
good pleasure of the individual the corresponding conduct which is to
be ethical. It can be imposed upon him, if by economic measures and
measures of organization the relation between the individual and
society is determined in such a way that it automatically functions in
the most effective way. Thus by the side of social ethics socialism
makes its appearance. Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825),_(_57_)_
Charles Fourier (1772-1837)_(_58_)_ and P. J. Proudhon
(1809-1865)_(_59_)_ in France, Robert Owen, the mill-owner
(1771-1858),_(_60_)_ in England, and Ferdinand Lassalle
(1825-64),_(_61_)_ and others in Germany, prelude its appearance. Karl
Marx (1818-1883)_(_62_)_ and Friedrich Engels (1820-1895) put forward
in _Das Kapital_ its consistent programme, demanding the abolition of
private property and the State-regulation both of labour and of the
reward of labour.

_Das Kapital_ is a doctrinaire book which works with definitions and
tables, but never goes very deeply into questions of living and the
conditions of living. The great influence it exerts rests on the fact
that it preaches belief in a progress which is inherent in events, and
works itself out in them automatically. It undertakes to unveil the
mechanism of history, and to show how the succession of different
methods of social organization—slavery, feudalism, the bourgeois
wage-system—tend towards the final replacement of private production
by State-communistic [pg 162] production as the logical crown of
completed evolution. Through Marx, Hegel’s belief in inherent progress
becomes, if with a somewhat different interpretation, the conviction
of the masses. His optimistic feeling for reality takes the helm.

Through the rise of socialism ethical utilitarianism loses in
importance. The hopes of the crowd begins to centre no longer on what
can be accomplished in the world by an ethical temper which is
steadily growing stronger, and working ever more and more effectively
in social matters, but on what is reached when free course is secured
for the laws of progress which are assumed to be inherent in things.

It is true that ethical utilitarianism still maintains itself as an
influential reforming temper among the educated. In the competition
with socialism there even starts a strong movement which stirs
individuals, society, and the State alike into effective action
against social distress. One of its leaders is Friedrich Albert Lange
(1828-1875), the author of _The History of Materialism_ (1866). In his
work _The Labour Question in its Significance for the Present and the
Future_ (1866) he discusses the social tasks of the time and the
measures that will be effective for their accomplishment, and appeals
for ethical idealism without which, he says, nothing profitable can be
accomplished._(_63_)_

Christianity too supports the movement. In 1864 Bishop Ketteler, of
Mainz, comes forward, demanding in his book _The Labour Question and
Christianity_ the creation of a Christian-social temper._(_64_)_

In England it is the clergymen, Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872)
and Charles Kingsley (1819-1875), who bid Christendom adopt a social
temper. The latter’s [pg 163] famous sermon _The Message of the Church
to Working Men_ was preached in the evening of Sunday, June 22nd,
1851, before the workers who had come to London to see the first
International Exhibition. On account of the excitement it caused, the
Bishop of London inhibited him from preaching [in his
diocese]._(_65_)_

In Russia, Count Leo Tolstoi (1828-1910)_(_66_)_ lets loose the force
of the ethical thinking of Jesus. He does not, like others, interpret
his words as teaching a social idealism focused on the service of
systematic purposive effort, but allows them to be the commands to the
absolute, uncalculating devotion which their author meant them to be.
In his _Confessions_, which in the eighties were read throughout the
world, the lava of primitive Christianity pours itself into the
Christianity of modern times.

The social-ethical movement produces most result in Germany, because
in that country the State welcomes it in the person of the
Hohenzollerns. In 1883 and 1884 the Reichstag passes, in spite of the
disapproving attitude of the Social Democratic Party, laws for the
protection of the worker which may be considered to be models of their
kind.

In the bosom of socialism itself thoughtful spirits like Eduard
Bernstein (b. 1850),_(_67_)_ and others, come to see that even the
most effective measures taken for the social organization of society
cannot succeed unless there is a strong [pg 164] ethical idealism
behind them as their driving force. This is a return to the spirit of
Lassalle.

There exists, then, an active social-ethical temper. But it is
nevertheless only a trickling stream of water in a big river-bed. That
the reforms called for under the guidance of ethics can be realized is
no longer a general conviction, as it was in the age of rationalism.
The ethical temper which wishes to work for the future of mankind
becomes less and less appreciated. In the victory, so fateful for the
development of civilized mankind, won by Marxian State-socialism over
the social ideas of Lassalle which allow much more natural play to the
forces of reality, we see an expression of the fact that in the
mentality of the masses the belief-in-progress has emancipated itself
from ethics and has become mechanical. Confusion in the conception of
civilization and ruin of the civilized temper are the consequence of
this disastrous separation. The spirit of the modern age renounces
thereby the very thing which really constituted its strength.

How remarkable are the vicissitudes undergone by ethics!
Utilitarianism refuses all contact with nature-philosophy. It wishes
to be an ethic which is concerned only with the practical, but it does
not therefore escape its fate, which is to be wrecked upon
nature-philosophy. In its attempt to secure a basis for itself and to
think itself out completely, it changes into biological-sociological
utilitarianism. Next it loses its ethical character. Without becoming
aware of it, it has, of course, at the same time got entangled with
nature and natural happenings, and has given cosmic problems a place
within itself. Although it pretends to be only the practical ethic of
human society it has become a product of nature. It has been no good
removing all the distaffs: the Sleeping Beauty pricks her finger
nevertheless. No ethic can avoid coming to an understanding with
nature-philosophy.




[pg 165]

CHAPTER XV

SCHOPENHAUER AND NIETZSCHE


Schopenhauer. An ethic of world- and life-denial

AS bad luck will have it, the two most important ethical thinkers who
speak to us in the second half of the nineteenth century, Schopenhauer
and Nietzsche, do not help the age in the search for what it needs,
viz., a social ethic which is also true ethics. Concerned only with an
individualist ethic out of which no social ethic can be developed,
they offer incitements which, however valuable in themselves, cannot
arrest the demoralisation in world-view which is in progress.

Common to both is the fact that they are elemental moralists. They
pursue no abstract cosmic speculations. Ethics are for them an
experience of the will-to-live. They are therefore, from their very
core, cosmic.

In Schopenhauer the will-to-live tries to become ethical by turning to
world- and life-denial; in Nietzsche by devoting itself to a deepened
world- and life-affirmation.

From the standpoint of their own elemental ethics these two thinkers,
who stand in such deep contrast to each other, rise as judges of what
they find accepted as ethics in their time.

Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860) begins to publish at the beginning of
the century. His _The World as Will and Idea_ appears in 1819._(_68_)_
But he first obtains a hearing about 1860 when the speculative
philosophy had definitely gone bankrupt, and the unsatisfactory nature
of the ethic of [pg 166] popular utilitarianism, as also of that of
Kant’s successors, was generally acknowledged.

The most important among the earlier of these is Johann Friedrich
Herbart (1776-1841). His importance lies in the department of
psychological investigation. It is on a psychological foundation that
he tries to establish ethics in his _General Practical Philosophy_
(1808). He traces the moral back to five direct and ultimate
judgments, which are not derivable from anything beyond themselves,
and which may be compared with æsthetic judgments. They are these: the
ideas of inward freedom, of perfection, of benevolence, of right, and
of equity. By submitting itself to this mode of outlook, which starts
from pure intuition and is confirmed as correct for human beings by
the course of their experience, the will becomes ethical.

Instead, therefore, of seeking one basic principle only for the moral
Herbart accepts several ethical ideas which appear side by side. This
anæmic ethical theory possesses no convincing power. In his teaching,
however, about society and the State Herbart does produce something
solid.

To the earlier successors of Kant there belongs also Immanuel Hermann
Fichte (1797-1879), a son of J. G. Fichte, the so-called Younger
Fichte, with his _System of Ethics_ (2 vols., 1850-1853), which in its
time enjoyed considerable repute.

Schopenhauer is the first representative in Western thought of a
consistent world- and life-denying ethic. The suggestions which
brought him to it came to him from the philosophy of India, which
early in the nineteenth century began to be known in Europe._(_69_)_
For the exposition of his world-view he starts, like Fichte, from
Kant’s epistemological idealism. Like Fichte he defines the essence of
things in themselves (which is to be accepted as underlying all
phenomena) to be Will, not, however, like [pg 167] Fichte as will to
action, but more directly and more correctly as will-to-live. The
world, he says, I can understand only by analogy with myself. Myself,
looked at from outside, I conceive as a sensible phenomenon in space
and time, but looked at from within, as will-to-live. Correspondingly,
everything which meets me in the phenomenal world is a manifestation
of the will-to-live.

What is the meaning, then, of the world-process? Simply that countless
individualities which are rooted in the universal will-to-live are
continually seeking satisfaction in aims which they set before
themselves, in obedience to an inward impulse, and finding none. Again
and again they experience the disappointment that pleasure longed for,
not pleasure attained, is real pleasure; they have continually to
fight against hindrances; their own will-to-live continually comes
into conflict with other wills-to-live. The world is meaningless, and
all existence is suffering. The knowledge of this is attained to by
the will-to-live in the highest living creatures, who are gifted with
the power of remaining always conscious that the totality of what is
around them, outside themselves, is merely a world of appearances.
Surveying in this way the totality of existence, the will is then in a
position to reach clarity of thought about itself and about existence.

That it must effect something in the world that is worth while is the
obsession with which the will-to-live has befooled itself in European
philosophy. When it has attained to knowledge of itself, it knows that
optimistic world-affirmation is of no benefit to it. It can only hurry
it on from unrest to unrest, from disappointment to disappointment.
What it must try to do is to step out from the terrible game in which,
bedazzled, it is taking part, and settle itself to rest in world- and
life-denial.

For Spinoza the meaning of the world-process is that supreme
individualities arise, who find their experience within the Absolute;
for Fichte that the urge to activity of the Absolute comprehends
itself in supreme individualities as ethical; for Hegel that the
Absolute comes in supreme [pg 168] individualities to adequate
consciousness of itself; for Schopenhauer that in individualities the
Absolute attains to knowledge of itself, and finds deliverance from
the blind urge to life-affirmation which is within it. The meaning of
the world-process, therefore, is always found in this: that the Finite
and the Infinite blend their experiences of one another. Spinoza,
Fichte, and Hegel—and this is the weakness of their world-view—cannot
make it properly intelligible how far this experience in the Finite
can be said to have really a meaning for the Absolute. In
Schopenhauer, however, it has such a meaning. In man the universal
will-to-live begins to turn from the path of unrest and suffering into
that of peace.

The transition from Being to nothingness is introduced. This
nothingness is nothingness, it is true, only to the will-to-live,
which is still filled with urge to life-affirmation and with its
conception of the world. What it is in itself, this Nirvana of the
Buddhists, cannot be defined with our conceptions, which come to us
through our senses.

That Schopenhauer carries through his pessimistic-ethical world-view,
as Fichte does his optimistic-ethical, with the material provided by
epistemological idealism has not the importance that he himself
attributes to this fact. Indian predecessors have made this connexion
easier for him. In itself, pessimism can be developed just as well
without epistemological idealism. The drama of the tragical experience
of the will-to-live remains the same whatever the decorations and the
costumes with which it is played.

Although, therefore, it makes its appearance in the dress of Kant’s
theory of knowledge, Schopenhauer’s philosophy is elemental
nature-philosophy.

What then are the ethical elements in his ethic?

Like that of the Indians it appears in a threefold shape: as an ethic
of resignation, as an ethic of universal pity, and as an ethic of
world-renunciation.

About resignation Schopenhauer speaks in forcible words. In language
which rises to the level of poetry, he [pg 169] describes how the man
who is intent on his own self-perfecting does not meet the destinies
of his existence in childish resistance to what is hard, but feels
them as incitements to become free from the world. In the
disagreeables which poison existence for him, and in the misfortune
which threatens to crush him, he suddenly feels himself lifted out of
everything on which he sets value, and brought to the triumphant
feeling that nothing can any longer do him any harm. The field of
resignation, which the philosophical ethics of modern times had
allowed to lie fallow for generations, is replanted by Schopenhauer.

Ethics are pity. All life is suffering. The will-to-live which has
attained to knowledge is therefore seized with deep pity for all
creatures. It experiences not only the woe of mankind, but that of all
creatures with it. What is called in ordinary ethics “love” is in its
real essence pity. In this powerful feeling of pity the will-to-live
is diverted from itself. Its purification begins.

How anxious Kant and Hegel and others are in their ethics to deprive
direct pity of its rights, because it does not suit their theories!
Schopenhauer takes the gag out of its mouth and bids it speak. Those
who, like Fichte, Schleiermacher, and others, ground ethics on a
painfully thought out world-scheme, expect man to run every time to
the topmost attic of his reflexions to fetch down his motives to moral
action. According to the sociological utilitarians he should always
first sit down and calculate what is ethical. Schopenhauer bids him do
something never yet heard of in philosophical ethics—listen to his own
heart. The elemental ethical which has by the others been pushed into
the corner, can now, thanks to him, takes its proper place again.

The others, in order not to get embarrassed with their theories, have
to limit ethics exclusively to the conduct of man to man. They
anxiously insist upon it that pity for animals is not ethical in
itself, but has importance only in view of the kindly disposition
which must ever be [pg 170] maintained among men. Schopenhauer tears
down these fences, and teaches love to the most insignificant being in
creation.

The artificial and curious pleas, too, which the rest produce to put
man into an ethical relation to organised society disappear in
Schopenhauer. Fichte’s and Hegel’s ethical over-valuation of the State
makes him smile. He himself is left free from the necessity of
dragging into ethics things of the world which refuse to be fitted
into them. He can allow the conviction that ethics consist in being
different from the world to flame up in blinding clearness. He is
pledged to no concessions, since he does not, like the others,
represent an ethic which wishes to do something purposive in the
world. Because his world-view is world- and life-denying he can be an
elemental moralist when others have to renounce being such. Nor does
he need, like them, to sever all connexion with Jesus and religious
ethics. He can appeal as often as he likes to the fact that his
philosophy only establishes what has always been accepted by the piety
of Christianity and of the Indians as the essential element in the
moral. It is well-known that Schopenhauer judged Christianity to have
the Indian spirit, and to be probably, in some way or other, of Indian
origin._(_70_)_

Elemental ethics now obtain once more their right place in a thinking
world-view, and this explains the enthusiasm which Schopenhauer
arouses when he at last gets known. That it was possible to ignore for
nearly forty years the very significant matter which he gave to the
world remains one of the most remarkable events in the history of
European thought. The optimistic world-view passed at that time for so
self-evident that the man who laid hands upon it even in the directly
illuminating thoughts upon ethics to which Schopenhauer gave
utterance, could not obtain a hearing. At a later period also many
attach themselves to Schopenhauer only because of his ethical maxims
with their natural and interesting appeal, and refuse to accept [pg
171] his consistent world-view of world- and life-denial. It is a
right feeling which guides them.

Absorption of ethics in world- and life-denial

Schopenhauer’s world-view, like that of the Brahmans, because it
reveals itself as consistent world- and life-denial, is in the last
resort not ethical but supra-ethical. Even though through several
chapters of his ethics he can speak in more elemental fashion than
Spinoza, Fichte, Schleiermacher, and Hegel, he is nevertheless in
reality no more ethical than they are. He ends, as they do, in the
frozen sea of the supra-ethical point of view, only at the South Pole
instead of at the North. The price which he pays for being able to
outbid them in elemental ethics is his world view of world- and
life-denial. But the price is a ruinous one.

With Schopenhauer, as with the Indians, ethics are only a phase of
world- and life-denial. They are nothing in themselves but merely what
they are in the frame provided by that world-view. And everywhere
there peeps through his ethically tinted world- and life-denial world-
and life-denial as such. Like a strange sun in the sky it devours
ethics, just as the real sun devours a cloud from which men are vainly
hoping to get a refreshing shower of rain.

On the assumption of world- and life-denial all ethical action is
illusory. Schopenhauer’s pity is merely deliberative. Of pity which
brings help he can have no real knowledge any more than the Indian
thinkers can. Like all will-to-action in the world, such pity has no
meaning. It has no power to lighten the misery of the rest of
creation, since that misery lies in the will-to-live, which is
incurably full of suffering. The one thing, therefore, that pity can
do is to enlighten the will-to-live everywhere about the delusion in
which it is held captive, and bring it to the apathy and peace offered
by world- and life-denial. Schopenhauer’s pity, like that of the
Brahmans and the [pg 172] Buddha, is at bottom merely theoretical. It
can use as its own the words of the religion of love, but it stands at
a far lower level than the latter. Obstructing the way to any real
ethic of love it has before it, as the Indian thinkers also have, the
ideal of absolute inactivity.

The ethic of self-perfecting also is present in Schopenhauer more in
word than in reality. The attainment of inward freedom from the world
is really ethical only if the personality is thereby enabled to work
as a more direct force in the world, but this thought is not to be
found either in Schopenhauer or in the Indians. World- and life-denial
is with them an end in itself, and it continues to assert itself when
its ethical character has ceased. Higher than ethics, says
Schopenhauer, stands asceticism. Everything which helps to deaden the
will-to-live, is to him significant. Men and women who renounce love
and the hope of offspring so that there may be less life in the world,
are to him in the right. Those who deliberately choose religious
suicide, and after employing every conceivable device for deadening
the will-to-live allow the lamp of life to be extinguished, as the
Brahmans do, by withholding all nourishment from the body, these
similarly act as truly enlightened. Only suicide as the outcome of
despair is to be rejected. That is, of course, not a result of the
true life-denial, but is, on the contrary, the act of a life-affirming
will, which is only discontented with the conditions in which it finds
itself._(_71_)_

With Schopenhauer, then, ethics reach only so far as world- and
life-denial has willed and is in a position to declare itself ethical.
They are only an introduction to, and a preparation for, liberation
from the world. It is, at bottom, by an intellectual act that the
suspension of the will-to-live is consummated. If I have won my way
through to the understanding that the whole phenomenal world is
delusion and misery, and that my will-to-live has no need to take
seriously the world and itself, then I am released. How far and to
what extent I then take part in [pg 173] the game of life with the
consciousness that I am but a player in it, has no importance.

Schopenhauer does not think out the pessimistic world-view in the
great and calm manner of the wise men of India. He behaves under its
influence like a nervous and ailing European. While they, on the
ground of the liberating knowledge they have reached, advance with
majestic gait from the ethical to the supra-ethical, and leave behind
them good and evil as two things, over both of which they have equally
triumphed, he reveals himself as a miserable Western sceptic._(_72_)_
Incapable of living out the world-view which he preaches, he clings to
life as to money, appreciates the pleasures of the table as well as
those of love, and has more contempt than pity for mankind. As though
to justify himself in this, he in _The World as Will and Idea_, where
he has just been speaking about the deadening of the will-to-live,
rebels against the notion that anyone who teaches a saintly course of
life must also live like a saint. “It is indeed,” so runs the famous
passage, “a strange demand to make of a moralist that he shall
recommend no other virtue than those which he himself possesses. To
sum up in a series of conceptions the whole essence of the world, in
abstract terms, in general terms, and with clearness, and to offer it
thus as a reflected copy in permanent rational conceptions which are
always ready to hand; that and nothing else is philosophy.”_(_73_)_

With these sentences Schopenhauer’s philosophy commits suicide. Hegel
has a right to say that philosophy is not imperative but only
reflective thinking, for his own philosophy does not claim to be
anything more. But _The World as Will and Idea_ protests with
illuminating language and in a tone of urgent entreaty against the
will-to-live. It ought therefore to be the life-creed of the man whose
voice it is.

[pg 174]

The fact that Schopenhauer can for a moment so far forget himself as
to express himself sceptically about ethics has its own deep-reaching
explanation. It belongs to the essence of world- and life-denial,
which he wishes to proclaim as ethics, that it cannot be thought out
consistently to a conclusion, and that it cannot be put consistently
into practice. Even with the Brahmans and the Buddha it keeps itself
alive by inadmissible concessions to world- and life-affirmation. But
with Schopenhauer it goes so far in that direction that he can no
longer make any attempt to bring theory and practice into harmony, but
must move about resolutely in an atmosphere of unveracity.

Schopenhauer does succeed in letting the ethical appearance which
world- and life-denial can assume, shine out in brilliant colours. But
of really producing an ethic out of world- and life-denial he is as
little capable as the Indians.

Nietzsche’s criticism of current ethics

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900) in the early period of his activity is
under the spell of Schopenhauer._(_74_)_ One of his _Old-fashioned
Reflexions_ bears the title: “Schopenhauer as Educator.” Later on he
goes through a development which leads him to recognise as the ideal a
scientifically deepened Positivism and Utilitarianism. He is his real
self first when, starting with _Joyous Science_, he tries to establish
his world-view of the higher life-affirmation, and thereby becomes
anti-Schopenhauer, anti-Christian, and anti-Utilitarian.

The criticism he passes upon the philosophical and religious ethics
which he finds accepted is passionate and spiteful. But it goes deep.
He casts at them two reproaches, viz. that they have made a pact with
unveracity, and that they do not allow men to become personalities. In
[pg 175] this he says only what had long been due. Sceptics had
already made public many such complaints. But he speaks as one who is
searching for the truth, and who is concerned about the spiritual
future of mankind, thus giving such complaints a new tone and a wider
range. Whereas the current philosophy believed that it had in the main
solved the ethical problem, and was united with biological and
sociological utilitarianism in the conviction that in the department
of individual ethics there were no more discoveries to be made,
Nietzsche turns the whole game upside down, and shows that all ethics
rest upon those of the individual. The question about the essential
nature of good and evil which was generally accepted as settled, he
puts forward again in elemental fashion. The truth that ethics in
their essential nature are a process of self-perfecting shines out in
him, as in Kant, although in a different light. Hence his place is in
the first rank of the ethical thinkers of mankind. Those who were torn
from their false certainty when his impassioned writings descended on
the lowlands of the thought of the outgoing nineteenth century, as the
south wind sweeps down from the high mountains in spring, can never
forget the gratitude they owe to this upheaver of thought, with his
preaching of veracity and personality.

Accepted ethics are deficient in veracity, according to Nietzsche,
because the conceptions of good and evil which they make current do
not spring out of man’s reflexion on the meaning of his life, but have
been invented in order to keep individuals useful to the majority. The
weak proclaim that sympathy and love are good, because that is to
their advantage. Thus led astray, all men try to force themselves to
the opinion that they fulfil the highest destiny of their existence by
surrender of themselves and devotion to others. But this opinion never
becomes with them a real inward conviction. They live out their lives
without any thought of their own as to what makes their life valuable.
They join the crowd in praising the morality of humility and
self-sacrifice as the true morality, but they [pg 176] do not really
believe in it. They feel self-assertion to be what is natural, and act
accordingly without admitting the fact to themselves. The public
ethical respect paid to humility and self-sacrifice they do not
question; they help to maintain it, from fear that individuals
stronger than themselves might become dangerous to them, if this
method of taming men were abandoned.

Current ethics, then, are something with which mankind as a whole is
deceived by means of traditional views, and with which individuals
deceive themselves.

With indignant statements like these Nietzsche is so far in the right,
that the ethic of humility and self-sacrifice does as a matter of
principle avoid coming to a clear and practical understanding with
reality. It lives by leaving quite undetermined the degree of
life-denial which is involved in it. In theory it proclaims
life-denial; in practice, however, it allows a life-affirmation which
has thereby become unnatural and sickly to prevail. Stripped of all
its passion, then, Nietzsche’s criticism means that only that ethic
deserves to be accepted as current which springs from independent
reflexion on the meaning of life, and comes to a straightforward
understanding with reality.

Individual ethics come before social ethics. Not what ethics mean for
society, but what they mean for the perfecting of the individual, is
the first question which has to be put to them. Do they allow a man to
become a personality or not? It is here, says Nietzsche, that current
ethics fail. They do not allow men to grow straight up, but trains
them like stunted trees on espaliers. They put humility and
self-surrender before men as the content of perfection, but to the
ethical, which consists in man being one with himself, and veracious
through and through, they contribute nothing.

What does “noble” mean? shouts Nietzsche to his age with harsh words as
being the ethical question which has been forgotten. Those who, when
the question re-echoed everywhere, were touched by the truth which was
stirring, and by the anxiety which was trembling within it, [pg 177]
have received from that solitary thinker all that he had to give to
the world.

If life-denial brings with it so much that is unnatural and fraught
with doubt, it cannot be ethics. Ethics, then, must consist of a
higher life-affirmation.

Nietzsche’s ethic of higher life-affirmation

But what is the higher life-affirmation? Fichte and the speculative
philosophers generally make it consist in this, that the will of man
conceives itself within the infinite will and in consequence of this
no longer belongs to the universe in merely natural fashion, but
surrenders itself knowingly and willingly to the latter as an energy
which acts in intelligent harmony with the infinite will. Nietzsche
sees clearly that in this way they have not arrived at any convincing
idea of the content of the higher life-affirmation, but are moving in
the region of the abstract. He himself means to remain at all costs
elemental, and he therefore avoids philosophizing about the universe,
showing himself thereby to be a true moralist like Socrates. He jeers
at those who, not content with belittling mankind, proceed further to
profane the reality of the world by declaring that it exists merely in
the human imagination. It is only on the essential nature of the
will-to-live and the way to use it most completely in experience, that
he himself wishes to reflect.

His original belief was that he could conceive the higher
life-affirmation as the development to a higher spirituality of the
will-to-live. When, however, he attempted to carry this idea through,
it took on, without his being aware of it, another form. Higher
spirituality means, of course, the repressing of natural impulses and
natural claims on life, and is thereby connected in some way or other
with life-denial. Higher life-affirmation, therefore, can only consist
in the content of the will-to-live being raised to its highest
conceivable power. Man carries out the meaning of his life by
affirming with the clearest consciousness of [pg 178] himself
everything that is within him—even his impulses to secure power and
pleasure.

But the opposition between the spiritual and the natural Nietzsche
cannot get rid of. Just in proportion as he emphasizes the natural
does the spiritual shrink back. Under the visible influence of the
mental disease which is threatening him the ideal man grows into the
“superman,” who asserts himself triumphantly against all fate, and
seeks his own ends without any consideration for the rest of mankind.

From the very outset Nietzsche is condemned, in his thinking out of
what life-affirmation means, to arrive at the higher form of it by a
more or less meaningless living out of life to the full. He wants to
listen to the highest efforts of the will-to-live without putting it
in any relation to the universe. But the higher life-affirmation can
be a living thing only when life-affirmation tries to conceive itself
in world-affirmation. Life-affirmation in itself, in whichever
direction it turns, can only become enhanced life-affirmation, never a
higher form of it. It careers about in circles unable to take any
fixed course, like a ship with its steering apparatus tied firmly up.

Nietzsche, however, instinctively shrinks from fitting
life-affirmation into world-affirmation, and bringing it by that
method to development into a higher and ethical life-affirmation.
Life-affirmation within world-affirmation means devotion to the world,
but with that there follows somehow or other life-denial within the
life-affirmation. But it is just this interplay of the two that
Nietzsche wants to get rid of, because it is there that ordinary
ethics come to grief. . . .

Nietzsche was not the first to put forward in Western thought the
theory of living one’s own life to the full. Greek sophists and others
after them anticipated him by this. There is a great difference,
however, between him and his predecessors. They are for living a full
life because it brings them enjoyment. He, on the other hand brings to
the theory the much deeper thought that by living [pg 179] one’s own
life victoriously to the full life itself is honoured, and that by
raising life to a higher power the meaning of existence is brought
out. Men of genius and strong individuality, therefore, should be
intent only on allowing the greatness that is in them to become an
actuality._(_75_)_

Nietzsche’s true predecessors are unknown to him. They have their
home, like those of Spinoza, in China. In that country
life-affirmation made the attempt to come to clear ideas about itself.
In Lao-tse and his pupils it is still naïvely ethical. In Chwang-tse
it becomes cheerful resignation; in Lie-tse the will to secret power
over things; in Yang-tse it ends in an all-round living of life to the
full. Nietzsche is a synthesis, showing itself in a European
mentality, of Lie-tse and Yang-tse. It is only we Europeans who are
capable of producing the philosophy of brutality.

Zarathustra is for Nietzsche the symbol of the thoughts which are
forming within him: Zarathustra as the hero of veracity who ventures
to value natural life as a good, and as the genius who is far removed
from the Judaeo-Christian mode of thought.

Nietzsche is at bottom no more unethical than Schopenhauer. He is
misled by the ethical element which there is in life-affirmation into
giving the status of ethics to life-affirmation as such. Thereby he
falls into the absurdities which follows from an exclusive affirmation
of life, just as Schopenhauer falls into those of an exclusive denial
of life. Nietzsche’s will-to-power should cause no more offence than
Schopenhauer’s will-to-self-annihilation, as it is explained in the
passages in his works which deal with asceticism. It is interesting to
note that neither of the two men lives in accordance with his view of
life. Schopenhauer is no [pg 180] ascetic but a _bon vivant_, and
Nietzsche does not lord it over his fellow men but lives in seclusion.

Life-affirmation and life-denial are both for a certain distance
ethical; pursued to a conclusion both are unethical. This result,
which was reached by the optimistic thought of China and the
pessimistic thought of India, makes its appearance in Europe in
Nietzsche and Schopenhauer because they are the only thinkers in this
continent who philosophise in elemental fashion about the
will-to-live, and venture to follow the paths of one-sidedness. Each
completing the other, they pronounce sentence on the ethics of
European philosophy by bringing into daylight again the elemental
ethical thoughts contained in life-denial as well as in
life-affirmation, thoughts which philosophy was keeping buried.
Arriving as they do at the non-ethical by thinking out to a
conclusion, one of them life-denial, the other life-affirmation, they
corroborate, if taken together, the statement that the ethical
consists neither of life-denial nor of life-affirmation, but is a
mysterious combination of the two.




[pg 181]

CHAPTER XVI

THE ISSUE OF THE WESTERN STRUGGLE FOR A WORLD-VIEW


Academic thinkers: Sidgwick, Stephen, Alexander, Wundt, Paulsen,
Höffding

THE attempts of speculative philosophy to find a foundation for ethics
in knowledge of the nature of the world have come to grief. Ethics
based on science and sociology have shown themselves powerless.
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, although they bring back into general
acceptance some elementary questions of ethics, are unable,
nevertheless, to establish a satisfying ethic.

In the later decades of the nineteenth century, therefore, ethics find
themselves in an unenviable position. They remain of good courage,
however, being confident that they have at their disposal a
sufficiency of “scientifically” recognized results to guarantee them
an assured existence.

This conviction is produced by a series of inter-related works—chiefly
academic manuals of ethics. Their authors are of the opinion that
ethics can be built, like the arch of a bridge, upon two piers. One of
their piers is the natural ethical disposition of man; the other they
allow themselves to find in those needs of society which influence the
spirit and temper of individuals. They consider their task to be the
bringing into actual existence of the arch (the possibility of
completing which they take for granted), with the solid material of
modern psychology, biology, and sociology, and the dividing of the
load in the best calculated way between the two piers. Fundamentally
they do nothing beyond restoring with new means the standpoint of
Hume.

The following writers try to carry through this adjustment of the
ethics which start from the standpoint of [pg 182] ethical personality
and those which start from that of society: Henry Sidgwick
(1838-1900),_(_76_)_ Leslie Stephen (1832-1904),_(_77_)_ Samuel
Alexander (b. 1859),_(_78_)_ Wilhelm Wundt (b. 1832),_(_79_)_
Friedrich Paulsen (1846-1908),_(_80_)_ Friedrich Jodl (b.
1849),_(_81_)_ Georg von Gizyki (1851-1895),_(_82_)_ Harald Höffding
(b. 1843),_(_83_)_ and others. Of these ethical writers who, in spite
of the variety of experience they bring to bear on the subject, are
essentially related to one another, the most original is Leslie
Stephen, the scientifically soundest is Wilhelm Wundt, the most
ethical is Harald Höffding.

Höffding makes the ethical originate partly out of a consideration
which limits the sovereignty of the present minute. “An action (he
says) is good which preserves the totality of life and gives fulness
and life to its content; an action is bad which has a more or less
decided tendency to break into and narrow the totality of life and its
content.” Supporting this consideration come also instincts of
sympathy, which make us feel pleasure in the pleasure of others, and
pain at their pain. The aim of ethics is general prosperity.

Of these ethical writers some put the chief emphasis on the ethical
disposition of the individual, while others hold that ethics are
constituted chiefly by their content, which aims at the good of
society. What is common to them all [pg 183] is that they try to
combine the ethic of ethical personality and the ethic of
utilitarianism without having inquired into their higher unity. That
is why the chapters in which they touch on the problem of the basic
principle of the moral are always the part of their works which is the
least clear and the least living. One is conscious of how happy they
feel when they have waded through this swamp, and can launch out into
consideration of the different ethical standpoints which have emerged
in history, or can face questions on single points in ethical
practice. And when they handle practical questions, it is obvious that
they are not in possession of any usable basic principle of the moral.
Their coming to terms with reality is a mere groping here and there.
The considerations on the strength of which they decide are set out
now in this sense, now in that. Hence these ethical writers frequently
offer very interesting discussions on ethical problems, but the
conception of the moral never gets from them any real explanation or
any deepening. The criterion of a real ethic is whether it allows
their full rights to the problems of personal morality and of the
relation of man to man, problems with which we are concerned every day
and every hour, and in which we must become ethical personalities.
These academical works do not do this. Therefore, although they may
arrive at results which deserve attention, they are not capable of
giving effective ethical impulses to the thought of their time.

The ethic of self-perfecting. Kant’s successors: Cohen, Herrmann

This mediating ethic is not left uncriticized. In Germany inheritors
of the Kantian spirit like Hermann Cohen (b. 1842)_(_84_)_ and Wilhelm
Herrmann (1846-1922)_(_85_)_ oppose [pg 184] it, and in
English-speaking countries successors of the Intuitionists like James
Martineau (1805-1900),_(_86_)_ F. H. Bradley (b. 1846),_(_87_)_ T. H.
Green (1836-1882),_(_88_)_ Simon Laurie (1829-1909),_(_89_)_ and James
Seth (b. 1860)._(_90_)_

In spite of wide differences in detail these thinkers agree in
refusing to derive ethics either from the ethical disposition of man
or from the claims of society. They represent them as produced
entirely through the ethical personality. To become ethical
personalities, however, (so they say) we step out of ourselves and
work for the good of the community.

Cohen and Herrmann attempt to reach an ethic which is a consistent
unity by using logic to put a content into the empty categorical
imperative of Kant. They wish to make good what he missed in his
_Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten_ (Foundations for a Metaphysic
of Morals) and in his _Metaphysik der Sitten_ (A Metaphysic of
Morals). Cohen finds the origin of ethics in the pure Will thinking
out the idea of one’s fellow-man and that of the associating of men to
form a state, his ethical ego being brought into existence by this
logical operation. The ethic thus attained consists in honesty,
modesty, loyalty, justice, and humanity, and culminates in the
representation of the state as the highest creation of the moral
spirit. But that this ethic is only the offspring of mental ability is
betrayed by the whole story of its appearance. The “pure will” is an
abstraction which cannot start anything.

Instead of obtaining an ethic by deduction, using abstract logical
methods, Wilhelm Herrmann opens for it the back-door of experience. He
does indeed make ethics consist in “the bowing of the individual
before the power [pg 185] of a something which is universally valid in
thought,” but that content of ethics which is a necessity of thought
we are to reach by seeing ourselves in each other as if in a mirror,
and deciding what kind of conduct makes us mutually “reliable.” The
thought of the unconditional claim originates, therefore,
spontaneously in us, but awakes to the fact that it is determined by
its content “through experience of human intercourse, and in the
relation of reliability.”

Herrmann did not carry this philosophic ethic through to completion.
He sketches it as an introduction to a not less artificial theological
ethic. His conception is allied to Adam Smith’s theory of the
impartial third party (see page 82).

Martineau, Green, Bradley, Laurie, Seth, and Royce

Martineau, Green, Bradley, Laurie, and Seth try to reach an ethic
which is a consistent unity by making the whole of ethics originate in
the need of self-perfecting. Of these, Martineau goes more on the
lines of the moralists of the eighteenth century, known as the
Cambridge Platonists. Ethics consist for him in thinking ourselves
into the ideal of perfection, which God gave us with our life, and
letting ourselves be determined by it. T. H. Green, F. H. Bradley,
Simon Laurie, and James Seth show more or less the influence of J. G.
Fichte. The ethical is with them founded on the fact that man wishes
to live his life out in the deepest way as an effective personality,
and thereby attain to true union with the infinite spirit. This
thought is expounded best by T. H. Green. He is also led at the same
time to the relation between civilization and ethics, and lays it down
that all the achievements of human activity, especially the political
and social perfecting of society, are nothing in themselves, and have
a real meaning only so far as they render more thorough inward
perfecting attainable by individuals. A spiritualized conception of
civilization is therefore now struggling [pg 186] for acceptance. An
upholder on American soil of this ethic of self-perfecting is Josiah
Royce (1855-1916)._(_91_)_

In the effort to conceive of ethics as a whole as being an ethic of
self-perfecting, that is to say of conduct which springs from inward
necessity, these thinkers express thoughts which belong to a living
ethic. To be energetically concerned with the basic principle of the
moral, even though one be led in the direction of the universal and
apparently abstract, always brings with it results which are valuable
for practice, even if the solution of the problem itself is not
thereby advanced beyond a certain point.

These thinkers go so far on these lines as to conceive of ethics as
higher life-affirmation, consisting in devoting ourselves to the
activity which the world-spirit wills for us. They represent the
mysticism of activity taught by J. G. Fichte, but without its
speculative foundation.

They leave unsolved, however, nay, they do not even put the question,
how the higher life-affirmation comes to give itself a content which
stands in contradiction to the course of nature. They conceive of
higher life-affirmation as self-devotion, that is to say as
life-affirmation within which life-denial is active. But how does this
paradox come about? How far is this direction of the will, which
contradicts the natural will-to-live, a necessity of thought? Why must
men become different from the world in order to exist and work in the
world in true harmony with the world-spirit? And what meaning has this
conduct of his for the happenings which take place in the universe?

Nature-philosophy and ethics. Fouillée, Guyau, Lange, Stern

The thought of Alfred Fouillée (1838-1913)_(_92_)_ and Jean [pg 187]
Marie Guyau (1854-1888)_(_93_)_ also circles round the conception of
ethics as higher life-affirmation. They too conceive of the ethical as
devotion, that is to say, as life-affirmation within which life-denial
is present, but they dig deeper than the English and American
representatives of the ethic of self-perfecting, in that they seek to
conceive of ethics within a nature-philosophy. Hence questions come to
be discussed which remain unnoticed in the former. The problems of the
basic principle of the moral and that of the optimistic-ethical
world-view are once more opened up and, for the first time, in a
comprehensive and elemental way.

Fouillée philosophises in a noble way about the will-to-live. The
ideas which arise in us, directed towards ethical ideals, are (he
says), like our ideas generally, not simply something produced by
thought, but are the expression of forces which press within us
towards making existence full and complete._(_94_)_ Speaking
generally, we must in this matter clearly understand that the
evolution which in the course of the world produces and maintains
existence is the work of re-presentative forces (_idées-forces_), and
is therefore to be explained in the last analysis as psychic. It
reaches its highest point in man’s ideas, which will their ends with
clear consciousness. In this highest being, man, reality gets so far
as to produce ideals which go out beyond reality, and by their means
to be led on beyond itself. Ethics are therefore a result of the
evolution of the world. The idea of self-perfecting through devotion,
which we experience as the puzzling element within us, is after all a
natural manifestation of the will-to-live. The ego which has reached
the farthest height of willing and representing enlarges itself by
overflowing upon other human existences. Devotion is, therefore, not a
surrender of the self, but a [pg 188] manifestation of its
expansion._(_95_)_ The man who analyses himself more deeply learns by
experience that the highest life-affirmation comes about, not by the
natural will-to-live simply rising into will-to-power, but by its
“expanding.” “Act towards others as if you became conscious of them at
the same time as you become conscious of yourself.”_(_96_)_

Jean Marie Guyau, a pupil and friend of Fouillée’s, in his _Sketch of
an Ethic without Obligation or Sanction_, tries to work out the
thought of this ethical life-affirmation through expansion. Ordinary
ethics, he says, stand helpless before this insoluble cleft between
the ego and other men, but living nature makes no stop at that point.
The individual life is expansive because it is life. As in the
physical sphere it carries within itself the impulse to produce fresh
life like itself, so in the spiritual sphere also it wishes to widen
its own existence by linking it on to other life like itself. Life
includes not feeding only, but also production and fruitfulness; real
living is not a taking in only, but a giving out of oneself as well.
Man is an organism which imparts itself to others; its perfection
consists in the most complete imparting of itself. In this
philosophizing, then, Hume’s notion of sympathy is given more profound
expression.

Fouillée and Guyau, both of them invalids, lived together at Nice and
Mentone. Trying in one another’s company to realise the ethical higher
life-affirmation, they take their exercise on the very shore on which
Nietzsche that same year thought out his heightened life-affirmation
of _Beyond Good and Evil_. He knows their works, as they also know
his, but as men they remain personally unknown to each other._(_97_)_

[pg 189]

Fouillée and Guyau, because they think deeply, are led to
nature-philosophy by their philosophizing about the way in which the
will-to-live is to become ethical. They wish to conceive ethics,
within a world- and life-affirming nature-philosophy, as a deepening,
which is a necessity of thought, of life-affirmation. They thus join
the procession of the Chinese monists. That which these, like Spinoza
and Fichte, attempted and failed to do, they attempt again in the
confidence that their nature-philosophy will be fairer to the
conception of living existence than that of the others was.

Navigating the rushing stream of heightened life-affirmation, they try
with mighty efforts at the oars to reach the bank of the ethical. They
believe that they will be able to land there . . . but the waves carry
them past it, as they did all those who attempted the journey before
them.

That life-affirmation in its highest form, by a paradox which lies in
the nature of things, becomes ethical devotion to others they cannot
show convincingly. This proposition, in which they would transform the
natural world-view into an ethical one, is truth only for the thought
which dares to make the same jump because it sees no possibility
otherwise of reaching land from the drifting boat.

The ethic of Fouillée and Guyau, then, is an enthusiastic conception
of life to which man pulls himself up when coming to terms with
reality, in order to assert himself and exert himself in the universe
in accordance with a higher value which he feels in himself.

Fouillée and Guyau are, therefore, elemental moralists like
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. They are not, however, like the latter,
making a voyage with their rudder tightly lashed in the circle of
world- and life-denial or of world- and life-affirmation; they hold on
their course with sure feeling towards the mysterious union of
world-affirmation, life-affirmation, and life-denial which constitutes
ethical life-affirmation. . . . But this course takes them out over
the boundless ocean. They never reach land.

[pg 190]

In order to understand themselves as a direction of the will-to-live
which is a necessity of thought, and to think themselves out to an
ethical world-view, ethics must come to terms with nature-philosophy.
We find them, then, attempting—as did the Rationalists, and Kant, and
the speculative philosophers—to read into the world, in simple or in
detailed thought, an optimistic-ethical meaning, or at least, as with
Spinoza, to give an ethical character in some way or other to the
relation of the individual to the universe. These two men also,
Fouillée and Guyau, wrestle with nature-philosophy in order from it to
justify ethics and an ethical world-view as not without meaning. At
the same time, however, they dare—and this is the new element which
appears in them—to look straight in the face the possibility that it
will perhaps be impossible to carry their undertaking through. What
will then become of ethics and world-view? Although they ought really
to totter and fall, they do nevertheless remain standing—so Fouillée
and Guyau judge.

Whether the idea of the good can finally claim any objective validity
cannot be asserted with complete confidence, says Fouillée in his
_Morale des Idées-forces_. Man must finally be content to force
himself to acceptance of the ethically expansive life-affirmation,
merely because he feels it to be the only thing which is capable of
making life valuable. Out of love for the ideal he triumphs over all
doubt, and sacrifices himself to it, untroubled about whether or no
anything results from his doing so.

Guyau’s _Sketch of a Morality without Obligations or Sanctions_ ends
in similar thoughts. An inner force, he says, works upon us and drives
us forward. Do we go forward alone, or will the idea eventually win
for itself some influence upon nature? . . . Anyhow let us go forward!
. . . “Perhaps the earth, perhaps mankind, will one day reach some as
yet unknown goal which they themselves have created. There is no hand
leading us, no eye watching on our behalf; the rudder was broken long
ago, [pg 191] or rather there never was one at all; it has to be
provided. That is a big task, and it is our task.” . . . Ethical men
are crossing the ocean of events on a rudderless and mastless
derelict, so to say, hoping nevertheless that they will some day and
somewhere reach land.

In these sentences there is announced from a distance the
disappearance of the optimistic-ethical interpretation of the world.
Because they venture on renouncing this, and proclaim in principle the
sovereign independence of ethics, Fouillée and Guyau belong to the
greatest thinkers who have had a share in shaping our world-view.

They do not, however, follow to the end the path on which they have
stumbled. While they make ethics independent of whether its activity
can or cannot prove itself legitimate as significant and effective in
the totality of world-happenings, they assume the existence of a
conflict between world-view and life-view, which philosophy down to
their day had actually not noticed. But they do not investigate its
nature, and do not show how it is that life-view can venture to assert
itself in opposition to world-view, and even to exalt itself as the
more important. They are content to prophesy that ethics and ethical
world-view will grow green again as mighty oases, fed by subterranean
springs, even if the sand-storms of scepticism should have turned into
a desert the broad territory of the optimistic-ethical knowledge of
the world, in which we once wanted to make our home. At bottom,
however, they hope that nothing like this will happen, and their
confidence that a nature-philosophy which deals in the proper way with
the nature of Being will after all finally reach an ethic and a
world-view, is not completely overthrown.

Since they at first claim only a hypothetical validity for their new
view, and do not carry it through as a matter of principle, Fouillée
and Guyau do not exercise upon the thought of the end of the
nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth the influence
which they ought to have. Their age was, indeed, not ready for that
[pg 192] renunciation of knowledge for which their writings were
preparing the way.

A forerunner of their ethic is to be found in that which Friedrich
Albert Lange sketches as his own at the end of his _History of
Materialism_ (1866). Ethics, he says, are an imaginative creation on
which we determine, because we carry an ideal within ourselves. We
rise above the actual because we find no satisfaction in it. We are
ethical because our life thereby obtains a definite character such as
we long for. . . . Ethics mean becoming free from the world.

Lange also, then, has already reached the view that from direct
philosophizing about the world and life an ethical world-view results,
not as a necessity of thought, but as a necessity for life. But like
the two French thinkers he just throws out the thought instead of
following it out into all its presuppositions and consequences.

A peculiar supplement which completes the ethics of Fouillée, Guyau,
and Lange, without actually going back to them, is provided by the
Berlin physician, Wilhelm Stern, in an inquiry, which has attracted
far too little notice, into the evolutionary origin of ethics. The
essential nature of the moral, he says, is the impulse to maintenance
of life by the repelling of all injurious attacks upon it, an impulse
through which the individual being experiences a feeling of
relationship to all other animate beings in face of nature’s injurious
attacks upon them. How has this mentality arisen in us? Through the
fact that animate beings of the most varied kinds have been obliged
through countless generations to fight side by side for existence
against the forces of nature, and in their common distress have ceased
to be hostile to one another, so that they might attempt a common
resistance to the annihilation which threatened them, instead of
succumbing in a common ruin. This experience, which began with their
first and lowest stage of existence and has become through thousands
of millions of generations more and more [pg 193] pronounced, has
given its special character to the psychology of all living beings.
All ethics are an affirmation of life, the character of which is
determined by perception of the dangers to existence which living
beings experience in common.

How much deeper Wilhelm Stern digs than Darwin did! According to
Darwin, experience of the never-ceasing, universal danger to existence
produces finally nothing but the herd-instinct, which holds together
creatures of the same species. According to Stern, there is developed
by the same experience a kind of solidarity with everything that
lives. The barriers fall. Man experiences sympathy with animals, as
they experience it, only less completely, with him. Ethics are not
only something peculiar to man, but something which, though in a less
developed form, is to be seen also in the animal world as such.
Self-devotion is an experience of the deepened impulse to
self-preservation. In the active as well as in the passive meaning of
the word the whole animate creation is to be included within the basic
principle of the moral.

The fundamental commandment of ethics, then, is that we cause no
suffering to any living creature, not even the lowest, unless it is to
effect some necessary protection for ourselves, and that we be ready
to undertake, whenever we can, positive action for the benefit of
other creatures.

In Fouillée, Guyau, and Lange ethics come to terms with
nature-philosophy, but without any advance towards making themselves
cosmic. They fall into the anachronism of regarding themselves still,
even at that date, as nothing beyond the regulating of the temper and
disposition of man towards his fellow-men, instead of widening
themselves out so as to deal with the conduct of man towards every
living creature and towards Being in general. In Stern they take this
obvious, further step.

No ethic short of one that has made itself universal and cosmic is
capable of taking in hand the investigation of the basic principle of
the moral; only such an ethic can [pg 194] really come to terms in
intelligible fashion with nature-philosophy.

Nature-philosophy and ethics in Eduard von Hartmann

In Eduard von Hartmann (1842-1906)_(_98_)_ also, ethics try to
comprehend themselves within nature-philosophy. His _Philosophy of the
Unconscious_ is largely in line with the thoughts of Fouillée, but in
the matter of world-view he goes off in another direction. Instead of
allowing ethics, when they are coming to terms with nature-philosophy,
to experience their freedom from it, he compels them to base
themselves on such a philosophy. His nature-philosophy is pessimistic.
It confesses to being unable to discover any principle which contains
a meaning in the course of nature. Therefore (so Hartmann concludes,
as do the Indians and Schopenhauer), the world-process is something
which must come to a standstill. Everything that exists must gradually
enter on the blessed condition of will-lessness. Ethics are the
disposition which brings this development into action.

In language obscure enough von Hartmann formulates at the end of his
_Phenomenology of the Moral Consciousness_ his pessimistic-ethical
world-view as follows: “Existence in the world of matter is the
Incarnation of the Godhead; the world-process is the history of the
Passion of the Incarnate God, and at the same time the way to the
Redemption of Him who is crucified in the flesh; but morality is
co-operation for the shortening of this road of suffering and
redemption.”

Then, however, instead of unfolding what this ethic is, and how it is
to come into force, he undertakes to show that all ethical standpoints
which have ever made their appearance in any way in history have their
own justification. He wants to house them all within an evolution
which necessarily leads to a pessimistic ethic.

[pg 195]

Every moral principle which shows itself in history (von Hartmann
asserts) changes itself by starting on a search for the completion
which lies nearest to it. It lives itself out, and then makes way for
the higher moral principle which issues logically from it. That is how
the ethical consciousness in individuals and in mankind works itself
up from one moral principle to another till it reaches the highest
knowledge. From the primitive moral principle of aiming at individual
pleasure it travels past the authoritarian, the æsthetic, the
sentimental, and the intellectual moral systems, which are one and all
subjective, to the objective morality of care for the general
happiness. But still beyond this it is led to the evolutionary moral
principle of the development of civilisation, and here it learns to
think on supra-moral lines. It grasps the notion that for moral
consideration there is still something higher than the prosperity of
individuals and of society, namely “contest and struggle for the
maintenance and enhancing of civilization.” This according to usual
ideas unethical conception of ethics has to live itself out
completely, so that it may then be resolved into an ethic of world-
and life-denial.

By this insight into the logic of the course of ethical evolution, von
Hartmann is saved from making any protest, as an ordinary ethical
thinker would, against the unethical civilization-ethics of the close
of the nineteenth century. He knows, on the contrary, that he is
helping the cause of rightly understood ethical progress, if he treats
them with respect as a necessary phenomenon, and urges that they be
allowed to live themselves out with the utmost completeness. We have
learnt (he therefore proclaims) to see through the ethic which aims at
making men and peoples happy as being a piece of sentimentality, and
we ought now to make up our minds to deal seriously with the
supra-ethical ethic of the enhancing of life and civilization. We must
learn to regard as good whatever is necessary for the development of
civilization, and we [pg 196] are no longer at liberty to condemn war
in the name of ethics. “The principle of the development of
civilization compels us to recognize all these protests as unsound,
since wars are the chief means of carrying on the struggle between
races, _i.e._, the process of natural selection within mankind, and
preparation for the effective waging of war has formed one of the most
important means of education and training for mankind in every phase
of the development of their civilization, as it will also, so far as
we can see, in the future.”_(_99_)_ Economic misery too, and the
struggles which arise from it, are seen by the ethical spirit which
looks further ahead to subserve a higher objective. The sufferings
under the wage system, which are far greater than those under slavery,
are necessary for the course of civilization. The struggle which they
evoke calls forces into being and has an educative result. The course
of civilization needs a favoured minority to serve as bearers of its
ideas. Beneficence and charity to the poor must therefore be practised
with moderation. The need which spurs men on to active work must not
be banished from the world.

Another element in the course of civilization is the taking into
possession of the whole earth by the race with the highest
civilization, which must therefore increase its numbers as much as
possible. In order to make the female population keen about the task
which thus falls to them, women must be raised intellectually, _i.e._,
their patriotism and national feeling must be increased as much as
possible, their historical sense must be aroused, and they must be
filled with enthusiasm for the principle of civilization which
underlies evolution. “To effect this object, the history of
civilization must be made the foundation of all instruction in the
upper classes of girl-schools.”_(_100_)_

It is desirable, therefore, to make efforts to secure the “improvement
of the human type,” and the attainment [pg 197] of an enhancement of
civilization in which “the world-spirit becomes in increasing measure
conscious of itself.”

In his nature-philosophy and his philosophy of history, then, Eduard
von Hartmann reaches a supra-ethical world-view in which Hegel and
Nietzsche drink to brotherhood, and the principles of inhumanity and
relativity, which underlie biologico-sociological ethics, sit at table
with garlands on their heads.

How and when the supra-ethical ethic of enhanced world- and
life-affirmation passes over into the highest ethic of world- and
life-denial, and in what way this highest ethic, in which we function
as Redeemers of the Absolute, is to be carried out in practice, von
Hartmann is, however, unable to make clear. The abstruse modulations
with which, in the last chapters of his work, he tries to get from one
to the other provide us with ample proof of the unnatural character of
the undertaking. To produce a world-view with Hegel for body and
Schopenhauer for head, is an absurdity. By his resolve to attempt it,
von Hartmann admits his inability to make enhanced life-affirmation
become in a natural way ethical.

Eduard von Hartmann prefers to the profession of moralist that of
philosopher of the history of morals. Instead of serving the world
with an ethical system of morals, he makes it happy with the discovery
of the principle of inherent progress in the history of morals, and
thus helps to befool completely the thought of his age, which is
living its life in an unethical and unspiritual optimism.

From the history of ethics nothing is to be obtained except a certain
amount of clearness about the problem of ethics. Anyone who discovers
in it principles which promise automatic progress in the ethical
development of mankind has by his miserably faulty construction of
that history read these principles into the facts without any
justification.

[pg 198]

Nature-philosophy and ethics in Bergson, Chamberlain, Keyserling,
Haeckel

Henri Bergson (b. 1860)_(_101_)_ renounces altogether the attempt to
bring together nature-philosophy and ethics. Houston Stewart
Chamberlain (b. 1855)_(_102_)_ and Count Hermann Keyserling (b.
1880)_(_103_)_ make the attempt but without reaching any result.

In his philosophizing about nature, Bergson does not go beyond the
_rôle_ of the observing subject. He analyses in a masterly way the
nature of the process of knowledge. His investigations into the origin
of our conception of time and of the actions of our consciousness
which are bound up with it, have taught us how to comprehend the
course of nature in its living reality. Leading us on beyond the
science which consists in external affirming and calculating, Bergson
shows that the true knowledge of Being comes to us through a sort of
intuition. Philosophizing means experiencing our consciousness as an
emanation of the creative impulse which rules in the world. Bergson’s
nature-philosophy has therefore a close inward connexion with that of
Fouillée, but he does not find it necessary, as Fouillée does, to
produce from it a world- and life-view. He limits himself to depicting
it from the standpoint of the problem of the theory of knowledge. He
does not attempt any analysis of the ethical consciousness. Year after
year we have waited for him to complete his work, as he no doubt
himself intended, with an attempt at producing an ethic on the basis
of nature-philosophy. But he [pg 199] contented himself with
developing in ever-new forms his theories about our inner knowledge of
the real. He never comes to the recognition that all deepening of our
knowledge of the world acquires its real meaning only so far as it
teaches us to comprehend what we ought to aim at in life. He lets the
waves of events roll past us, as if we were seated on an island in the
stream, whereas we are in reality obliged to exert ourselves as
swimmers in the stream.

During the war the German picture-houses were crammed. People went to
see the pictures in order to forget their hunger. Bergson’s philosophy
brings before us as living events the world which Kant depicted in
motionless wall-pictures. But to satisfy the hunger of to-day for
ethics he does nothing. He has no world-view to offer us in which we
can find a life-view. Over the whole of his philosophy there prevails
a quietistic, sceptical tone.

Houston Stewart Chamberlain tries to find a world-view which is based
on nature-philosophy and is at the same time ethical. His work
entitled _Immanuel Kant_ (1905), which is really a journey through the
problems raised by philosophy with attempts to solve them, ends in the
thought that we have to combine Goethe’s nature-philosophy, which
conceives Becoming as an eternal Being, with Kant’s judgement about
the nature of duty, if we wish to reach a real civilization. He finds
himself unable, however, to carry through to completion such a
world-view.

Roused by Chamberlain, Hermann Keyserling goes in the aims of his
thinking far beyond Bergson. He wants to reach clear ideas not only
about knowledge of the world, but also about life and work in the
world. From the pinnacle, however, to which he mounts, he sees only
the field of wisdom; that of ethics is veiled in mist. The highest
idea, so he declares at the conclusion of his work _The Structure of
the World_, is that of truth. We want to know, because knowledge,
“whether it visibly serves life at present or not, already implies in
itself a purposive reaction to the outer world.” In correct knowledge
the [pg 200] human spirit enters into reciprocal relations with the
universe. Life carries within itself its own purposive character.

Keyserling finds it quite in order that the world-view of great men
should be superior to ordinary moral standards. One must not reproach
Leonardo da Vinci for working as willingly in the service of the
French king, Francis I., as he had done previously in that of the
Sforzas whom Francis expelled. “Almost every great spirit is a
complete egoist.” If any one has experience of life in its full extent
and depth and living force, and works in reciprocity with the
universe, interest in the human race is for him a kind of
specialization which is no longer incumbent on him.

In the Preface to the second edition of _The Structure of the World_
(1920), Keyserling admits that he has not reached a decision about the
ethical problem. In his _Philosophy as Art_ (1920), he declares it to
be the foremost duty of our time to “make the wise man a possible
type, to draw him out by education, and give him all necessary
publicity and scope for his activities.”

The wise man is the one man who is capable of veracity, the man who
lets all the tones of life sound in him, and seeks to be in tune with
the fundamental bass-note which is given in him. He has no universally
valid world-view to impart to others. He has not even for himself one
that is definite and final; he has only one which is liable to
constant alteration for the better. He himself is unalterable only in
this, that he wants to live his life in its entirety and in the most
vital co-operation with the Universe, and at the same time ever
strives to be himself. Veracious and emphatic life-affirmation is
therefore the last word of this philosophizing about the world and
life. . . .

Thus does nature-philosophy admit that it cannot produce an ethic.

With the lesser spirits self-deception goes further. The ordinary
scientific monism, the greatness of which consists in its being an
elemental movement towards veracity in an [pg 201] age which is weary
of veracity, is still convinced that from its insight into the
essential nature of life, into the development of lower life into
higher, and into the inner connexion of the individual life with the
life of the universe, it can somehow or other arrive at an ethic. But
it is significant that its representatives take altogether different
roads in the search for an ethic. An incredible absence of thought and
of plan reigns in the ethical philosophizing of the ordinary
scientific nature-philosophy. Many of its representatives have before
their mind’s eye a conception of the moral as a becoming one with the
universe, a conception which is related to that of the Stoics and
Spinoza. Others, influenced by Nietzsche, entertain the thought that
true ethics are an enhanced and aristocratic life-affirmation, and
have nothing to do with the claims of the “democratic” social
ethics._(_104_)_ Others again, like Johannes Unold in his work _Monism
and its Ideals_ (1908), try to bring together nature-philosophy and
ethics just in such a way as to let them conceive of the human
activity which is directed to social ends as the final result of the
development of the organic world. There are also scientific
nature-philosophers who are content to put together out of what is
commonly regarded as moral an ethic which is universally accepted, and
to exalt it, so far as they can, into a product of nature-philosophy.
In Ernst Haeckel’s (1834-1919) work _The Riddle of the Universe_
(1899), there is an ethic of that character built on to the palace of
nature-philosophy like an outside kitchen. The basic principle of
monistic ethical theory is (so it is here maintained) the equal
justification of Egoism and of Altruism, and then a balance between
them. Both are laws of nature. Egoism serves the preservation of the
individual, altruism that of the species. This “golden rule of
morality” is said to be of equal significance [pg 202] with the rule
which Jesus and other ethical thinkers before him are said to have
enunciated in the demand that we shall love our neighbour as
ourselves. Spencer and water is poured out under a Christian label.

The death-agony of the optimistic-ethical world-view

An inexorable development of thought, then, brings it about that the
philosophy of the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of
the twentieth, either advances to a supra-ethical world-view, or finds
itself living in an ethical ruin. What happens in the great German
speculative philosophy of the beginning of the nineteenth century is a
prelude to the _dénouement_ of the drama. In that philosophy an
ethical world-view tries to find itself a foundation in speculative
nature-philosophy, and in doing so becomes, as stands confessed in
Hegel, supra-ethical. Later, ethics believe themselves capable of
providing a “scientific” conception of themselves, thanks to the
results reached by psychology, biology, and sociology, but in
proportion as they effect this, their energy decreases. Later still,
when through the growth of science and the inward changes in thought a
nature-philosophy which is in harmony with scientific observation of
nature becomes the only possible philosophy, ethics have once more to
make a real attempt to found themselves in a nature-philosophy which
is directed upon the universe. There is nothing, however, but the
enhancement and perfecting of life which nature-philosophy can give as
the meaning of life. Hence ethics must struggle to conceive the
enhancement and perfecting of life as something which comes to pass
within the field of ethical ideas, and it is this that the most modern
thought is striving for, on lines of development which are often
apparently irreconcilable, without ever attaining its goal.

Whenever ethics really rely in any way upon nature-philosophy for the
production of the convincing, ethical world-view which the age is
longing for, they get wrecked [pg 203] upon it in one way or another.
Either they actually attempt to give themselves out to be somehow a
natural enhancement of life and thereby so alter their character that
they cease to be really and truly ethics. Or they abdicate; perhaps,
as with Keyserling, leaving the field free to supra-ethical
world-view, perhaps, as with Bergson, leaving nature-philosophy and
ethical questions with it, to rest in peace.

Thus the sun of ethics becomes darkened for our generation,
nature-philosophy pushing forward like a wall of cloud. Just as an
inundation overwhelms pastures and fields with its water-borne
_débris_, so do the supra-ethical and the unethical ways of thinking
break in upon our mentality. They bring about the most terrible
devastations without anyone having any clear idea of what the
catastrophe means, or indeed being conscious of anything wrong beyond
that the spirit of the time is rendering all ethical standards
powerless.

Everywhere there grows up an unethical conception of civilization. The
masses reconcile themselves in an incomprehensible way to the theory
of the relativity of all ethical standards and to thoughts of
inhumanity. Freed from any obligation of ethical intention, the belief
in progress suffers a process of externalization which increases from
year to year, becoming finally nothing better than a wooden façade
which conceals the pessimism behind it. That we have lapsed into
pessimism is betrayed by the fact that the demand for the spiritual
advance of society and mankind is no longer seriously made among us.
We have now resigned ourselves, as if no explanation of it were
needed, to the fate of being obliged to smile at the high-flying hopes
of previous generations. There is no longer to be found among us the
true world- and life-affirmation which reaches down to the depths of
the spiritual nature of man. Unavowed pessimism has been consuming us
for decades.

Delivered over to events in a temper and disposition which is
powerless because it is entirely without any true [pg 204] and ethical
ideals of progress, we are experiencing the collapse of material and
spiritual civilization alike.

By its belief in an optimistic ethical world-view the modern age made
itself capable of a mighty advance towards civilization. Its thought,
however, has not been able to show this world-view to be founded in
the nature of things, and we have therefore sunk, consciously and
unconsciously, into a condition in which we have no world-view at all,
a condition of pessimism, too, and of absence of all ethical
conviction, so that we are on the point of complete shipwreck.

The bankruptcy of the optimistic-ethical world-view was announced
beforehand as little as was the financial bankruptcy of the ruined
states of Europe. But just as the latter was gradually revealed as
having actually come about by the constantly diminishing value of the
paper-money that was issued, so is the former being gradually revealed
by the constantly diminishing power among us of the true and profound
ideals of civilization.




[pg 205]

CHAPTER XVII

THE NEW WAY


Why the optimistic-ethical world-view cannot be carried through to the
logical conclusion

THE greatness of European philosophy consists in its having chosen the
optimistic-ethical world-view; its weakness in its having again and
again imagined that it was putting that world-view on a firm
foundation, instead of making clear to itself the difficulties of
doing so. The task before our generation is to strive with deepened
thought to reach a truer and more serviceable world-view, and thus to
bring to an end our living on and on without any world-view at all.

Our age is striking out unmeaningly in every direction like a fallen
horse in the traces. It is trying with external measures and new
organisation to solve the problems with which it has to deal, but all
in vain. The horse cannot get on its feet again till it is unharnessed
and allowed to get its head up. Our world will not get upon its feet
again till it lets the truth come home to it that its cure is not to
be found in active measures but in new ways of thinking.

But new ways of thinking can arise only if a true and serviceable
world-view draws individuals within its influence.

The one serviceable world-view is the optimistic-ethical. Its renewal
is a duty incumbent on us. Can we prove it to be true?

In the struggle of the thinkers who for centuries exerted themselves
to demonstrate the truth of the optimistic-ethical world-view, and
kept surrendering themselves comfortably to the illusion, always very
soon shattered, that [pg 206] they had succeeded, the problem with
which we are concerned reveals itself in outlines which become clearer
and clearer. We are now in a position to reckon up why those or those
paths, apparently so full of promise, have led to nothing, and can
lead to nothing. By the insight into the problem thus won we shall be
preserved from entering on impassable roads and forced to follow the
only one which is practicable.

The most general result of the attempts made up to the present is
this: that the optimistic-ethical interpretation of the world, by
which it was hoped to put the optimistic-ethical world-view on a firm
foundation, cannot be carried through to a conclusion. Yet how logical
and natural it seemed to tune up the meaning of life and the meaning
of the world to the same note! How invitingly the path opened out of
explaining our own existence from the nature and significance of the
world! The path rises so naturally to the crest of the foothills that
one could only believe it led up to the highest point of knowledge.
But high up in the ascent it breaks off with chasms ahead.

The reflexion that the meaning of human life must be conceivable
within the meaning of the world is such an obvious one to thought,
that the latter never lets itself be led from its path by the failure,
one after another, of all attempts in that direction. It merely
concludes that it has not tackled the problem in the right way. It
therefore has resort to the whisperings of the theory of knowledge,
and undertakes to impugn the reality of the world in order to deal
with it more successfully. In Kant, in the speculative philosophy, and
in much “spiritualistic” popular philosophy which has been current
almost down to our own day, it preserved its hope of reaching its goal
by some sort of combination of epistemological with ethical realism.
Hence the philosophy of academic manuals declaims against the
unprejudiced thinking which tries to reach a world-view without first
having been baptised by Kant with fire and the Holy Spirit. But this
too is a vain proceeding. The refined and underhand attempts to form a
[pg 207] conception of the world with an optimistic-ethical meaning
meet with no better success than the naïve ones. What our thinking
tries to proclaim as knowledge is never anything but an unjustifiable
interpretation of the world.

Against the admission of this, thought guards itself with the courage
of despair, because it fears it will find itself in that case with no
idea of what to do in face of the problem of life. What meaning can we
give to human existence, if we must renounce all pretence of knowing
the meaning of the world? Nevertheless there remains only one thing
for thought to do, and that is to adapt itself to facts.

The hopelessness of the attempt to find the meaning of life within the
meaning of the world is shown first of all by the fact that in the
course of nature there is no purposiveness to be seen in which the
working of men, and of mankind as a whole, could in any way intervene.
On one of the smaller among the millions of heavenly bodies there have
lived for a short space of time some human beings. For how long will
they continue so to live? Any lowering or raising of the temperature
of the earth, any change in the inclination of the axis of their
planet, a rise in the level of the ocean, or a change in the
composition of the atmosphere, could put an end to their existence. Or
the earth itself may fall, as so many other heavenly bodies have
fallen, a victim to some cosmic catastrophe. We are entirely ignorant
of what we mean for the earth. How much less then may we presume to
try to attribute to the infinite universe a meaning which has us for
its object, or which can be explained in terms of our existence!

It is not, however, merely the huge disproportion between the universe
and human beings which makes it impossible for us to give the aims and
objects of mankind a logical place in those of the universe. Any such
attempt is made useless beforehand by the fact that we have not yet
succeeded in discovering any general purposiveness in the course of
nature. Whatever we do find of purposiveness in the world is never
anything but isolated instances of it.

[pg 208]

In the production and maintenance of some definite form of life nature
does sometimes act purposively in a magnificent way. But in no way
does she ever seem intent on uniting these instances of purposiveness
which are directed to single objects into a collective purpose. She
never undertakes to let life coalesce with life to form a collective
life. She is wonderfully creative force, and at the same time
senselessly destructive force. We face her, absolutely unable to form
any notion of what to do. What is full of meaning within the
meaningless, the meaningless within what is full of meaning: that is
the essential nature of the universe

Life-view independent of world-view

These elemental established conclusions European thought has tried to
ignore. It can do so no longer, and it is of no use to try. The facts
have silently produced their consequences. While the
optimistic-ethical world-view still maintains itself among us as a
dogma, we no longer possess the ethical world- and life-affirmation
with which it ought to provide us. Perplexity and pessimism have taken
possession of us without our admitting it.

There remains, therefore, nothing for us to do but to admit that we
understand nothing of the world, and are surrounded by nothing but
enigmas. Our knowledge is becoming sceptical.

Just as thought has hitherto allowed world-view and life-view to hang
together, mutually connected, so have we in consequence fallen
similarly into a sceptical conception of life. But is it really the
case that life-view is towed along by world-view, and that when the
latter can no longer be kept afloat life-view must sink with it into
the depths? Necessity bids us cut the tow-rope and try to let
life-view continue its voyage independently.

This manœuvre is not such a surprising one as it seems. While people
acted as though their life-view were taken from their world-view, the
connexion between the two was really just the opposite, their
world-view was formed from [pg 209] their life-view. What they put
forward as their view of the world was an interpretation of the world
in the light of their life-view.

The life-view held by European thought being optimistic-ethical, the
same character was attributed by everybody to their world-view in
defiance of facts. The will, without admitting it, overpowered
knowledge. Life-view prompted and world-view recited. The belief that
their life-view was derived from their world-view was therefore only a
fiction.

In Kant this overpowering of knowledge, which had till then been just
naïvely allowed, was worked out systematically. His doctrine of the
“Postulates of the Practical Reason” means just this: that the will
claims for itself the decisive word in the last pronouncements of the
world-view. Only Kant manages to arrange the matter so cleverly that
the will never forces its supremacy on knowledge, but receives it from
the latter as a free gift, and then makes use of it in carefully
chosen parliamentary ways. It proceeds as if it had been invoked by
the theoretical reason to provide possible truths with reality
belonging to truths which are necessities of thought.

In Fichte the will dictates to knowledge its world-view without any
regard at all for the arts of diplomacy.

From the middle of the nineteenth century onward there can be
discerned a tendency in natural science no longer to claim that
world-view shall accommodate itself to scientifically established
facts. The valuable convictions of the traditional world-view are to
hold good, even if they cannot be brought into harmony with the
accepted knowledge of the world. After the publication of Du
Bois-Raymond’s (1818-1896) lectures “On the Limits of our Knowledge of
Nature” it begins with a certain school of natural science to be
considered almost a part of good manners to declare oneself
incompetent in questions of world-view. There grows up gradually what
one may call a modern doctrine of the two-fold nature of truth. To
this movement expression is given by the “Keplerbund,” which was [pg
210] founded in 1907 by representatives of natural science, and goes
so far as to declare acceptable to natural science the valuable
pronouncements of the current world-view, even when given in formulas
provided by ecclesiastical authority. This new doctrine of the
two-fold nature of truth is brought to philosophical expression by the
theory of the solidity of “value-judgments.” By means of this theory
Albrecht Ritschl (1822-1889) and his imitators try to uphold the
validity of a religious world-view side by side with a scientific one.
Almost the whole religious world, so far as it tries to remain a
thinking body, grasps at such expedients. Next, in William James’s
(1842-1910) philosophy of Pragmatism the will admits in half-naïve,
half-cynical fashion that all the knowledge professed by its
world-view has been produced by itself.

That the valuable assertions made by the world-view are to be traced
back to the will which has been determined by valuable convictions is
therefore a fact, and since Kant’s day the fact has been admitted in
the most varied directions. The shock given to the feeling for
veracity, which accompanies this no longer naïve but half-conscious
and insidiously employed interpretation of the world, plays a fatal
part in the mentality of our time.

But why go on with this want of candour? Why keep knowledge in
subservience to the will by means of a kind of infamous secret police?
Any world-view deduced therefrom must ever be a poor weak thing. Let
us allow the will and knowledge to come together in a relation which
is honourable to both.

In what has hitherto been called world-view there are two things
united: view of the world and life-view. So long as it was possible to
cherish the illusion that the two were harmonious and each completed
the other, there was nothing to be said against this combination. Now,
however, when the divergence can no longer be concealed, the wider
conception of world-view which includes life-view organically within
itself, must be given up. It is no longer permissible to go on naïvely
believing that we get our life-view [pg 211] from our view of the
world, or furtively elevating in some way or other our life-view into
a view of the world. We are standing at a turning-point of thought.
Critical action which clears away all prevailing _naïvetés_ and
dishonesties has become necessary. We must make up our minds to leave
life-view and view of the world mutually independent of each other,
and see that a straightforward understanding between the two is
reached. We have to admit that because our life-view is made up of
convictions which are given in our will-to-live but are not confirmed
by knowledge of the world, we have allowed it to go beyond the varied
knowledge which makes up our view of the world.

This renunciation of world-view in the old sense, that is of a unitary
world-view which is complete in itself, means a painful experience for
our thought. We come hereby to a dualism against which we at every
moment instinctively rebel. But we must surrender to facts. Our will
to live has to accommodate itself to the inconceivable fact that it is
unable with its own valuable convictions to discover itself again in
the manifold will-to-live which is seen manifested in the world. We
wanted to form a life-view for ourselves out of items of knowledge
gathered from the world. But it is our destiny to live by means of
convictions which an inward necessity makes a part of our thought.

In the old rationalism reason undertook to investigate the world. In
the new it has to take as its task the attaining to clarity about the
will-to-live. Thus we return to an elemental philosophising which is
once more busied with questions of world- and life-view as they
directly affect men, and seeks to give a safe foundation to, and to
keep alive, the valuable ideas which we find in ourselves. It is in a
life-view which is dependent on itself alone, and has come in a
straightforward way to an understanding with world-knowledge, that we
hope to find once more power to attain to ethical world- and
life-affirmation.




[pg 212]

CHAPTER XVIII

THE FOUNDATIONS OF OPTIMISM SECURED FROM THE WILL-TO-LIVE


The pessimistic result of knowledge

THERE are two things which thought has to do for us; it must lead us
up out of the naïve world- and life-affirmation to a deepened one, and
it must let us go on from mere ethical impulses to an ethic which is a
necessity of thought.

Deepened world- and life-affirmation consists in this, that we have
the will to maintain our own life and every kind of existence that we
can in any way influence, and to bring them to their highest value. It
demands from us that we think out all ideals of the material and
spiritual perfecting of individual men, of society, and of mankind as
a whole, and let ourselves be determined by them to steady activity
and steady hope. It does not allow us to withdraw into ourselves, but
orders us to bring to bear a living and so far as possible an active
interest on everything which happens around us. To endure a state of
unrest through our relation to the world, when by withdrawing into
ourselves we might enjoy rest; that is the burden which deeper world-
and life-affirmation lays upon us.

We begin our life-course in an unsophisticated world- and
life-affirmation. The will-to-live which is in us gives it to us as
something which is a matter of course. But later, when thought awakes,
the questions crop up which make a problem of what has hitherto been a
matter of course. What meaning will you give your life? What do you
mean to do in the world? When, along with these [pg 213] questions, we
begin trying to reconcile knowledge and will-to-live, facts get in the
way of this with confusing suggestions. Life attracts us, they say,
with a thousand expectations, and fulfils hardly one of them. And the
fulfilled expectation is almost a disappointment, for only anticipated
pleasure is really pleasure; in pleasure which is fulfilled its
opposite is already stirring. Unrest, disappointment, and pain are our
lot in the short span of time which lies between our entrance on life
and our departure from it. The spiritual is in a dreadful state of
dependence on the bodily. Our existence is at the mercy of meaningless
happenings and can be brought to an end by them at any moment. The
will-to-live gives me an impulse to action, but the action is just as
if I wanted to plough the sea, and to sow in the furrows. What did
those who worked before me effect? What significance in the endless
chain of world-happenings have their efforts had? With all its
illusive promises the will-to-live only means to mislead me into
prolonging my existence, and allowing to enter on existence, so that
the game may go on without interruption, other beings to whom the same
miserable lot has been assigned as to myself.

The discoveries in the field of knowledge against which the
will-to-live knocks when it begins to think, are therefore altogether
pessimistic. It is not by accident that all religious world-views,
except the Chinese, have a more or less pessimistic tone and bid man
expect nothing from his existence here.

Who will stop us from making use of the freedom we are allowed, and
casting existence from us? Every thinking human being makes
acquaintance with this thought. We let it take a deeper hold of us
than we suspect from one another, as indeed we are all more oppressed
by the riddles of existence than we allow others to notice.

What determines us, so long as we are comparatively in our right mind,
to reject the thought of putting an end to our existence? An
instinctive feeling of repulsion from such a deed. The will-to-live is
stronger than pessimistic [pg 214] facts of knowledge. An instinctive
Reverence for Life is within us, for we are will-to-live. . . .

Even the consistently pessimistic thought of Brahmanism makes to the
will-to-live the concession that voluntary death may only come about
when the individual has put behind him a considerable portion of life.
The Buddha goes still further, rejecting any violent exit from
existence and demanding only that we let the will-to-live within us
die out.

All pessimism, then, is inconsistent. It does not push open the door
to freedom, but makes concessions to the obvious fact of existence. In
Indian thought, which tends to pessimism, it attempts to make these
concessions as small as possible, and to maintain the impossible
fiction that merely the bare life is being lived with complete
abstinence from any share in the happenings which are taking place
here, there, and everywhere about it. With us the concessions are
larger, since the conflict between the will-to-live and pessimistic
recognition of facts is to a certain extent damped down, and obscured
by the optimistic world-view which prevails in the general mode of
thought. There arises an unthinking will-to-live which lives out its
life trying to snatch possession of as much happiness as possible, and
meaning to do something active without having made clear to itself
what its intentions really are.

Whether somewhat more or somewhat less of world- and life-affirmation
is retained matters little. Whenever the deepened world- and
life-affirmation is not reached there remains only a depreciated
will-to-live, which is not equal to the tasks of life. Thought usually
deprives the will-to-live of the force lent it by its freedom from
pre-conceptions, without being able to induce it to adopt a practice
of reflexion in which it would find new and higher force. Thus it
still possesses energy enough to continue in life, but not enough to
overcome pessimism. The stream becomes a swamp.

That is the experience which determines the character [pg 215] of
men’s existence, without their confessing it to themselves. They
nourish themselves scantily on a little bit of happiness and many vain
thoughts, which life puts in their manger. It is only by the pressure
of necessity, exerted by elementary duties which throng upon them,
that they are kept in the path of life.

Often their will-to-live is changed into a kind of intoxication.
Spring sunshine, trees in flower, passing clouds, fields of waving
corn provoke it. A will-to-live which announces itself in many forms
in magnificent phenomena all around them, carries their own
will-to-live along with it. Full of delight, they want to take part in
the mighty symphony which they hear. They find the world beautiful. .
. . But the transport passes. Horrid discords allow them once more to
hear only noise, where they thought they perceived music. The beauty
of nature is darkened for them by the suffering which they discover
everywhere within it. Now they see once more that they are drifting
like shipwrecked men over a waste of waters, only that their boat is
at one moment raised aloft on mountainous waves and the next sinks
into the valleys between them, and that now sunbeams, and now heavy
clouds, rest upon the heaving billows.

Now they would like to persuade themselves that there is land in the
direction in which they are drifting. Their will-to-live befools their
thinking, so that it makes efforts to see the world as it would like
to see it. It compels it also to hand them a chart which confirms
their hopes of land. Once more they bend to the oars, till once more
their arms drop with fatigue, and their gaze wanders, disappointed,
from billow to billow.

That is the voyage of the will-to-live which has abjured thought.

Is there, then, nothing else that the will-to-live can do but drift
along without thought, or sink in pessimistic knowledge? Yes, there
is. It must indeed voyage across this boundless sea; but it can hoist
sails, and steer a definite course.

[pg 216]

The world- and life-affirmation of the will-to-live

The will-to-live which tries to know the world is a shipwrecked
castaway; the will-to-live which gets to know itself is a bold
mariner.

The will-to-live is not restricted to maintaining its existence on
what the ever unsatisfying knowledge of the world offers it; it can
feed on the life-forces which it finds in itself. The knowledge which
I acquire from my will-to-live is richer than that which I win by
observation of the world. There are given in it values and incitements
bearing on my relation to the world and to life which find no
justification in my reflexion upon the world and existence. Why then
tune down one’s will-to-live to the pitch of one’s knowledge of the
world, or undertake the meaningless task of tuning up one’s knowledge
of the world to the higher pitch of one’s will-to-live. The right and
obvious course is to let the ideas which are given in our will-to-live
be accepted as the higher and decisive kind of knowledge.

My knowledge of the world is a knowledge from outside, and remains for
ever incomplete. The knowledge derived from my will-to-live is direct,
and takes me back to the mysterious movements of life as it is in
itself.

The highest knowledge, then, is the knowing that I must be true to the
will-to-live. It is this knowledge that hands me the compass for the
voyage I have to make in the night without the aid of a chart. To live
out one’s life in the direction of its course, to raise it to a higher
power, and to ennoble it, is natural. Every depreciation of the
will-to-live is an act of unveracity towards myself, or a symptom of
unhealthiness.

The essential nature of the will-to-live is determination to live
itself to the full. It carries within it the impulse to realise itself
in the highest possible perfection. In the flowering tree, in the
strange forms of the medusa, in the blade of grass, in the crystal;
everywhere it strives to reach the perfection with which it is
endowed. In everything [pg 217] that exists there is at work an
imaginative force, which is determined by ideals. In us, beings who
can move about freely and are capable of pre-considered, purposive
working, the impulse to perfection is given in such a way that we aim
at raising to their highest material and spiritual value both
ourselves and every existing thing which is open to our influence.

How this striving originated within us, and how it has developed, we
do not know, but it is given with our existence. We must act upon it,
if we would not be unfaithful to the mysterious will-to-live which is
within us.

When the will-to-live arrives at the critical point where its early
unsophisticated world- and life-affirmation has to be changed into a
reflective one, it is the part of thought to assist it by holding it
to the thinking out of all the ideas which are given within it and to
the surrender of itself to them. That the will-to-live within us
becomes true to itself and remains so; that it experiences no
degeneration but develops itself to complete vitality, that is what
decides the fate of our existence.

When it comes to clearness about itself, the will-to-live knows that
it is dependent on itself alone. It is meant to attain to freedom from
the world. Its knowledge of the world can prove to it that its
striving to raise to their highest value its own life and every living
thing which can be influenced by it remains in the course of the
world-whole, something problematic. In this it has not been misled.
Its world- and life-affirmation carries its meaning in itself. It
follows from an inward necessity, and is sufficient for itself. By its
means my existence joins in pursuing the aims of the mysterious
universal will of which I am a manifestation. In my deepened world-
and life-affirmation, I manifest reverence for life. With
consciousness and with volition I devote myself to Being. I become of
service to the ideals which it thinks out in me; I become imaginative
force like that which works enigmatically in nature, and thus I give
my existence a meaning from within outwards.

[pg 218]

Reverence for life means to be in the grasp of the infinite,
inexplicable, forward-urging Will in which all Being is grounded. It
raises us above all knowledge of things and lets us become a tree
which is safe against drought, because it is planted among running
streams. All living piety flows from reverence for life and the
compulsion towards ideals which is given in it. In reverence for life
lies piety in its most elemental and deepest form, in which it has not
yet involved itself with any explanation of the world or no longer
does so, but is piety which comes simply from inward necessity, and
therefore asks no questions about ends to be pursued.

The will-to-live, too, which has become reflective and has made its
way through to deeper world- and life-affirmation, tries to secure
happiness and success, for as will-to-live it is will to the realizing
of ideals. It does not, however, live on happiness and success.
Whatever of these it obtains is a strengthening of itself which it
thankfully accepts, though it is resolved on action, even if happiness
and success must be denied it. It sows as one who does not count on
living to reap the harvest.

The will-to-live is not a flame which burns only when events provide
suitable fuel; it blazes up, and that with the purest light, when it
is forced to feed on what it derives from itself. Then, too, when
events seem to leave no future for it but suffering, it still holds
out as an active will. In deep reverence for life it makes the
existence which according to usual ideas is no longer in any way worth
living, precious, because even in such an existence it experiences its
own freedom from the world. Quiet and peace radiate from a being like
that upon others, and cause them also to be touched by the secret that
we must all, whether active or passive, preserve our freedom in order
truly to live.

True resignation is not a becoming weary of the world but the quiet
triumph which the will-to-live celebrates at the hour of its greatest
need over the circumstances of life. [pg 219] It flourishes only in
the soil of deep world- and life-affirmation.

In this way our life is a coming to an understanding between our
will-to-live and the world, along with which we have continually to be
on our guard against allowing any deterioration in our will-to-live.
The struggle between optimism and pessimism is never fought to a
finish within us. We are ever wandering on slipping rubble above the
abyss of pessimism. When that which we experience in our own existence
or learn from the history of mankind, falls oppressively upon our
will-to-live and robs us of our freshness and our power of
deliberation, we might lose hold, and be carried away with the moving
boulders into the abyss below. But knowing that what awaits us below
is death, we work our way up to the path again. . . .

Or it may perhaps be that pessimism comes over us, like the bliss of
complete rest over those who, tired out, sit down in the snow. No
longer to be obliged to hope for and aim at what is commanded us by
the ideals which are forced upon us by the deepened will-to-live! No
longer to be in a state of unrest when by lessening our efforts we can
have rest! . . . Gently comes the appeal from knowledge to our will to
tune itself down to the facts. . . .

That is the fatal state of complete rest in which men, and civilised
mankind as a whole, grow numb and die.

And when we think that the enigmas by which we are surrounded can no
longer harm us, there once more rises up before us somewhere or other
the most terrifying of them all, the fact that the will-to-live can be
shattered in suffering or in spiritual night. This enigma, too, before
which our will-to-live shudders as before the most inexplicable of all
inexplicable things, we must learn to leave unsolved.

Thus does pessimistic knowledge pursue us closely right on to our last
breath. That is why it is so profoundly significant that the
will-to-live rouses itself at last and once for all to insist on its
freedom from having to understand the world, and shows itself capable
of letting itself be [pg 220] determined solely by that which is given
within itself. With humility and courage it makes its way through the
endless chaos of enigmas, fulfilling its mysterious destiny, making a
reality of its union with the infinite will-to-live.




[pg 221]

CHAPTER XIX

THE PROBLEM OF ETHICS, STARTING FROM THE HISTORY OF ETHICS


An ethic of self-devotion, or an ethic of self-perfecting?

THOUGHT, then, which reaches bottom, arrives at an unshakeable
world-and-life affirmation. Let it now try whether it can lead us to
an ethic. But that it may not proceed with us, as it so often does,
merely at random, it shall gather from the thought which has hitherto
been devoted to ethics all the guidance which is there to be found.

What does the history of ethics teach?

As a quite general principle we learn from it, that the object of all
ethical enquiry is the discovery of the universal basic principle of
the moral.

The basic principle of the moral must show itself to be a necessity of
thought, and must bring man to an unceasing, living, and practical
conflict and understanding with reality.

The principles of the moral which have hitherto been offered us are
absolutely unsatisfying. This is clear from the fact that they cannot
be thought out to a conclusion without leading to paradoxes, or losing
in ethical content.

Classical thought tries to conceive of the ethical as that which
brings rational pleasure. It did not succeed, however, from that
starting-point in arriving at an ethic of active devotion. Shut up
within the egoistic-utilitarian, it ends in an ethically-coloured
resignation.

The ethical thought of modern times is from the outset
social-utilitarian. It is to it a matter of course that the individual
must devote himself in every respect to his fellow-individuals, and to
society. But when it tries to [pg 222] give a firm foundation to this
ethic of devotion which seems to it so much a matter of course, and to
think it out to a conclusion, it is driven to the most remarkable
consequences, which are inconsistent with each other in the most
varied directions. At one time it explains devotion as a refined
egoism; at another as something which society forcibly imposes on
individuals; at another as something which it develops in him by
education; at another, as in Bentham, as something which he adopts as
one of his convictions on the ground of the urgent representations of
society; at another as an instinct which he obeys. The first
assumption cannot be carried through; the second, third, and fourth
are unsatisfying because they allow ethics to reach men from the
outside; the last leads to a _cul-de-sac_. If, for example, devotion
is an instinct, it must, of course, be made conceivable how thought
can work upon it, and raise it to the level of a considered, widely
inclusive, voluntary activity at which level it first becomes ethical.
This, which is its peculiar problem, utilitarianism does not
recognise, much less solve. It is always in too much of a hurry to
come to practical results. At last it gives its bond to biology and
social science, which bring it to conceiving itself as herd-mentality,
wonderfully developed and capable of still further development. It
thereby bring itself to a halt far below the level of real ethics.

The ethic of devotion fails therefore most remarkably, although it
starts from what is most elementary and essential in ethics, to shape
itself in a way which satisfies thought. It is as if it had the true
basic principle of ethics within its reach, yet always grasped to
right or left of it.

By the side of these two attempts to understand ethics as effort to
procure rational pleasure, or as devotion to one’s fellow-men and to
society, there is a third, which tries to explain ethics as effort
after self-perfecting. This attempt has in it something abstract and
venturesome. It disdains to start from a universally acknowledged
content of the ethical, as utilitarianism does, and in contrast to
that [pg 223] sets before thought the task of deriving the whole
content of ethics from the effort after self-perfecting.

Plato, the first representative in the West of the ethics of
self-perfecting, and Schopenhauer try to solve the problem by setting
up, as do the Indians, world- and life-denial to be the basic
principle of the ethical. That, however, is no solution. World- and
life-denial, if consistently thought out and carried through, does not
produce an ethic but reduces ethics to impotence.

Kant, the modern restorer of the ethic of self-perfecting, sets up the
conception of absolute duty, but without giving it any content. He
thereby admits his inability to derive the content of ethics from the
effort after self-perfecting.

If the ethic of self-perfecting tries really to acquire a content, it
must allow that ethics consist either in world- and life-denial or in
higher world- and life-affirmation. The first need not be considered;
there remains, therefore, only the other.

Spinoza conceives the higher world- and life-affirmation as a thinking
absorption in the universe. He does not, however, arrive thereby at a
real ethic, but only at an ethically-coloured resignation.
Schleiermacher uses much art to lend this ethical colouring a more
brilliant tone. Nietzsche avoids the paths of resignation, but reaches
thereby a world- and life-affirmation which is ethical only so far as
it feels itself to be an effort after self-perfecting.

The only thinker who succeeds to some extent in giving to
self-perfecting within world- and life-affirmation an ethical content
is J. G. Fichte. The result, however, is valueless, because it
presupposes an optimistic-ethical view of the nature of the universe
and of the position of man within it, which is based upon inadmissible
speculation.

The ethic of self-perfecting is therefore not capable of so
establishing the basic principle of the moral, that it has a content
which is ethically satisfying; the ethic of devotion, on the other
hand, starting from the content which it [pg 224] presupposes, cannot
reach a basic principle of ethics which is grounded in thought. The
attempt made by antiquity to conceive ethics as that which brings
rational pleasure we need no longer consider. It is only too clear
that it does not take sufficiently into account the enigma of
devotion, and can never solve it. There remain, therefore, for
consideration only the two undertakings, so strangely opposed to one
another, one of which starts from devotion as a generally accepted
content of the ethical in order to conceive it as belonging to the
self-perfecting of man, while the other starts from self-perfecting
and seeks to conceive devotion as an item in its content which is a
necessity of thought.

Is there a synthesis of these two? In other words, do devotion and
self-perfecting belong together in such a way that the one is
contained in the other?

If this inward unity has not been visible hitherto, may not the cause
be that reflexion, whether upon devotion or upon self-perfecting, did
not go deep enough and was not sufficiently inclusive?

Ethics and a theory of knowledge. Ethics and natural happenings. The
enthusiastic element in ethics

Before thought attempts to investigate more deeply and completely the
nature of devotion and that of self-perfecting, it must proceed
further to put clearly before itself what there is offered to it in
the way of different kinds of knowledge and other considerations on
its journey through the Western search for ethics.

It may be accepted as something fully recognised that ethics have
nothing to expect from any theory of knowledge. Depreciation of the
reality of the sensible world brings them merely apparent profit.
Thought believes it can draw from the possibility of a spiritualising
of the world some advantage for the optimistic-ethical interpretation
of it. It has been, however, established by this [pg 225] time that
ethics can no more be derived from an ethical interpretation of the
world than world- and life-affirmation can be referred back to an
optimistic interpretation of it, and that they must instead of that
find their foundation in themselves in a world which is recognised as
absolutely enigmatic. At once and for ever, then, all attempts to
bring ethical and epistemological idealism into connexion with one
another have to be recognised as useless for ethics. Ethics can let
space and time go hang.

In epistemological investigations into the nature of space and time
ethics feel a satisfaction which is strong but uninterested. They view
them as efforts after knowledge which must be made, but they know that
the results can never touch what is essential in any world- and
life-view. It suffices them to know that the whole world of sense is a
manifestation of forces, that is to say of an enigmatically manifold
will-to-live. In this their thought is spiritualistic. It is
materialistic, however, so far as it presupposes manifestation and
force to be connected in such a way that any effect produced upon the
former influences the force which lies behind it. Ethics feel that if
it were not thus possible for one will-to-live to produce through the
manifestation effects on another will-to-live, they would have no
reason for existing. But to investigate how this relation between
force and its manifestation is to be explained from the standpoint of
epistemology, and whether it can be explained at all, ethics can leave
undecided as being none of their business; they claim for themselves,
just as does natural science, the right to remain free from
preconceptions.

In this connexion it is interesting to observe that it is among the
representatives of scientific materialism that enthusiastic ethical
idealism is often to be met with, while the adherents of
spiritualistic philosophy are usually moralists with an unemotional
temperament.

With renunciation of all help from epistemological [pg 226] idealism,
it follows that ethics ask for nothing and expect nothing from
speculative philosophy. They declare they have nothing to do with any
kind of ethical interpretation of the world.

Thought gathers, further, from the history of ethics that the latter
cannot be conceived as being merely a natural happening which
continues itself in man. In the ethical man natural happenings come
into contradiction with themselves. Nature knows only a blind
affirmation of life. The will-to-live which animates natural forces
and living beings is concerned to work itself out unhindered. But in
man this natural effort is in a state of tension with a mysterious
effort of a different kind. Life-affirmation exerts itself to take up
life-denial into itself in order to serve other living beings by
self-devotion, and to protect them, even eventually by self-sacrifice,
from injury or destruction. It is true that self-devotion plays a
certain _rôle_ in non-human living beings. As a temporary instinct it
rules in sexual love and in parental love; as a permanent instinct it
is found in certain individual members of animal species (_e.g._,
ants, bees) which, because sexless, are incomplete individualities.
These manifestations are in a certain way a prelude to the interplay
of life-affirmation and life-denial which is at work in the ethical
man. They do not, however, explain it. That which is active elsewhere
only as a temporary instinct, or as an instinct in incomplete
individualities and that, too, always within special relations of
solidarity with others, becomes now, in man, a steady, voluntary,
unlimited form of action, a result of thought, in which individuals
endeavour to realise the higher life-affirmation. How does this come
about?

Here one is faced once more by the problem of the _rôle_ which thought
plays in the origin of ethics. It seizes on something of which a
preliminary form is seen in an instinct, in order to extend it and
bring it to perfection. It comprehends the content of an instinct, and
tries to give it practical application in new and consistent action.

[pg 227]

In some way or other the _rôle_ of thought lies in the fulfilment of
life-affirmation. It rouses the will-to-live to recognise as in
analogy with the life-affirmation which is in itself, the
life-affirmation which shows itself in the manifold life which is
everywhere around it, and to join in its experiences. On the
foundation of this world-affirmation life-denial takes its place as a
means of helping forward this affirmation of other life than its own.
It is not life-denial in itself that is ethical, but only such as
stands in the service of world-affirmation and becomes purposive
within it.

Ethics are a mysterious chord in which life-affirmation and
world-affirmation are the ground-note and the fifth; life-denial is
the third.

It is important, further, to know what is to be gathered from ethical
inquiry down to the present time about the intensity and the extension
of the life-denial which stands in the service of world-affirmation.
Again and again the attempt has been made to establish this
objectively. In vain! It belongs to the nature of devotion that it
must live itself out subjectively and without reservations.

In the history of ethics there is downright fear of what cannot be
subjected to rules and regulations. Again and again thinkers have
undertaken to define devotion in such a way that it remains rational.
This, however, is never done except at the cost of the naturalness and
living character of ethics. Life-denial remains something irrational,
even when it places itself at the service of a purposive policy. A
universally applicable balance between life-affirmation and
life-denial cannot be established. They remain in a state of continual
tension. If any relaxation does take place, it is a sign that ethics
are collapsing, for in their real nature they are unbounded
enthusiasm. They originate indeed in thought, but they cannot be
carried through to a logical conclusion. Anyone who undertakes the
voyage to a true ethic must be prepared to be carried round and round
in the whirlpool of the irrational.

[pg 228]

The ethic of ethical personality, and the ethic of society

Together with the subjectively enthusiastic nature of ethics goes the
fact that it never wishes to succeed in developing the ethic of
ethical personality into a serviceable ethic of society. It seems so
obvious, that from right individual ethics right social ethics should
result, the one continuing itself into the other like a town into its
suburbs. In reality, however, they cannot be so built that the streets
of the one continue as those of the other. The plans of each are drawn
on principles which take no account of that.

The ethic of ethical personality is personal, incapable of regulation,
and absolute; that which is established by society for its own
prosperous existence is supra-personal, regulated, and relative. Hence
the ethical personality cannot surrender to it, but lives always in
continuous disputation with it, obliged again and again to oppose it
because it finds its focus too short.

In the last analysis the antagonism between the two arises from their
differing valuations of humaneness. Humaneness consists in this—that
no human being is ever sacrificed to a purpose. The ethic of ethical
personality aims at preserving humaneness. That which is established
by society is impotent in that respect.

When the individual is faced with the alternative of having to
sacrifice in some way or other the happiness or the existence of
another, or else to bear the loss himself, he is in a position to obey
the demands of ethics and to choose the latter. But society, thinking
impersonally and pursuing its aims impersonally, does not allow the
same weight to consideration for the happiness or existence of an
individual. In principle humaneness is not an item in its ethic. But
individuals come continually into the position of being in one way or
another executive organs of society, and then the conflict between the
two points of view becomes active. That this may always be decided in
its own favour, [pg 229] society exerts itself to limit as closely as
possible the authority of the ethic of personality, although inwardly
it has to acknowledge its superiority. It wants to have servants who
will never oppose it.

Even a society the ethical standard of which is relatively high, is
dangerous to the ethics of its members. If those things which form
precisely the defects of a social ethic develop strongly, and society
exercises, further, an excessively strong spiritual influence on
individuals, then the ethic of ethical personality is ruined. This
happens in present-day society, the ethical conscience of which is
becoming fatally stunted by a biologico-sociological ethic and this,
moreover, finally corrupted by nationalism.

The great mistake made by ethical thought down to the present time is
that it fails to admit the essential difference between the ethic of
ethical personality and that which is established from the standpoint
of society, and always thinks that it ought, and is able, to cast them
in one piece. The result is that the ethic of personality is
sacrificed to the ethic of society. An end must be put to this. What
matters is to recognise that the two are engaged in a conflict which
cannot be made less intense. Either the ethic of personality raises
the social ethic, so far as it can, to its own level, or it is dragged
down by the latter.

But to get rid of the present unhealthy state of opinion it is not
enough to bring individuals to a consciousness that if they are not to
suffer spiritual harm they must be in a state of continual conflict
with the ethics of society. What matters is to establish a basic
principle of the moral, which will put the ethic of personality in a
position to come with consistency and success to discussion and
agreement with the ethic of society. Hitherto there has been no
possibility of putting this weapon into its hands. Ethics have, as we
know, always been regarded as the most thorough-going possible
devotion to society.

The ethic of ethical personality, then, and the ethic [pg 230] which
is established from the standpoint of society cannot be traced back
the one to the other, and are not of equal value. The first only is a
real ethic; the other is improperly so called. Thought must aim at
finding the basic principle of absolute ethics, if it is to reach the
condition of being ethics at all, and it was because it was not clear
on this point that it made so little progress. Progress in ethics
consists in our making up our minds to think pessimistically of the
ethic of society.

The ethic which is established from the standpoint of society
consists, in its essential nature, in this, that society appeals to
the moral disposition of the individual in order to secure from it
what cannot be forced upon it by compulsion and law. It only comes
nearer to real ethics when it comes to an agreement with the ethic of
personality and tries to bring its own demands on the individual into
harmony as far as possible with the latter’s. In proportion as society
takes on the character of an ethical personality, its ethic becomes an
ethic of ethical society.

The problem of a complete ethic

In general, thought should have busied itself with the question of
what is included in the whole field of ethics, and how the different
elements within it are connected with each other.

In ethics are included the ethic of passive self-perfecting, which is
effected by inward self-liberation from the world (resignation); the
ethic of active self-perfecting effected by means of the mutual
relations between man and man; and the ethic of ethical society.
Ethics are thus an extensive gamut of notes. They start from the not
yet ethical, where the vibrations of resignation begin to make
themselves perceptible as notes of ethical resignation. With
increasingly rapid vibrations they pass from the ethic of resignation
into that of active self-perfecting. Rising still higher they emerge
into the notes of the ethic of [pg 231] society which are already
becoming more or less harsh and noisy, and they die away finally into
the legal commands of society which are never more than conditionally
ethical.

Up to now all ethical systems have been thoroughly fragmentary. They
confine themselves to this or that octave of the gamut. The Indians
and, following in their train, Schopenhauer are, on the whole,
concerned only with the ethic of passive self-perfecting; Zarathustra,
the Jewish prophets, and the great moralists of China only with that
of active self-perfecting. The interest of modern Western philosophy
is fixed almost exclusively on the ethic of society. In consequence of
the starting-point which they chose, the thinkers of antiquity in the
West cannot get any further than an ethic of resignation. The deeper
thinkers among our moderns—Kant, J. G. Fichte, Nietzsche, and
others—have inklings of an ethic of active self-perfecting.

European thought is characterised by almost always playing in the
upper octaves, and not in the lower ones. Its ethic has no bass
because the ethic of resignation plays no part in it. An ethic of
duty, that is an activist ethic, appears to it to be a complete one.
It is because he is a representative of the ethic of resignation that
Spinoza remains such a stranger to his own age.

Inability to understand resignation and the relations prevailing
between ethics and resignation, is the fatal weakness of modern
European thought.

In what, then, does a complete ethic consist? In an ethic of passive
self-perfecting, together with one of active self-perfecting. The
ethic which is established from the standpoint of society is a
supplementary one which has to be corrected by that of active
self-perfecting.

In view of that fact, a complete ethic must be put forward in a shape
which compels it to seek to come to terms with the ethic of society.




[pg 232]

CHAPTER XX

THE ETHIC OF DEVOTION AND THE ETHIC OF SELF-PERFECTING


The widening of the ethic of self-devotion into a cosmic ethic

BEING sufficiently informed about the questions which have called for
solution and the results attained in the search for an ethic down to
the present time, the ethic of self-devotion and that of
self-perfecting can now try to combine their ideas, with a view to
establishing together the true basic principle of the moral.

Why do they not succeed in combining their ideas?

On the side of the ethic of self-devotion the fault must somehow lie
in the fact that it is too narrow. As a matter of principle social
utilitarianism is concerned only with the relations of man to man and
to human society. The ethic of self-perfecting on the other hand is
something universal. It has to do with the relation of man to the
world. If the ethic of self-devotion, therefore, wishes to agree with
that of self-perfecting, it must become, like the latter, universal,
and let its devotion be directed not only towards man and society but
somehow or other towards all life whatever in the world.

But ethics hitherto have been unwilling to take even the first step in
this universalizing of devotion.

Just as the housewife who has scrubbed out the parlour, takes care
that the door is left shut so that the dog may not get in and spoil
the work she has done by the marks of his paws, so do European
thinkers watch carefully that no animals run about in the fields of
their ethics. The stupidities they are guilty of in trying to maintain
the traditional narrow-mindedness and to raise it to a principle [pg
233] border on the incredible. Either they leave out altogether all
sympathy for animals, or they take care that it shrinks to a mere
afterthought which means nothing. If they admit anything more than
that, they think themselves obliged to produce elaborate
justifications, or even excuses, for so doing.

It seems as if Descartes with his dictum that animals are mere
machines had bewitched the whole of European philosophy.

So important a thinker as Wilhelm Wundt mars his ethic with the
following sentences: “The only object for sympathy is man. . . . The
animals are for us fellow-creatures, an expression by which language
already hints at the fact that we acknowledge here a kind of
co-ordination with ourselves only with reference to the ultimate
ground of everything that happens, viz., creation. Towards animals
also, then, there can arise within us stirrings which are to a certain
extent related to sympathy, but as to true sympathy with them there is
always wanting the fundamental condition of the inner unity of our
will with theirs.” To crown this wisdom he ends with the assertion
that of rejoicing with animals there can at any rate be no question,
as if he had never seen a thirsty ox drink.

Kant emphasises especially that ethics have to do only with duties of
man towards men. The “human” treatment of animals he thinks himself
obliged to justify by putting it forward as a practising of
sensibility which helps to improve our sympathetic relations with
other human beings.

Bentham, too, defends kindness to animals chiefly as a means of
preventing the growth of heartless relations with other men, even
though he here and there recognises it as something obviously right.

Darwin in his _Descent of Man_ notices that the feeling of sympathy
which is dominant in the social impulse, becomes at last so strong
that it comes to include all men, and indeed even animals. But he does
not pursue the problem and the [pg 234] significance of this fact any
further, and contents himself with establishing the ethics of the
human herd.

Thus it ranks with European thought as a dogma that ethics have to do
properly only with a man’s relation to his fellows and to society. The
motives which emanate from Schopenhauer, Stern, and others, for
throwing down the antiquated line of circumvallation, are not
understood.

This backward attitude is the more unintelligible seeing that both
Indian thought and Chinese, even when they have only scarcely begun to
develop, make ethics consist in a kindly relation to all creatures.
Moreover, they have come to this view quite independently of each
other. The subtle and far-reaching commands concerning regard for
animals in the popular Chinese ethics of the book _Kan Yin Pien_
(_Concerning Rewards and Punishments_) cannot be referred back, as is
commonly supposed, to Buddhist influences._(_105_)_ They have no
connexion with metaphysical discussions about the mutual relationship
of all beings, such as became effective as the ethical horizon widened
in Indian thought, but originate in a living, ethical feeling which
dares to draw the consequences which seem to it to be natural.

When European thought refuses to make self-devotion universal, the
reason is that its efforts are directed to reaching a rational ethic
which deals with universally valid judgments, and it sees a prospect
of that only when it can keep its feet upon the solid ground of
discussion of the interests of human society. But an ethic which
busies [pg 235] itself with the relations of man to the whole creation
forsakes it. Such an ethic is driven into discussions about existence
as such. Whether it will or not, it has to plunge into the adventure
of coming to terms with nature-philosophy, and the result of such an
adventure cannot be foreseen.

This is a correct conclusion. But it has already been shown that the
ethic of society, which guides men from the outside, supposing it can
be drawn up in this way at all, is never a true ethic, but merely an
appendix to ethics. It has been established further that true ethics
are always subjective, that they have an irrational enthusiasm as
their very breath of life, and have to come to terms with
nature-philosophy. The ethic of self-devotion has, therefore, no
reason for shrinking from this in any case unavoidable adventure. Its
house has been burnt down. Let it go out into the world to seek its
fortune.

Let it, then, venture to accept the thought that self-devotion has to
be practised not only towards men but towards all living creatures,
yes, towards all life whatever that exists in the world and is within
the reach of man. Let it rise to the conception that the relation of
men to each other is only an expression of that in which they all
stand to Being and to the world in general. Having thus become cosmic,
the ethic of devotion can hope to meet the ethic of self-perfecting,
which is fundamentally cosmic, and to unite itself with it.

The ethic of self-perfecting and mysticism

But in order that the ethic of self-perfecting may combine with that
of self-devotion, it must first become cosmic in the right way.

It is indeed fundamentally cosmic, because self-perfecting can consist
of nothing but this, that man comes into his true relation to the
Being that is in him and outside him. His natural, outward connexion
with Being he means to [pg 236] change into a spiritual, inward
devotion to it, letting his passive and active relation to things be
determined by this devotion.

In this effort, however, he has never yet got further than a passive
devotion to Being. He is always driven past active devotion to it.
This one-sidedness is what makes it impossible for the two ethics of
self-perfecting and of self-devotion to penetrate each other, and to
produce together the complete ethic of passive and active
self-perfecting.

But what is the reason that the ethic of self-perfecting, in spite of
all its efforts, cannot get out of the circle of the passive? It is
that it allows the spiritual inward devotion to Being to be directed
to an abstract notion of Being instead of to real Being. Thus it
approaches nature-philosophy in a wrong way.

Whence this error? It is a result of the difficulties which the ethic
of self-perfecting meets when it attempts to comprehend itself in
nature-philosophy.

In a fashion which is deep, though it strikes us as unfamiliar,
Chinese thought undertakes to arrive at this agreement. It thinks that
it is somehow or other in the “impersonal” element of the world’s
activity that the secret of the truly ethical lies. It accordingly
makes spiritual devotion to Being consist in this, that we look away
from the subjective stirrings within ourselves, and relate ourselves
to the laws of objectivity which we discover in the course of nature.

It is with this deep “becoming like the world” that the thought of
Lao-tse and that of Chwang-tse are concerned. The motifs of such an
ethic make themselves heard in a wonderful fashion in Lao-tse’s
_Taoteking_; but they cannot be made to produce a complete symphony.
The meaning of what happens in the world is a thing we cannot
investigate. What we do understand of it is that all life tries to
live itself out. The true ethic of life, therefore, “in the spirit of
what happens” would seem to be that of Yang-tse and Friedrich
Nietzsche. On the other hand the assumption [pg 237] of an
objectivity, dominant in the course of nature, which can be a pattern
for our activity is nothing else than an attempt, undertaken with the
palest of colours, to paint the world as ethical. Correspondingly,
this existence in the spirit of the world means with Lao-tse and
Chwang-tse an inward liberation from the rule of passion and from
outward occurrences, which is accompanied by marked depreciations of
all tendencies to activity. Whenever life in the spirit of the world
leads to a really activist ethic as with Confucius, Mo-Di, and others,
there has been a corresponding interpretation of the meaning of the
world. Whenever, in general, human thinking raises
being-like-the-world to an ethic, the ethical willing of mankind has
read somehow or other into the world-spirit an ethical character in
order to be able to find itself in it later.

Since no motives to ethical activity are to be discovered in the
course of nature, the ethic of self-perfecting must allow both the
active and the passive ethic to originate side by side in the bare
fact of spiritual inward self-dedication to Being. It must derive them
both from the act as such, without any presupposition of any sort of
ethical quality in Being. Then first will thought have reached a
complete ethic without having been guilty of any sort of naïve or
tricky proceedings.

That is the problem at which the ethical searching of all peoples and
all ages vainly toils, so far as it ventures to think in the spirit of
true nature philosophy. With the Chinese and the Indians, in Stoicism,
with Spinoza, Schleiermacher, Fichte, and Hegel, and in all mysticism
of union with the Absolute, it reaches only an ethic of resignation,
consisting of inward liberation from the world, never at the same time
an ethic of working in the world and upon the world.

It is true that it only seldom ventures honestly to admit to itself
the unsatisfactory result. As a rule it seeks to widen it, and to
maintain in some measure an activist ethic in spite of it, letting
this ethic be combined in some form or other with the ethic of
resignation. The more [pg 238] consistent the thinkers, the more
modest is the space occupied by the piece thus hooked on.

With Lao-tse and Chwang-tse, with the Brahmans and the Buddha, with
the Stoics of antiquity, with Spinoza, Schleiermacher, and Hegel, and
with the great monist mystics the activist ethic is reduced to little
more than nothing. With Confucius and Meng-tse, with the Hindoo
thinkers, with the representatives of the Later Stoicism, and with J.
G. Fichte it makes strenuous efforts to assert itself, but it can do
so only so far as it takes either naïve or sophisticated thought to
help it.

Every world-and-life-view which is to satisfy thought is mysticism. It
must seek to give to the existence of man such a meaning as will
prevent him from being satisfied with being a part of the infinite
existence in merely natural fashion, but will make him determine to
belong to it inwardly and spiritually also, through an act of his
consciousness.

The ethic of self-perfecting is in inmost connexion with mysticism.
Its own destiny is decided in that of mysticism. Thinking out the
ethic of self-perfecting means nothing else than seeking to found
ethics on mysticism. Mysticism, on its side, is a valuable
world-and-life-view only in proportion as it is ethical.

And yet it finds it cannot succeed in being ethical. Experience of
becoming one with the Absolute, of existence within the world-spirit,
of ascent into God, or whatever one may choose to call the process, is
not in itself ethical; it is only spiritual. Of this deep distinction
Indian thought has become conscious. With the most varied phrasing it
proclaims the statement: “Spirituality is not ethics.” We Europeans
have remained naïve in matters of mysticism. What appears among us as
mysticism is usually mysticism with a more or less Christian, that is
to say ethical, colouring. Hence we are inclined to deceive ourselves
about the ethical content of mysticism.

If one analyses the mysticism of all peoples and all ages to find out
its ethical content, we find that this is [pg 239] extraordinarily
small. Even the ethic of resignation, which seems after all to belong
naturally to mysticism, is in it more or less afflicted with
impotence. Through the absence of the activist ethic with which it
should normally be bound up, it to a certain extent loses its hold,
and pushes itself more and more into the region of no longer ethical
resignation. There then arises a mysticism that no longer helps the
effort for self-perfecting, which is the deeper work to which it is
called, but allows absorption into the Absolute to become an aim in
itself. The purer the mysticism, the further has this evolution
developed. Mysticism becomes then a world- and life-view of the merging
of the finite existence in the infinite, if indeed it does not get
reversed, as with the Brahmans, into the lofty mysticism of the
existence of infinite existence within the finite. The ethic of
self-perfecting, which should arise out of mysticism, is therefore
always in danger of perishing in mysticism.

The tendency of mysticism to become supra-ethical is quite natural. As
a matter of fact its connexion with an Absolute which has neither
qualities nor needs has nothing more to do with self-perfecting. It
becomes a pure act of consciousness, and leads to a spirituality which
is just as bare of content as the pre-supposed Absolute. Feeling its
weakness, mysticism does all it can to be more ethical than it is, or
at any rate to appear so. Even the Indian form of it makes efforts in
this direction, although again, on the other hand, it has courage to
be veracious enough to rank the spiritual above the ethical.

In order to judge what mysticism is worth ethically one must count
only what it contains in itself in the way of ethics, not what it does
or says beyond that. Then, however, the ethical content of even
Christian mysticism is terrifyingly small. Mysticism is not a friend
but a foe of ethics; it devours it. And yet the ethic which is to
satisfy thought must be born of mysticism. All deep philosophy, all
deep religion, are ultimately a struggle for ethical mysticism and
mystical ethics.

[pg 240]

Dominated by efforts to secure an activist ethical world- and
life-view, we Westerners do not allow mysticism to come into its own.
It leads among us a furtive, intermittent existence. We feel
instinctively that it stands in antagonism to activist ethics, and we
have therefore no inward relationship to it.

Our great mistake, however, is thinking that we can reach without
mysticism an ethical world- and life-view, which shall satisfy thought.
Up to now we have done nothing but fabricate world- and life-views.
They are good because they keep men up to activist ethics, but they
are not true, and therefore they are always collapsing. Moreover they
are not deep. Hence European thought makes men ethical indeed, but
superficial, and the European, because he is surfeited with world-view
which has been fabricated with a view to activist ethics, has no
collectedness and no inward personality, nor indeed any feeling of
need for these things.

It is indeed time for us to abandon this error. Depth and stability in
thinking come to the world- and life-view of activist ethics only when
this springs from mysticism. The question of what we are to make of
our life is not solved by our being driven out into the world with an
impulse to activity, and never being allowed to collect ourselves for
thought. It can be really answered only by a world- and life-view which
brings man into a spiritual inward relation to Being, out of which
there results of natural necessity an ethic both passive and active.

The hitherto accepted mysticism cannot effect this because it is
supra-ethical. The struggle of thought has therefore to direct itself
upon ethical mysticism. We must rise to a spirituality which is
ethical, and to an ethic which includes within itself all
spirituality. Then only do we become profoundly qualified for life.

Ethics must resolve to originate in mysticism. Mysticism, on its side,
must never think that it exists for its own sake. It is not a flower,
but only the calyx. Ethics are [pg 241] the flower. Mysticism which
exists for itself only is the salt which has lost its savour.

The hitherto accepted mysticism leads into the supra-ethical because
it is abstract, and abstraction is the death of ethics, for ethics are
a living relation for a living life. We must therefore abandon
abstract mysticism, and turn to the mysticism which is alive.

Abstract mysticism and the mysticism of reality. Supra-ethical, and
ethical mysticism

The Essence of Being, the Absolute, the World-spirit, and all similar
expressions denote nothing actual, but something conceived in
abstractions which for that reason it is also absolutely impossible to
represent to the mind. The only reality is the Being which manifests
itself in phenomena.

How does thought come to such a meaningless proceeding as making man
enter into a spiritual relation with an unreal creation of thought? By
yielding to temptation in two ways, one general, one particular.

Thrown back upon the necessity of expressing itself in words thought
adopts as its own the abstractions and symbols which have been coined
by language. But this coinage should have no more currency than allows
it to represent things in an abbreviated way, instead of putting them
forward with all the detail in which they are given. But in time it
comes about that thought works with these abstractions and symbols as
if they represented something really existing. That is the general
temptation.

The particular temptation lies in this case in this, that man’s
devotion to infinite Being, effected with the help of abstractions and
symbols, is thereby given expression in an enticingly simple way. It
is taken to consist of entrance into relation with the totality of
Being, that is to say, with its spiritual essence.

That looks very well in words and in thought. Reality, [pg 242]
however, knows nothing about the individual being able to enter into
connexion with the totality of Being. As it knows of no Being except
that which manifests itself in the existence of individual beings, so
also it knows of no relations except these of one individual being to
another. If mysticism, then, means to be honest, there is nothing for
it to do but to cast from it the usual abstractions, and to admit to
itself that it can do nothing rational with this imaginary essence of
Being. The Absolute may be as meaningless to it as his fetish is to a
converted negro. It must in all seriousness go through the process of
conversion to the mysticism of reality. Abandoning all stage
decorations and declamation, let it try to get its experience in
living nature.

There is no Essence of Being, but only infinite Being in infinite
manifestations. It is only through the manifestations of Being, and
only through those with which I enter into relations, that my being
has any intercourse with infinite Being. The devotion of my being to
infinite Being means devotion of my being to all the manifestations of
Being which need my devotion, and to which I am able to devote myself.

Only an infinitely small part of infinite Being comes within my reach.
The rest of it drives on past me, like distant ships to which I make
signals they do not understand. But by devoting myself to that which
comes within my reach and needs me, I make spiritual, inward devotion
to infinite Being a reality and thereby give my own poor existence
meaning and richness. The river has found its sea.

From devotion to the Absolute there comes only a dead spirituality. It
is a purely intellectual act. No motives to activity are given in it.
Even the ethic of resignation can only eke out a miserable existence
on the soil of such an intellectualism. But in the mysticism of
reality devotion is no longer a purely intellectual act, but one in
which everything that is alive in man has its share. There is
therefore dominant in it a spirituality which carries in itself [pg
243] in elemental form the impulse to action. The gruesome truth that
spirituality and ethics are two different things no longer holds good.
Here the two are one and the same.

Now, too, the ethic of self-perfecting and the ethic of devotion can
interpenetrate each other. They now become, we see, cosmic in
nature-philosophy, which leaves the world as it is. Hence they cannot
but meet each other in a thought (which satisfies in every direction
the laws of thinking), of living devotion to Being which lives. In
this thought lie passive and active self-perfecting in mutual
agreement and perfect union. They comprehend each other as the working
out of one and the same inner compulsion. Having become one they no
longer need first of all to exert themselves to establish by joint
efforts the completed ethic of influencing the world through
liberation from the world. The completeness is now automatically
attained. Now there ring out in wonderful harmonies all the notes in
the gamut of ethics, from the vibrations in which resignation begins
to be audible as ethics, up to the higher notes in which ethics pass
over into the harsh noises of the commands which are proclaimed by
society to be ethical.

Subjective responsibility for all life which comes within his reach,
responsibility which widens out extensively and intensively to the
limitless, and which the man who has become inwardly free from the
world experiences and tries to make a reality, that is ethics. It
originates in world- and life-affirmation. It makes itself a reality in
life-denial. It is completely bound up with optimistic willing. Never
again can the belief-in-progress get separated from ethics, like a
badly-fastened wheel from a cart. The two turn inseparably on the same
axle.

The basic principle of ethics, that principle which is a necessity of
thought, which has a definite content, which is ever bringing itself
into steady, living, and practical agreement with reality, proclaims
itself to be: Devotion to life out of reverence for life.




[pg 244]

CHAPTER XXI

THE ETHIC OF REVERENCE FOR LIFE


The basic principle of the moral

COMPLICATED and laborious are the roads along which ethical thought,
which has mistaken its way and lost itself, must be brought back. Its
course, however, maps itself out quite simply if, instead of taking
apparently convenient short cuts, it keeps to its right direction from
the very beginning. For this three things are necessary.

It must have nothing to do with an ethical interpretation of the
world.

It must become cosmic and mystical, that is, it must seek to conceive
all the devotion which rules in ethics as a manifestation of an
inward, spiritual relation to the world.

It must not go astray into abstract thinking, but must remain
elemental, understanding self-devotion to the world to be
self-devotion of human life to every form of living being with which
it can come into relation.

The origin of ethics is that I think out the full meaning of the
world-affirmation which is given by nature together with the
life-affirmation in my will-to-live, and try to make it a reality.

To become ethical means to begin to think sincerely.

Thinking is the agreement between willing and knowing which is come to
within me. Its course is a naïve one, if the will demands of the
knowledge to be shown a world which corresponds to the impulses which
it carries within itself, and if the knowledge attempts to satisfy
this requirement. The place of this dialogue, a dialogue which is
doomed beforehand to produce no result, must be taken by a correct
one, in which the will demands from the knowledge only what it really
knows.

[pg 245]

If the knowledge answers solely with what it knows, it is always
teaching the will one and the same fact, viz., that in and behind all
phenomena there is will-to-live. Knowledge, though ever becoming
deeper and more inclusive, can do nothing except take us deeper into
the enigmatic fact that all that is, is will-to-live. Progress in
science consists only in increasingly accurate description of the
phenomena in which life in its innumerable forms appears and passes,
letting us discover life where we did not previously expect it, and
putting us in a position to turn to our own use in this or that way
what we have learnt of the course of the will-to-live in nature. But
what life is, no science can tell us.

For our world- and life-view, then, the gain derived from knowledge is
only that it makes it harder for us to be thoughtless, because it
forces upon our attention ever more strongly the mystery of the
will-to-live which we see stirring everywhere. Hence the difference
between learned and unlearned is an entirely relative one. The
unlearned man who, at the sight of a tree in flower, is overpowered by
the mystery of the will-to-live which is stirring all round him, knows
more truly than the learned one who studies under the microscope or in
physical and chemical activity a thousand forms of the will-to-live,
but who, with all his knowledge of the life-course of these
manifestations of the will-to-live, is unmoved by the mystery that
everything which exists is will-to-live, while he is puffed up with
vanity at being able to describe exactly a fragment of the course of
life.

All true knowledge passes on into experience. The nature of the
manifestations I do not know, but I form a conception of it in analogy
to the will-to-live which is within myself, and thus my knowledge of
the world becomes experience of the world. The knowledge which is
becoming experience does not allow me to remain in face of the world a
subject who merely knows; it forces upon me an inward relation to the
world, and fills me with reverence for the mysterious will-to-live
which is in everything. By making [pg 246] me think and wonder, it
leads me ever upwards to the heights of reverence for life. There it
lets my hand go. It cannot accompany me further. My will-to-live must
now find its way about the world by itself.

It is not by informing me what this or that manifestation of life
means in the sum-total of the world that knowledge brings me into
connexion with the world. It goes about with me not in outer circles,
but in the inner ones. From within outwards it puts me in relation to
the world by forcing my will-to-live to feel everything around it as
also will-to-live.

With Descartes, philosophy starts from the dogma: “I think, therefore
I exist.” With this poverty-stricken, arbitrarily chosen beginning, it
is landed irretrievably on the road to the abstract. It never finds
the entrance to ethics, and remains entangled in a dead world- and
life-view. True philosophy must start from the most immediate and
comprehensive fact of consciousness, which says: “I am life which
wills to live, in the midst of life which wills to live.” This is not
a cleverly composed dogmatic formula. Day after day, hour after hour,
I live and move in it. At every moment of reflexion it stands fresh
before me. There bursts forth again and again from it as from roots
that can never dry up, a living world- and life-view which can deal
with all the facts of Being. A mysticism of ethical union with Being
grows out of it.

As in my own will-to-live there is a longing for wider life and for
the mysterious exaltation of the will-to-live which we call pleasure,
with dread of annihilation and of the mysterious encroachment on the
will-to-live which we call pain; so is it also in the will-to-live all
around me, whether it can express itself before me, or remains dumb.

Ethics consist, therefore, in my experiencing the compulsion to show
to all will-to-live the same reverence as I do to my own. There we
have given us that basic principle of the moral which is a necessity
of thought: It is good to maintain and to promote life; it is bad to
destroy life or to obstruct it.

[pg 247]

As a matter of fact everything which in the ordinary ethical valuation
of the relations of men to each other ranks as good, can be brought
under the description of material and spiritual maintenance or
promotion of human life, and of effort to bring it to its highest
value. Conversely, everything which ranks as bad in human relations is
in the last analysis material or spiritual destruction or obstruction
of human life, and negligence in the effort to bring it to its highest
value. Separate individual categories of good and evil which lie far
apart and have apparently no connexion at all with one another fit
together like things which belong to each other, as soon as they are
comprehended and deepened in this the most universal definition of
good and evil.

The basic principle of the moral means, however, not only an ordering
and deepening of the current views of good and evil, but also a
widening of them. A man is truly ethical only when he obeys the
compulsion to help all life which he is able to assist, and shrinks
from injuring anything that lives. He does not ask how far this or
that life deserves one’s interest as being valuable, nor, beyond that,
whether and how far it can appreciate such interest. Life as such is
sacred to him. He tears no leaf from a tree, plucks no flower, and
takes care to crush no insect. If in summer he is working by
lamplight, he prefers to keep the window shut and breathe a stuffy
atmosphere rather than see one insect after another fall with singed
wings upon his table.

If he goes into the street after a shower and sees an earthworm which
has strayed on to it, he bethinks himself that it must get dried up in
the sun, if it does not get back soon enough to ground into which it
can burrow, and so he lifts it from the deadly stone surface, and puts
it on the grass. If he comes across an insect which has fallen into a
puddle, he stops a moment in order to hold out a leaf or a stalk on
which it can save itself.

He is not afraid of being laughed at as sentimental. It is the fate of
every truth to be a subject for laughter until [pg 248] it is
generally recognized. Once it was considered folly to assume that men
of colour were really men and ought to be treated as such, but the
folly has become an accepted truth. To-day it is thought to be going
too far to declare that constant regard for everything that lives,
down to the lowest manifestations of life, is a demand made by
rational ethics. The time is coming, however, when people will be
astonished that mankind needed so long a time to learn to regard
thoughtless injury to life as incompatible with ethics.

Ethics are responsibility without limit towards all that lives.

The definition of ethics as a relation to things within a disposition
to reverence for life, strikes one in its absolutely universal extent
as cold. But it is the only complete one. Sympathy is too narrow to
rank as the essence of the ethical. It denotes, of course, only
interest in the suffering will-to-live. But ethics include also
feeling as one’s own all the circumstances and all the aspirations of
the will-to-live, its pleasure, too, and its longing to live itself
out to the full, as well as its urge to self-perfecting.

Love means more, since it includes fellowship in suffering, in joy,
and in effort, but it shows the ethical only in a simile, although in
a natural and deep one. It makes the solidarity produced by ethics
analogous to that which nature calls forth on the physical side, for
more or less temporary purposes between two beings which complete each
other sexually, or between them and their offspring.

Thought must strive to bring to expression the nature of the ethical
in itself. To effect this it comes inevitably to defining ethics as
devotion to life which is inspired by reverence for life. Even if the
word reverence for life sounds so general as to seem somewhat
lifeless, what is signified by it is nevertheless something which the
man into whose thought it has made its way can never get rid of.
Sympathy, and love, and every kind of valuable emotion are given
within it. With a restless living force [pg 249] reverence for life
works upon the disposition into which it has entered, and throws it
into the unrest of a feeling of responsibility which at no place and
at no time ceases to affect it. Just as the screw which burrows
through the water drives the ship along, so does reverence for life
the man.

Arising, as it does, from an inner compulsion, the ethic of reverence
for life is not dependent on the extent to which it is able to think
itself out to a satisfying life-view. It need give no answer to the
question of what significance the ethical man’s work for the
maintenance, promotion, and exalting of life can have in the total
happenings of the course of nature. It does not let itself be misled
by the calculation that the maintaining and completing of life which
it practises is hardly worth consideration beside the tremendous,
unceasing destruction of life which goes on through natural forces.
Having the will to action, it can leave on one side all the problems
of the success of its work. Full of significance for the world is the
fact in itself that in the ethically developed man there has made its
appearance in the world a will-to-live which is filled with reverence
for life and devotion to life.

In my will-to-live the universal will-to-live experiences itself
otherwise than in its other manifestations. In them it shows itself in
a process of individualising which, so far as I can see from the
outside, is bent merely on living itself out to the full, and in no
way on union with any other will-to-live. The world is a ghastly drama
of will-to-live divided against itself. One existence makes its way at
the cost of another; one destroys the other. One will-to-live merely
exerts its will against the other, and has no knowledge of it. But in
me the will-to-live has come to know about other wills-to-live. There
is in it a longing to arrive at unity with itself, to become
universal.

Why does the will-to-live experience itself in this way in me alone?
Is it because I have acquired the capacity of reflecting on the
totality of Being? What is the goal of this evolution which has begun
in me?

[pg 250]

To these questions there is no answer. It remains a painful enigma for
me that I must live with reverence for life in a world which is
dominated by creative will which is also destructive will, and
destructive will which is also creative.

I can do nothing but hold to the fact that the will-to-live in me
manifests itself as will-to-live which desires to become one with
other will-to-live. That is for me the light that shines in the
darkness. The ignorance in which the world is wrapped has no existence
for me; I have been saved from the world. I am thrown, indeed, by
reverence for life into an unrest such as the world does not know, but
I obtain from it a blessedness which the world cannot give. If in the
tenderheartedness produced by being different from the world another
person and I help each other in understanding and pardoning, when
otherwise will would torment will, the division of the will-to-live is
got rid of. If I save an insect from the puddle, life has devoted
itself to life, and the division of life against itself is got rid of.
Whenever my life devotes itself in any way to life, my finite
will-to-live experiences its union with the infinite will in which all
life is one, and I enjoy a feeling of refreshment which prevents me
from pining away in the desert of life.

I therefore recognize it as the destiny of my existence to be obedient
to this higher revelation of the will-to-live in me. I choose for my
work the removal of this division of the will-to-live against itself,
so far as the influence of my existence reaches. Knowing now the one
thing needful, I leave on one side the enigma of the world and of my
existence in it.

The surmisings and the longings of all deep religiousness are
contained in the ethic of reverence for life. This religiousness,
however, does not build up for itself a completed world-view, but
resigns itself to the necessity of leaving its cathedral unfinished.
It finishes the choir only, but in this choir piety maintains a living
and never-ceasing divine service.

[pg 251]

The ethic of resignation. An ethic of veracity towards oneself, and an
activist ethic

The ethic of reverence for life shows its truth also in that it
includes in itself the different elements of ethics in their natural
connexion. Hitherto no ethic has been able to present in their
parallelism and their interaction the effort after self-perfecting, in
which man acts upon himself from outside without deeds, and the
activist ethic. The ethic of reverence for life can do this, and
indeed in such a way that it not only answers academic questions, but
also produces a deepening of ethical insight.

Ethics are reverence for the will-to-live within me and without me.
From the former comes first the profound life-affirmation of
resignation. I apprehend my will-to-live as not only something which
can live itself out in happy occurrences, but also something which has
experience of itself. If I refuse to let this self-experience
disappear in thoughtlessness, and persist in feeling it to be
valuable, I begin to learn the secret of spiritual self-assertion. I
win an unsuspected freedom from the various destinies of life. At
moments in which I had expected to find myself overwhelmed, I find
myself exalted in an inexpressible and surprising happiness of freedom
from the world, and I experience therein a clearing of my life-view.
Resignation is the vestibule through which we enter ethics. Only he
who in deepened devotion to his own will-to-live experiences inward
freedom from outward occurrences, is capable of devoting himself in
profound and steady fashion to the life of others.

Just as in the reverence for my own will-to-live I struggle for
freedom from the destinies of life, so I struggle too for freedom from
myself. Not only in face of what happens to me, but also with
attention to the way in which I deal with the world, I practise the
higher self-maintenance. Out of reverence for my own existence I place
myself under the compulsion of veracity towards myself. Everything [pg
252] I acquired would be purchased too dearly by action in defiance of
my convictions. I fear that if I were untrue to myself I should be
wounding my will-to-live with a poisoned spear.

The fact that Kant makes, as he does, veracity towards oneself the
centre point of his ethic, testifies to the depth of his ethical
feeling. But because in his search for the essential nature of the
ethical he fails to find his way through to reverence for life, he
cannot comprehend the connexion between veracity towards oneself and
an activist ethic.

As a matter of fact the ethic of veracity towards oneself passes
imperceptibly into that of devotion to others. Such veracity compels
me to actions which manifest themselves as devotion in such a way that
ordinary ethics derive them from devotion.

Why do I forgive anyone? Ordinary ethics say, because I feel sympathy
with him. They allow men to seem to themselves, when they pardon
others, frightfully good, and allow them to practise a style of
pardoning which is not free from humiliation of the other. They thus
make forgiveness a sweetened triumph of self-devotion.

The ethic of reverence for life does away with this unpurified view.
All acts of forbearance and of pardon are for it acts forced from one
by veracity towards oneself. I must practise unlimited forgiveness
because, if I did not, I should be wanting in veracity to myself, for
it would be acting as if I myself were not guilty in the same way as
the other has been guilty towards me. Because my life is so liberally
spotted with falsehood, I must forgive falsehood which has been
practised upon me; because I myself have been in so many cases wanting
in love, and guilty of hatred, slander, deceit, or arrogance, I must
pardon any want of love, and all hatred, slander, deceit, or arrogance
which have been directed against myself. I must forgive quietly and
without drawing attention to it; in fact I do not really pardon at
all, for I do not let things develop to any such act of judgement. Nor
is this any eccentric proceeding; [pg 253] it is only a necessary
widening and refinement of ordinary ethics.

The struggle against the evil that is in mankind we have to carry on
not by judging others, but by judging ourselves. Struggle with oneself
and veracity towards oneself are the means by which we work upon
others. We quietly draw them into our efforts after the deep spiritual
self-assertion which springs out of reverence for one’s own life.
Power makes no noise. It is there, and works. True ethics begin where
the use of language ceases.

The innermost element then, in activist ethics, even if it appears as
self-devotion, comes from the compulsion to veracity towards oneself,
and obtains therein its true value. The whole ethic of being other
than the world flows pure only when it comes from this source. It is
not from kindness to others that I am tender-hearted, peaceable,
forbearing, and friendly, but because by such behaviour I prove my own
deepest self-assertion to be true. Reverence for life which I apply to
my own existence, and reverence for life which keeps me in a temper of
devotion to other existence than mine, interpenetrate each other.

Ethics and thoughtlessness. Ethics and self-assertion

Ordinary ethics, because they are without any basic principle of the
ethical, are obliged to engage at once in the discussion of
conflicting duties. The ethic of reverence for life has no such need
for hurry. It takes its own time to think out in all directions its
own principle of the moral. Knowing itself to be firmly established,
it then settles its position with regard to these conflicts.

It has to come to terms with three adversaries: these are
thoughtlessness, egoistic self-assertion, and society.

To the first of these it pays usually insufficient attention, because
no open conflicts arise between them. This adversary does,
nevertheless, obstruct it imperceptibly.

There is, however, a wide field which our ethic can take [pg 254]
possession of without any collision with the troops of egoism. Man can
accomplish much that is good, without having to require of himself any
sacrifice. And if there really goes with it a bit of his life, it is
something so insignificant that he feels it no more than if he were
losing a hair or a piece of dead skin.

Over wide stretches of conduct the inward liberation from the world,
the being true to oneself, the being different from the world, yes,
and even devotion to other life, is only a matter of giving attention
to this particular relation. We fall short so much, because we do not
keep ourselves up to it. We do not stand sufficiently under the
pressure of any inward compulsion to be ethical. The steam hisses at
all points out of the leaky boiler. The resulting losses of energy are
as high as they are in ordinary ethics, because these ethics have at
their disposal no single basic principle of the moral which works upon
thought. They cannot repair the boiler; they do not, indeed, ever even
examine it. Reverence for life, however, being something which is ever
present to thought, penetrates unceasingly and in all directions men’s
observation, reflexion, and resolutions. A man can keep himself clear
of it as little as the water can prevent itself from being coloured by
the dye-stuff which is dropped into it. The struggle with
thoughtlessness is started, and is always advancing.

But what is the relation between ethics and reverence for life in the
conflicts which arise between inward compulsion to devotion, and
necessary self-assertion?

I too am subject to division of my will-to-life against itself. In a
thousand ways my existence stands in conflict with that of others. The
necessity to destroy and to injure life is imposed upon me. If I walk
along an unfrequented path, my foot brings destruction and pain upon
the tiny creatures which populate it. In order to preserve my own
existence, I must defend myself against the existence which injures
it. I become a hunter of the mouse which inhabits my house, a murderer
of the insect which wants to have its nest there, a mass-murderer of
the bacteria which [pg 255] may endanger my life. I get my food by
destroying plants and animals. My happiness is built upon injury done
to my fellow-men.

How does our ethic assert itself in the tragic necessity to which I am
subjected through the division of my will-to-live against itself?

Ordinary ethics seek compromises. They try to lay down how much of my
existence and of my happiness I must sacrifice, and how much of them I
may preserve at the cost of the existence and happiness of other
lives. With this distinction they produce an experimental, relative
ethic. They offer as ethical what is in reality not ethical but a
mixture of non-ethical necessity and ethics. They thereby establish a
huge confusion, and allow the starting of an ever-increasing
obscuration of the conception of the ethical.

The ethic of reverence for life knows nothing of a relative ethic. It
allows to rank as good only the maintenance and promotion of life. All
destruction of and injury to life, under whatever circumstances they
take place, it condemns as evil. It does not keep in store adjustments
between ethics and necessity all ready for making up. It is always
again and again and in ways that are always original coming to terms
in men with reality. It does not abolish for man all ethical
conflicts, but compels him to decide for himself in each case how far
he can remain ethical and how far he must submit himself to the
necessity for destruction of and injury to life, and therewith incur
guilt. It is not by receiving instruction about agreement between
ethical and necessary, that a man makes progress in ethics, but only
by coming to hear more and more plainly the voice of the ethical, by
becoming ruled more and more by the longing to preserve and promote
life, and by becoming more and more obstinate in resistance to the
necessity for destroying or injuring life.

In ethical conflicts man can arrive only at subjective decisions. No
one can lay down for him at what point, on each occasion, lies the
extreme limit of possibility for [pg 256] his persistence in the
preservation and promotion of life. He alone has to decide, by letting
himself be guided by a feeling of the highest possible responsibility
towards other life.

We must never let ourselves become blunted and dull. We are living in
truth, when our experience in these conflicts is ever deepening. The
good conscience is an invention of the devil’s.

Man and other living creatures

What does reverence for life say about the relations between men and
the animal world?

Whenever I injure life of any sort, I must be quite clear whether it
is necessary. Beyond the unavoidable, I must never go, not even with
what seems insignificant. The farmer who has mown down a thousand
flowers in his meadow to feed his cows, must be careful on his way
home not to strike off in thoughtless pastime the head of a single
flower by the roadside, for he thereby commits a wrong against life
without being under the pressure of necessity.

Those who experiment with operations or the use of drugs upon animals,
or inoculate them with diseases, so as to be able to bring help to
mankind with the results gained, must never quiet any misgivings they
feel with the general reflexion that their gruesome proceedings aim at
a valuable result. They must first have considered in each individual
case whether there is a real necessity to force upon any animal this
sacrifice for the sake of mankind, and they must take the most careful
pains to ensure that the pain inflicted is made as small as possible.
How much wrong is committed in scientific institutions through neglect
of anæsthetics, which to save time or trouble are not administered!
How much, too, through animals being subjected to torture merely to
give to students a demonstration of perfectly understood phenomena. By
the very fact that animals have been subjected to experiments, and
have by their pain won such valuable results for suffering [pg 257]
men, a new and special relation of solidarity has been established
between them and us. From that springs for each one of us a compulsion
to do to every animal all the good we possibly can. By helping an
insect when it is in difficulties I am thereby attempting to cancel
part of man’s ever new debt to the animal world. Whenever an animal is
in any way forced into the service of man, every one of us must be
concerned with the suffering which it has thereby to undergo. None of
us must allow to take place any suffering for which he himself is not
responsible, if he can hinder it in any way, at the same time quieting
his conscience with the reflexion that he would be mixing himself up
in something which does not concern him. No one must shut his eyes and
regard as non-existent the sufferings of which he spares himself the
sight. Let no one regard as light the burden of his responsibility.
While so much ill-treatment of animals goes on, while the moans of
thirsty animals in railway trucks sound unheard, while so much
brutality prevails in our slaughter-houses, while animals have to
suffer in our kitchens painful death from unskilled hands, while
animals have to endure intolerable treatment from heartless men, or
are left to the cruel play of children, we all share the guilt.

We are afraid of making ourselves conspicuous, if we let it be noticed
how we feel for the sufferings which man brings upon the animals. We
think at the same time that others have become more “rational” than we
are, and that they take as being usual and as a matter of course, what
we are excited about. Yet suddenly they will let slip a word which
shows us that they too have not yet learnt to acquiesce. And now,
though they are strangers, they are quite near us. The mask in which
we misled each other falls off. We know now, from one another, that we
are alike in being unable to escape from the gruesome proceedings that
are taking place unceasingly around us. What a happy making of a new
acquaintance!

The ethic of respect for life guards us from letting each other
believe through our silence that we no longer experience [pg 258]
what, as thinking men, we must experience. It prompts us to keep each
other sensitive to what distresses us, and to talk and to act together
without any feeling of shyness, just as the responsibility we feel
moves us to. It makes us keep on the look-out together for
opportunities of bringing some sort of help to animals, to make up for
the great misery which men inflict on them, and thus to step for a
moment out of the incomprehensible horror of existence.

The ethic of the relation of man to man

In the matter also of our relation to other men, the ethic of
reverence for life throws upon us a responsibility so unlimited as to
be terrifying.

Here again it offers us no rules about the extent of the
self-maintenance which is allowable; again, it bids us in each case
come to terms with the absolute ethic of self-devotion. I have to
decide in accordance with the responsibility of which I am conscious,
how much of my life, my possessions, my rights, my happiness, my time,
and my rest I must devote to others, and how much of them I may keep
for myself.

In the question of possession, the ethic of reverence for life is
outspokenly individualist in the sense that wealth acquired or
inherited must be placed at the service of the community, not through
any measures taken by society, but through the absolutely free
decision of the individual. It expects everything from a general
increase in the feeling of responsibility. Wealth it regards as the
property of society left in the sovereign control of the individual.
One man serves society by carrying on a business in which a number of
employees earn their living; another by giving away his wealth in
order to help his fellows. Between these two extreme kinds of service
let each decide according to the responsibility which he finds
determined for him by the circumstances of his life. Let no one judge
his neighbour. The one thing that matters is that each shall value
what he possesses as means to action. Whether this is [pg 259]
accomplished by his keeping and increasing his wealth, or by surrender
of it, matters little. Wealth must reach the community in the most
varied ways, if the latter is to profit by it in the best way.

Those who possess little wealth to call their own are most in danger
of holding what they have in a purely selfish spirit. There is
profound truth in the parable of Jesus which makes the servant who had
received least the least loyal to his duty.

My rights too the ethic of reverence for life does not allow to belong
to me. It forbids me to quiet my conscience with the reflexion that as
the stronger, but by quite legitimate means, I am advancing myself at
the cost of one who is weaker than I. In what the law and public
opinion allow me it sets a problem before me. It bids me think of
others, and makes me ponder whether I can allow myself the inward
right to pluck all the fruit that my hand can reach. Thus it may
happen that in obedience to consideration for the existence of others
I do what seems to ordinary opinion to be folly. Yes, it may even show
itself to be folly by the fact that my renunciation has not been of
the slightest benefit to him for whom it was made. And yet I was
right. Reverence for life is the highest court of appeal. What it
commands has its own significance, even if it seems foolish or
useless. We all look, of course, in one another, for the folly which
indicates that we have higher responsibilities making themselves felt
in ourselves. Yet it is only in proportion as we all become less
rational, in the meaning given it by ordinary calculation, that the
ethical disposition develops in us, and allows problems to become
soluble which have hitherto been insoluble.

Nor will reverence for life grant me my happiness as my own. At the
moments when I should like to enjoy myself without restraint, it wakes
in me reflexion about misery that I see or suspect, and it does not
allow me to drive away the uneasiness thereby caused to me. Just as
the wave cannot exist for itself, but is ever a part of the heaving
surface of ocean, so must I never live my life for itself, but [pg
260] always in the experience which is going on around me. It is an
uncomfortable doctrine which the true ethic whispers into my ear. You
are happy, it says; therefore you are called upon to give much.
Whatever more than others you have received in health, natural gifts,
working capacity, success, a beautiful childhood, harmonious family
circumstances, you must not accept as being a matter of course. You
must pay a price for them. You must show more than average devotion of
life to life.

To the happy the voice of the true ethic is dangerous, if they venture
to listen to it. When it calls to them, it never damps down the
irrational which glows within it. It assails them to see whether it
can get them out of their rut and turn them into adventurers of
self-devotion, people of whom the world has too few. . . .

Reverence for life is an inexorable creditor! If it finds anyone with
nothing to pledge but a little time and a little leisure, it lays an
attachment on these. But its hardheartedness is good, and sees
clearly. The many modern men who as industrial machines are engaged in
callings in which they can in no way be active as men among men, are
exposed to the danger of merely vegetating in an egoistic life. Many
of them feel this danger, and suffer under the fact that their daily
work has so little to do with spiritual and ideal aims and does not
allow them to put into it anything of their human nature. Others
acquiesce; the thought of having no duties outside their daily work
suits them very well.

But that men should be so condemned or so favoured as to be released
from responsibility for devotion as men to men, the ethic of reverence
for life will not allow to be legitimate. It demands that every one of
us in some way and with some object shall be a man for men. To those
who have no opportunity in their daily work of giving themselves as
man to men, and have nothing else that they can give, it suggests
their offering something of their time and leisure, even if these have
been granted to them in scanty measure. Find for yourselves some
secondary [pg 261] work (it says to them), an inconspicuous one,
perhaps a secret one. Open your eyes and look for a human being or
some work devoted to human welfare which needs from some one a little
time or friendliness, a little sympathy, or sociability, or work.
There may be a solitary or an embittered fellow-man, an invalid or an
inefficient person to whom you can be something. Perhaps it is an old
person or a child. Or some good work needs volunteers who can offer a
free evening, or run errands. Who can enumerate the many ways in which
that costly piece of fixed capital, a human being, can be employed!
More of him is wanted everywhere! Hunt, then, for some situation for
your humanity, and do not be frightened away if you have to wait, or
to be taken on trial. And do not be disturbed by disappointments.
Anyhow, do not be without some secondary work in which you give
yourself as a man to men. There is one that is marked out for you, if
you only truly will to have it. . . .

Thus does the true ethic speak of those who have only a little time
and a little human nature to give. Well will it be with them if they
listen to it, and are preserved from becoming stunted natures, because
they have neglected this devotion of self to others.

But to everyone, in whatever state of life he finds himself, the ethic
of respect for life does this: it forces him ever and again to be
inwardly concerned with all the human destinies and all the other
life-destinies which are going through their life-course around him,
and to give himself, as man, to the man who needs a fellow-man. It
will not allow the learned man to live only for his learning, even if
his learning makes him very useful, nor the artist to live only for
his art, even if by means of it he gives something to many. It does
not allow the very busy man to think that with his professional
activities he has fulfilled every demand upon him. It demands from all
and every that they devote a portion of their life to their fellows.
In what way and to what extent this is laid down for him the
individual must gather from the thoughts which arise in [pg 262] him,
and from the destinies in which his life moves. One man’s sacrifice is
outwardly unpretentious. He can accomplish it while continuing to live
a normal life. Another is called to some conspicuous devotion, and
must therefore put aside regard for his own progress. But let neither
judge the other. The tasks of men have to be decided in a thousand
ways to let the good become actual. What he has to bring as an
offering is the secret of each individual. But one with another we
have all to recognize that our existence reaches its true value only
when we experience in ourselves something of the truth of the saying:
“Whoever shall lose his life, the same shall find it” (S. Matt. x.
39).

Personal and supra-personal responsibility. Ethics and humanity

The ethical conflicts between society and the individual arise out of
the fact that the latter has to bear not only a personal, but also a
supra-personal responsibility. When my own person only is concerned, I
can always be patient, alway forgive, use all possible consideration,
always be tender-hearted. But each of us comes into a situation when
he is responsible not for himself only, but also for some undertaking,
and then is forced into decisions which conflict with personal
morality.

The industrialist who manages a business, however small, and the
musician who undertakes public performances, cannot be men in the way
they would like to be. The one has to dismiss a worker who is
incapable or given to drink, in spite of any sympathy he has for him
and his family; the other cannot let a singer whose voice is the worse
for wear perform any longer, although he knows what distress he thus
causes.

The more extensive a man’s activities, the oftener he finds himself in
the situation of having to sacrifice something of his humanity to his
supra-personal responsibility. Out of this conflict consideration
brings the average person to the decision that the wider
responsibility does, as a matter of principle, annul the personal. It
is with this idea [pg 263] that society addresses the individual. For
the quieting of consciences for which this decision is too categorical
it perhaps lays down a few principles which undertake to determine in
a way that is valid for everybody, how far in any case personal
morality can have a say in the matter.

To the current ethic no course remains open but to sign this
capitulation. It has no means of defending the fortress of personal
morality, because it has not at its disposal any absolute notions of
good and evil. Not so the ethic of reverence for life. That possesses,
as we can see, what the other lacks. It therefore never surrenders the
fortress, even if the latter is permanently invested. It feels itself
in a position to persevere in holding it, and by continual sorties to
keep the besiegers on the _qui vive_.

Only the most universal and absolute purposiveness in the maintenance
and promotion of life, which is the objective aimed at by reverence
for life, is ethical. All other necessity or expediency is not
ethical, but only a more or less necessary necessity, or a more or
less expedient expediency. In the conflict between the maintenance of
my own existence and the destruction of, or injury to, another, I can
never put the ethical and the necessary together to form a relative
ethical; I must choose between ethical and necessary, and, if I choose
the latter, must take it upon myself to be guilty through an act of
injury to life. Similarly I am not at liberty to think that in the
conflict between personal and supra-personal responsibility I can
balance the ethical and the expedient to make a relative ethical, or
even annul the ethical with the purposive; I must choose between the
two. If under the pressure of the supra-personal responsibility I
yield to the expedient, I become guilty in some way or other through
failure in reverence for life.

The temptation to combine with the ethical into a relative ethical the
expedient which is commanded me by the supra-personal responsibility
is especially strong, because it can [pg 264] be shown, in defence of
it, that the person who complies with the demand of this
supra-personal responsibility, acts unegoistically. It is not to his
individual existence or his individual welfare that he sacrifices
another existence or welfare, but he sacrifices an individual
existence and welfare to what forces itself upon him as expedient in
view of the existence or the welfare of a majority. But ethical is
more than unegoistic. Ethical is nothing but the reverence felt by my
will-to-live for every other will-to-live. Whenever I in any way
sacrifice or injure life, I am not within the ethical, but I become
guilty, whether it be egoistically guilty for the sake of maintaining
my own existence or welfare, or unegoistically guilty for the sake of
maintaining a greater number of other existences or their welfare.

This so easily made mistake of accepting as ethical a violation of
reverence for life if it is based upon unegoistic considerations, is
the bridge by crossing which ethics enter unintentionally the
territory of the non-ethical. The bridge must be broken down.

Ethics go only so far as humanity does, humanity meaning respect for
the existence and the happiness of individual human beings. Where
humanity ends pseudo-ethics begin. The day on which this boundary is
once for all universally recognized and marked out so as to be visible
to everyone, will be one of the most important in the history of
mankind. Thenceforward it can no longer happen that ethics which are
not ethics at all are accepted as real ethics, and deceive and ruin
individuals and peoples.

The ethics hitherto current have hindered us from becoming as earnest
as we must be by the fact that they have utterly deceived us as to the
many ways in which each one of us, whether through self-assertion, or
by actions justified by supra-personal responsibility, become guilty
again and again. True knowledge consists in being gripped by the
secret that everything around us is will-to-live and seeing clearly
how again and again we incur guilt against life.

Fooled by pseudo-ethics, man stumbles about in his [pg 265] guilt like
a drunken man. If he becomes instructed and earnest he seeks the road
which leads him least into guilt.

We are all exposed to the temptation of lessening the guilt of
inhumanity which comes from our working under supra-personal
responsibility, by withdrawing as far as possible into ourselves. But
such freedom from guilt is not honestly obtained. Ethics start with
world- and life-affirmation, and therefore will not allow us this
flight into negation. They forbid us to be like the housewife who
leaves the killing of the eels to her cook, and compels us to
undertake all duties involving supra-personal responsibility which
fall to us, even if we should be in a position to decline them for
reasons more or less satisfactory.

Each one of us, then, has to engage, so far as he is brought to it by
the circumstances of his life, in work which involves supra-personal
responsibility, but we must do it not in the spirit of the collective
body, but in that of the man who wishes to be ethical. In every
individual case we struggle therefore to preserve as much humanity as
is ever possible in such work, and in doubtful cases we venture to
make a mistake on the side of humanity rather than on that of the
object in view. When we have become instructed and earnest, we think
of what is usually forgotten: that all public activity of whatever
sort has to do not with facts only, but also with the creation of that
spirit and temper which is desirable in the collective body. The
creation of such a spirit and temper is more important than anything
directly attained in the facts. Public work, in which the utmost
possible effort is not made to preserve humanity, ruins the
disposition. He who under the influence of supra-personal
responsibility simply sacrifices men and human happiness when it seems
commanded, accomplishes something. But he has not reached the highest
level. He has only outward, not spiritual influence. We have spiritual
influence only when others notice that we do not decide coldly in
accordance with principles laid down once and for all, but in each
individual case fight for humanity.

[pg 266]

There is too little among us of this kind of struggling. From the
smallest who is something in the smallest business, right up to the
political ruler who holds in his hands the decision for peace or war,
we act too much as men who in any given case can prepare without
effort to be no longer men, but merely the executive of general
interests. Hence there is no longer among us any trust in a
righteousness lighted up with human feeling. Nor have we any longer
any real respect for one another. We all feel ourselves in the power
of a mentality of cold, impersonal, and usually unintelligent
opportunism, which stiffens itself with appeals to principle, and in
order to carry out small interests is capable of the greatest
inhumanity and the greatest folly. We therefore see among us one
temper of impersonal opportunism confronting another, and all problems
are executed in a useless conflict of force against force because
there is nowhere at hand such a spirit and temper as will make them
soluble.

Only through our struggles for humanity can forces which work in the
direction of the truly rational and expedient become powerful, while
the present spirit and temper prevails. Hence the man who works under
supra-personal responsibilities has to feel himself answerable not
only for the successful result which is to be realized through him,
but for the general spirit and temper which has to be created.

We therefore serve society without losing ourselves in it. We do not
allow it to be our guardian in the matter of ethics. That would be as
if the solo violinist allowed his bowing to be regulated by that of
the double-bass player. Never for a moment do we lay aside our
mistrust of the ideals established by society, and of the convictions
which are kept by it in circulation. We always know that society is
full of folly and will deceive us in the matter of humanity. It is an
unreliable horse, and blind into the bargain. Woe to the driver if he
falls asleep!

All this sounds too hard. Society serves ethics by giving legal
sanction to its most elementary principles, and handing [pg 267] on
the ethical principles of one generation to the next. That is much,
and it claims our gratitude. But society is also something which
checks the progress of ethics again and again, by arrogating to itself
the dignity of the ethical teachers. To this, however, it has no
right. The only ethical teacher is the man who thinks ethically, and
struggles for an ethic. The conceptions of good and evil which are put
in circulation by society are paper-money, the value of which is to be
calculated not by the figures printed upon it, but by its relation to
its exchange value in gold of the ethic of reverence for life. But so
measured, its exchange value reveals itself as that of the paper-money
of a half-bankrupt state.

The collapse of civilization has come about through ethics being left
to society. A renewal of it is possible only if ethics become once
more the concern of thinking human beings, and if individuals seek to
assert themselves in society as ethical personalities. In proportion
as we secure this, society will become, instead of the purely natural
entity, which it naturally is, an ethical one. Previous generations
have made the terrible mistake of idealizing society as ethical. We do
our duty to it by judging it critically, and trying to make it, so far
as is possible, more ethical. Being in possession of an absolute
standard of the ethical, we no longer allow ourselves to make
acceptable as ethics principles of expediency or even of the vulgarest
opportunism. Nor do we remain any longer at the low level of allowing
to be current as in any way ethical meaningless ideals, of power, of
passion, or of nationalism which are set up by miserable politicians
and maintained in some degree of respect by bewildering propaganda.
All the principles, dispositions, and ideals which make their
appearance among us we measure, in their showy pedantry, with a rule
on which the measures are given by the absolute ethic of reverence for
life. We allow currency only to what is consistent with the claims of
humanity. We bring into honour again regard for life and [pg 268] for
the happiness of the individual. Sacred human rights we again hold
high; not those which political rulers exalt at banquets and tread
underfoot in their actions, but the true ones. We call once more for
justice, not that which purblind authorities have elaborated in a
legal scholasticism, nor that about which demagogues of all shades of
colour shout themselves hoarse, but that which is filled to the full
with the value of each single human existence. The foundation of law
and right is humanity.

Thus we bring the principles, dispositions, and ideals of the
collective body into agreement with humanity. At the same time we
shape them in accordance with reason, for only what is ethical is
truly rational. Only so far as the current disposition of men is
animated by ethical convictions and ideals is it capable of truly
purposive activity.

The ethic of reverence for life puts in our hands weapons for fighting
false ethics and false ideals, but we have strength to use them only
so far as we—each one in his own life—preserve our humanity. Only when
those men are numerous who in thought and in action bring humanity to
terms with reality, will humanity cease to be current as a mere
sentimental idea and become what it ought to be, a leaven in the
spirit and temper of individuals and of society.



[pg 269]

CHAPTER XXII

THE CIVILIZING POWER OF THE ETHIC OF REVERENCE FOR LIFE


Civilization as a product of reverence for life

THE reverence for life which has grown up in the will-to-live which
has become reflective, contains world- and life-affirmation and ethics
side by side and interpenetrating each other. It therefore cannot but
continually think out and will all the ideals of ethical civilization,
and bring them into agreement with reality.

Reverence for life will not allow to pass as current the purely
individualistic and inward conception of civilization as it rules in
Indian thought and in mysticism. That man should make efforts for
self-perfecting by withdrawing into himself is to it a deep, but an
incomplete, ideal of civilization.

In no way does reverence for life allow the individual to give up all
interest in the world. It is unceasingly compelling him to be
concerned about all the life that is round about him, and to feel
himself responsible for it. Whenever life is in question the
development of which we can influence, our concern with it, and our
responsibility for it, are not satisfied by our maintaining and
promoting its existence as such; they demand that we shall try to
raise it to its highest value in every respect.

The being that can be influenced in its development by us is man.
Reverence for life compels us, therefore, to picture to ourselves and
to will every kind of progress of which man and humanity are capable.
It throws us into a restless condition of ever picturing to ourselves
and willing civilization, but as ethical men.

Even a not yet deepened world- and life-affirmation [pg 270] produces
this picturing and willing of civilization, but it leaves a man to
exert himself more or less without guidance. In reverence for life,
however, and the willing which accompanies it, to raise men and
humanity to their highest value in every respect, he possesses the
guidance which leads him to complete and purified ideals of
civilization which with full consciousness of their goal come to terms
with reality.

Defined from outside and quite empirically, complete civilization
consists in making actual all possible progress in discovery and
invention and in the arrangements of human society, and seeing that
they work together for the inward perfecting of individuals which is
the real and final object of civilization. Reverence for life is in a
position to complete this conception of civilization and to supply a
foundation for its most inward elements. This it does by defining what
is meant by the inward perfecting of man, and making it consist in
reaching the spirituality of an ever deepening reverence for life.

In order to give a meaning to the material and spiritual progress
which is to be made actual by the individual man and mankind, the
ordinary representation of civilization has to assume an evolution of
the world, in which such progress has a meaning. But to do so, it puts
itself in dependence on a play of phantasy which reaches no result. It
is impossible to depict an evolution of the world in which the
civilization produced by the individual man and mankind means
something.

In reverence for life, on the contrary, civilization recognizes that
it has nothing at all to do with the evolution of the world, but
carries its meaning in itself. The essence of civilization consists in
this, that the reverence for life which in my will-to-live is
struggling for recognition does get stronger and stronger in
individuals and in mankind. Civilization, then, is not a phenomenon of
any world-evolution, but an experience of the will-to-live within us,
which it is neither possible nor necessary to bring into [pg 271]
relation with the course of nature as we know it from outside. As a
perfecting of our will-to-live it is sufficient for itself. What the
development that takes place in us means in the totality of the
development in the world we leave on one side as something
undiscoverable. That as a result of all the progress which men and
mankind can make there shall exist in the world as much as possible of
will-to-live, putting reverence for life into practice on all life
which comes within reach of its influence, and seeking perfection in
the spiritual atmosphere of reverence for life: this and nothing else
is civilization. So completely does it carry its value in itself that
even the certainty of the human race ceasing to exist within a
calculable period, would not be able to lead us away from our efforts
to attain to civilization.

As a development in which the highest experience of the will-to-live
lives itself out, civilization has a meaning for the world without
needing any explanation of the world.

The four ideals of civilization. The struggle for a civilized mankind
in the machine age

The will-to-live which is filled with reverence for life is interested
in the most lively and persevering way that can be imagined in all
kinds of progress. Moreover, it possesses a standard by which to
assess their value correctly, and can create a spirit and temper which
allows them all to work in with one another in the most effective way.

Three kinds of progress come within the purview of civilization:
progress in knowledge and power; progress in the social organization
of mankind; progress in spirituality.

Civilization is made up of four ideals: the ideal of the individual;
the ideal of social and political organization; the ideal of spiritual
and religious social organization; the ideal of humanity as a whole.
On the basis of these four ideals thought comes to terms with
progress.

Progress in knowledge has a directly spiritual significance [pg 272]
when it is interpreted by thought. It makes us recognize, ever more
completely, that everything which exists is power, that is to say,
will-to-live; it is ever making larger the circle of the will-to-live
of which we can form conceptions by analogy with our own. What a
significance it has for our meditation on the world that we have
discovered in the cell an individual existence, in the capacity of
which for activity and suffering we see repeated the elements of our
own vitality! By our ever-growing knowledge we are roused to ever
greater astonishment at that secret of life which surrounds us on
every hand. From simple simplicity we arrive at a more profound
simplicity.

From our knowledge comes also power over the forces of nature. Our
powers of movement and of action are increased in an extraordinary
way. There comes about a far-reaching change in the circumstances of
our life.

The progress which accompanies it, however, is not to the same extent
an advantage for the development of man. By the power we obtain over
the forces of nature we do indeed free ourselves from nature, and make
her serviceable to us, but at the same time we thereby also cut
ourselves loose from her, and slip into conditions of life, the
unnatural character of which brings with it dangers of many sorts.

We press the forces of nature into our service by means of machines.
There is a story in the writings of Chwang-tse of how a pupil of
Confucius saw a gardener who, to get water for his flower-beds, went
down to the spring with his bucket every time. So he asked him whether
he would not like to lessen his labour. “How can I?” replied the
other. “You take a long piece of wood for a lever,” said Confucius’
pupil, “weighted behind, but light in front; with this you dip for the
water and it comes up without the least trouble. They call this device
a draw-well.” But the gardener, who was something of a philosopher,
answered: “I have heard my teacher say: ‘If a man uses machines, he
carries on all the affairs of life like a machine; whoever [pg 273]
carries on his affairs like a machine gets a machine-like heart; and
when anyone has a machine-like heart in his breast, he loses true
simplicity.’”

The dangers that were suspected by that gardener in the fifth century
B.C. are active among us in full force. Purely mechanical labour has
become the lot of numbers among us to-day. Cut loose from their own
house and from any ground of their own which might feed them, they
live in a depressing, materialist unfreedom. As a result of the
revolution which the machine has produced, we are almost all of us
subjected to an existence of labour which is far too much governed by
rule, too limited in its nature, and too trying to the system.
Reflexion and collectedness are made difficult for us. Family life and
the upbringing of our children are impoverished. We are all more or
less in danger of becoming human things instead of personalities. Many
sorts of material and spiritual injury to human existence form
therefore the dark side of the achievements of discovery and
invention.

Even our capacity for civilization is endangered. Claimed entirely for
so severe a struggle for existence, many of us are no longer in a
position to think about ideals which make for civilization. Such men
cannot reach the objective mood which is necessary for it. All their
attention is directed to the improvement of their own existence. The
ideals which they set up for this latter object they proclaim to be
ideals of civilization, and thus they start confusion in the general
picture of what civilization is.

In order to fit ourselves to the state of things produced by the
results of these achievements of discovery and invention which are,
indeed, desirable although injurious, we must think out the ideal of
humanity and wrestle with circumstances to make them hinder as little,
and help as much as possible the development of man up to this ideal.

The ideal of civilized man is none other than that of a man who in
every relation of life preserves true human nature. To be civilized
men means for us almost this: [pg 274] that in spite of the conditions
of modern civilization we remain human. It is only taking thought for
everything which belongs to true human nature that can preserve us,
amid the conditions of the most advanced external civilization, from
going astray from civilization itself. It is only if the longing to
become again truly man is awakened in the man of to-day, that he will
be able to find his way out of the confusion in which, blinded by
conceit at his knowledge and pride in his powers, he is at present
wandering. Only then, too, will he be in a position to work against
the pressure of those relations of life which threaten his human
nature.

Reverence for life demands, therefore, as the ideal of the material
and spiritual being of man, that with the completest possible
development of all his faculties and in the widest possible freedom,
both material and spiritual, he strives to be honest with himself and
to take a sympathetic and helping interest in all the life that is
around him. In earnest concern about himself he must ever keep in mind
all the responsibilities which are his lot, and so, as sufferer and as
actor, preserve in his relation to himself and to the world a living
spirituality. There should ever be before him as true human nature the
duty of being ethical in the profound world- and life-affirmation of
reverence for life.

If it is recognized as the aim of civilization that every man shall
attain to true human nature in an existence which is as fully as
possible worthy of him, then the uncritical overvaluing of the
external elements of civilization which we have taken over from the
end of the nineteenth century can no longer prevail among us. We are
forced more and more into a reflexion which compels us to distinguish
between the essentials and the unessentials of civilization.
Unspiritual pride in civilization loses its power over us. We dare to
face the truth that with the progress of discovery and invention
civilization has become not easier, but more difficult. We become
conscious of the problem of the mutual relations between the material
and [pg 275] the spiritual. We know that we all have to wrestle with
circumstances on behalf of our human nature, and make it an object of
our care to transform the almost hopeless struggle which many have to
carry on to preserve their human nature, into one which offers some
hope.

As a spiritual help in this struggle we offer them the spirit and
temper which will allow no man ever to be sacrificed to circumstances,
as if he were a mere human thing. Formulated by so-called thinkers and
popularized in all possible forms, the conviction is general that
civilization is the privilege of an _élite_, and that man in the mass
is only a means for realizing it. At the same time the spiritual help
which they can claim is denied to these men who have to wrestle to
preserve their human nature. That is the effect of the devotion to
reality to which we have surrendered ourselves. But reverence for life
rebels against it, and produces a spirit and temper in which there is
offered to every man in the thoughts of others the human value and the
human dignity which the circumstances of life would deny him. The
struggle has thus lost its extreme bitterness. Man has now to assert
himself only against his circumstances, and no longer against his
fellow-men at the same time.

Further, the temper of reverence for life helps those who have to
struggle hardest on behalf of their human nature by keeping alive the
conception of human nature as the privilege which must be preserved at
any price. It keeps them from engaging with one-sided aims in their
struggle for the diminishing of their material unfreedom, and bids
them bethink themselves that much more of human nature and inward
freedom can be combined with their actual life-circumstances than they
actually secure. It leads them on to preserve recollectedness and
inwardness when they have hitherto given them up.

There must come about a spiritualizing of the masses. The mass of
individuals must begin to reflect about their lives, about what they
want to secure for their lives in the [pg 276] struggle for existence,
about what makes their circumstances difficult, and about what they
themselves renounce. They are wanting in spirituality because they
have only a confused conception of what spirituality is. They forget
to think, because elementary thought about themselves has become
something unfamiliar to them. In what is in our day cultivated as
spirituality and practised as thought, there is absolutely nothing
that comes directly home to them as necessary for them. But if it
comes about that the thoughts suggested by reverence for life become
common among us, there will be a mode of thought provided which will
work in everybody, and a spirituality aroused which will show itself
in everybody. Even those who are engaged in the hardest struggle on
behalf of their human nature will then be led to reflexion and
inwardness, and will thereby obtain powers which they did not before
possess.

Though all of us are alike aware that the maintenance of civilization
is dependent first and foremost on the breaking out of the fountains
of spiritual life in us, we shall nevertheless zealously take in hand
our economic and social problems. The highest possible material
freedom for the greatest possible number is a requirement of
civilization.

The recognition that we evidently have so little power over economic
relations does not discourage us. We know this to be to a considerable
extent a result of the fact that hitherto facts were contending with
facts, and passions with passions. Our powerlessness comes from our
feeling for reality. We shall be able to deal with things much more
effectively, if we resolve to try to solve our problems by a change of
spirit and temper. And we are at length ready for the recognition of
this. The efforts for control which were made on the strength of
economic theories and Utopias were in every respect failures, and have
brought us into a terrible condition. There remains nothing for us to
do but to try a radical change of policy, [pg 277] viz., the solution
of our problems by means of a helpful understanding and confidence in
a way that will prove effective. It is reverence for life alone which
can create the spirit and temper needed for this. The understanding
and confidence which we mutually accord to each other with a view to
what is most purposive, and by means of which we obtain the utmost
power that is possible over circumstances, can be enjoyed only if
everyone can assume in everyone else reverence for the existence of
the other and regard for his material and spiritual welfare as a
spirit and temper which influences them to the depths of their being.
Only through reverence for life can we attain the standards of
economic justice, about which we have to come to an understanding with
each other.

Will it be possible to bring about this development? We must, if we
are not to be ruined together, materially and spiritually. All
progress in discovery and invention works itself out at last to a
fatal result, if we do not maintain control over it through a
corresponding progress in our spirituality. Through the power which we
gain over the forces of nature we get in an inexplicable way as human
beings control over other human beings. With the possession of a
hundred machines a single man or a company is given a supremacy over
all who work the machines. Some new invention makes it possible for
one man by a single movement to kill not merely a hundred, but ten
thousand of his fellow-men. In no sort of struggle is it possible to
avoid becoming ruinous to one another by economic or physical power.
At best the result is that the oppressor and the oppressed exchange
rôles. The only thing that can help is that we renounce the power
which is given us over one another. But that is something to be done
by spirituality.

Intoxicated by the progress in discovery and invention with which our
age has been flooded, we forgot to trouble ourselves about men’s
progress in spirituality. In the absence of all thought we slid
without knowing it into [pg 278] pessimism, believing, that is, in all
sorts of progress, but no longer in the spiritual progress of the
individual and of mankind.

Facts call us now to bethink ourselves, just as movements of their
capsizing vessel drive the crew up on to the deck and into the
rigging. Belief in the spiritual progress of the individual and of
mankind has already become almost impossible for us, but with the
courage of despair we must force ourselves into it. That we shall all
unanimously again will this spiritual progress and again hope for it:
that is the reversal of the helm which we must succeed in making, if
our vessel is at the last moment to be brought once more before the
wind.

Only through thoughtful reverence for life shall we become capable of
this achievement. If that reverence begins anywhere to work in our
thinking and in our spirit and temper, then the miracle is possible.
The power of the elementary and living spirituality that is to be
found in it is beyond calculation.

Church and State as historical entities, and as ideals of civilization

State and Church are only modified forms of the organization of men
towards humanity. The ideals of social-political and religious
organization are therefore determined by the necessity of these
entities being made effective aids to the spiritualizing of men, and
to their organization towards humanity.

The fact that the ideals of State and Church among us are not at work
in their true form is due to our historical sense. The men of the
“Aufklärung” assumed that State and Church had come into existence by
reason of estimates made of their usefulness. They sought to
comprehend the nature of these two entities by means of theories about
their origins, but in this proceeding they did nothing but read back
their own view into history. Not feeling the least reverence for any
natural historical entity, they [pg 279] found it easy to approach
them with demands suggested by a rational ideal. We, on the contrary,
have such a measure of this reverence that we feel shy of wishing to
transform in accordance with theoretical ideas what had a quite
different origin.

But State and Church are not merely natural historical entities; they
are also necessary ones. The only way in which reflexion can deal with
them is to be always at work, transforming them from what they are as
received, into organisms which are in accordance with reason and
effective in every respect. Only in this capacity for development is
their existence fully apprehended and justified.

The natural historical entity presents us always only with initial
facts which lead on to corresponding further happenings, but never
with facts in which the nature of the society, that is to say the way
in which we are to behave towards it and to belong to it, can be
determined. If one allows that in the conception of the natural entity
there is also given one of a self-determined purpose, there arises a
fundamental confusion in people’s notion of the organization. The
individual and humanity as a whole, which are just as truly natural
entities as the two historical ones, are robbed of their rights and
sacrificed to the latter. The increased understanding with which we
now study the natural policy of societies with historical origin can
therefore not alter at all our demand that State and Church shall
direct their course more and more with reference to the ideal of man
and of humanity as their natural poles, and be obliged to find in them
their higher effectiveness.

Civilization demands, then, that State and Church become capable of
development. This presupposes that the relations of influence between
the collective body and individual members of it will become different
from what they have been. In the last few generations the individual
has in face of State and Church surrendered more and more of his
spiritual independence. He received his spirit [pg 280] and temper
from them, instead of the spirit and temper that was growing within
him working as a shaping force upon State and Church.

This abnormal relation was unavoidable. The individual had, of course,
nothing in which he could be spiritually independent. He had,
therefore, no spirit and temper in which he could come to terms with
the entities of real life. Nor was he in a position to think out
ideals which could work upon reality. There was no course left for him
but to adopt as an ideal an idealized reality.

But in the world- and life-view of reverence for life he obtains the
means to a firm and valuable self-determination. It is with a will and
a hope which he carries ready shaped within himself that he faces
reality. It is to him something self-evident that every society that
is formed among men must serve towards the maintenance, the
advancement, and the higher development of life, and the production of
true spirituality.

That which is decisive for the commencement of a development of State
and Church which has civilization for its aim and object, is that the
mass of men belong to these two entities in the spirit and temper of
reverence for life and the ideals which grow out of it: when that is
the case there arises in State and Church a spirit which works for
their transformation into something ethical and spiritual.

A forecast of the course this process will take cannot be made, nor is
one needed. The spirit and temper of reverence for life is a force
which works effectively in every direction. The important thing is
that it shall be present with a strength and a steadiness which will
suffice to bring about the transformation.

The moralizing of the religious and political community

If the Church is to accomplish its task, it must unite men in
elementary, thoughtful, ethical religiousness. This [pg 281] it has
done hitherto very imperfectly. How far it is from being what it ought
to be, its absolute failure in the war revealed. There devolved on it
the duty of summoning men out of the struggle of national passions to
reflexion, and to keep them in the spirit and temper of the highest
ideals. It was not able to do this, and indeed did not seriously
attempt to. Only too completely historical, and too well organized,
and too little a directly religious association, itself succumbed to
the spirit of the time and mixed up with religion the dogmas of
nationalism and pragmatism. There was only one tiny church, the
community of the Quakers, which attempted to defend the unconditional
validity of reverence for life, as it is contained in the religion of
Jesus.

The spirit and temper of reverence for life is able to work for the
transformation of the Church to the ideal of a religious association,
because it is itself deeply religious. In all historically formulated
belief it seeks to bring into general acceptance as the elemental and
essential thing in piety the ethical mysticism of oneness with the
infinite Will, which experiences itself in us as the will to love. By
putting in the very centre of things the most living and universal
element of piety, it leads the different religious associations out of
the narrowness of their historical past, and paves the way for
understanding and union between them.

But this spirit and temper does even more than that. Besides bringing
the existing historical religious associations out of their historical
existence into a development towards the ideal of a religious
association, it works also where they can do nothing, in the sphere of
non-religion. There are many non-religious people among us. They have
become so partly through thoughtlessness and absence of any
world-view, and partly because as a result of honest thinking they
could no longer be content with a traditional religious world-view.
The world- and life-view of reverence for life enables these
non-religious minds to [pg 282] learn that every world- and life-view
which begins to think honestly necessarily becomes religious. Ethical
mysticism reveals to them the necessity to thought of the religion of
love, and leads them back to paths which they believed they had
abandoned for ever.

Just as the transformation of the religious association must be the
result primarily of an inward change, so must that of the social and
political community also.

It is true, indeed, that to believe in the possibility of transforming
the modern state into the civilized state is a piece of heroism. The
modern state finds itself to-day in an unprecedented condition of
material and spiritual penury. Collapsing under the weight of debts,
torn by economic and political struggles, stripped of all moral
authority, and scarcely able any longer to maintain its authority in
practical matters, it has to wrestle for its existence in a succession
of fresh troubles. Whence is it to get power to develop, in the face
of all these things, into a truly civilized state?

What crises and catastrophes the modern state is still destined to go
through cannot be foreseen. Its position is further endangered
especially by the fact that it has far overstepped the limits of its
natural sphere of operation. It is an extraordinarily complicated
organism which intervenes in all social relationships, which tries to
regulate everything, and therefore in every respect functions
ineffectively; it tries to dominate economic life as it dominates
spiritual life; and for its activities over this extensive field it
works with machinery which in itself at once constitutes a danger.

At some time and in some way or other the modern state must emerge
from its financial trouble, and reduce its activity to a normal
standard, but by what methods it can ever again get back to a natural
and healthy condition remains still a riddle.

The tragic thing is, then, that we have to belong to the unsympathetic
and unhealthy modern state while cherishing [pg 283] the will to
transform it into a civilized state. There is demanded from us an
absolutely impossible achievement of faith in the power of the spirit.
But the ethical world- and life-view gives us strength for the task.

Living in the modern state and thinking out the ideal of the civilized
state, we first of all put an end to the illusions which the former
cherishes about itself. Only by the majority of its members taking up
a critical attitude towards it can it come to itself again in
reflexion about itself. The absolute impossibility of the continuance
of the state in its present condition must become the universal
conviction before things can become in any way better.

But at the same time, through meditation on the civilized state, the
perception must become common property that all merely external
measures for raising and making healthy the modern state, however
effective they may be in themselves, will have only a quite imperfect
result unless the spirit of the state becomes quite different. Let us,
then, undertake to drive the modern state, so far as the power of our
thought reaches, into the spirituality and the morality of the
civilized state as it is to be, by following the ideas contained in
reverence for life. We demand from it that it shall become more
spiritual and more ethical than any state has hitherto been called on
to become. Only with efforts to reach the true ideal do we get
progress.

The objection is raised that, according to all experience, the state
cannot exist by relying merely on truth, justice, and ethical
considerations, but has in the last resort to take refuge in
opportunism. We smile at this experience. It is refuted by the dreary
results it has produced. We have, therefore, the right to declare the
opposite course to be true wisdom, and to say that true power for the
state as for the individual is to be found in spirituality and the
ethical. The state lives by the confidence of those who belong to it;
it lives by the confidence felt in it by other [pg 284] states.
Opportunist policy may have temporary successes to record, but in the
long run it assuredly lands itself in failure.

Thus ethical world- and life-affirmation lays upon the modern state
the requirement that it shall aspire to making itself an ethical
personality. It presses this obstinately upon the state, and does not
let itself be deterred by the smiles of superior persons. The wisdom
of to-morrow has a different tone from that of yesterday.

Only by a new spirit and temper ruling within it can the state attain
to peace within its borders; only by a new spirit and temper arising
between them can different states come to understand each other, and
cease to bring destruction upon each other; only by treating the
overseas world in a different spirit and temper from that of the past
and of to-day, can the modern state cease to load itself in that
quarter with guilt.

Such moral talk about the civilized state has often been produced in
the past. Certainly it has. But it acquires a special tone at a time
when the modern state is perishing in misery, because it refused in
the past to continue to be in any way spiritually ethical. It
possesses a new authority, too, to-day because in the world- and
life-view of reverence for life there is revealed the significance of
the ethical in its full extent and its full profundity.

We are therefore freed from any duty of forming a conception of the
civilized state which accords with the declarations of nationalism and
national civilization, and we are at liberty to turn back to the
profound _naïveté_ of thinking it to be a state which allows itself to
be guided by an ethical spirit and temper. With confidence in the
strength of the civilized spirit and temper which springs from
reverence for life we take upon ourselves the task of making this
civilized state an actuality.

We look round beyond peoples and states upon humanity as a whole,
feeling ourselves responsible to the civilized spirit and temper. To
anyone who has surrendered himself [pg 285] to ethical world- and
life-affirmation the future of men and of mankind is an object of care
and of hope. To become free from this care and hope is poverty; to be
wholly surrendered to it is riches. Thus it is our consolation, that
in a time of difficulty and without knowing how much we may still
experience of a better future, we are paving the way, solely by our
confidence in the power of the spirit, for a civilized mankind which
is to come.

Kant published, with the title _Towards Perpetual Peace_, a work
containing rules which were to be observed with a view to lasting
peace whenever treaties of peace were concluded. It was a mistake.
Rules for treaties of peace, however well intended and however ably
drawn up, can accomplish nothing. Such thinking as brings power to the
spirit and temper produced by reverence for life is the only thing
which can bring to mankind perpetual peace.

FINIS




FOOTNOTES


Preface Notes

1 [_Translator’s Note_.—Weltanschauung. This compound word may be
translated “theory of the universe,” “world-theory,”
“world-conception,” or “world-view.” The first is misleading as
suggesting, wrongly, a scientific explanation of the universe; the
second and third as suggesting, less ambitiously but still wrongly, an
explanation of how and why our human world is what it is. The last
indicates a sufficiently wide knowledge and consideration of our
corner of the universe to allow all factors to be taken into
consideration which bear on the question at issue.

There may be passages in which it is desirable to vary the
translation, and others in which it is possible to give the meaning in
more elegant English, for good English style does not take kindly to
such compound words. But this latter consideration can be only a
secondary one in the translation of a philosophical work, the first
object of which must be to ensure that the author’s meaning shall be
reproduced as clearly as possible.]


CHAPTER III Notes

2 Friedrich Jodl: _A History of Ethics as Philosophical Science_, 2nd
ed., 2 vols. (Vol. I., 1906; Vol. II., 1912). It treats of the ethics
of Western philosophy only.


CHAPTER V Notes

3 Very important for our knowledge of the old philosophy and ethics
are the ten books entitled _The Lives and Teaching of Famous
Philosophers_, Diogenes Laertius in the third century after Christ.
Just because they are purely anecdotal, They have preserved for us
much information and many views which otherwise—for the works on the
philosophers treated of have all been lost—we should not possess.

4 Xenophon, one of the generals who led the ten thousand back out of
Asia, wrote down his recollections of Socrates after the latter’s
death. By his report of the simple conversations of the master he
seeks to render impotent for all time the accusation that he corrupted
the youth and taught atheism, for even after his death teachers of
rhetoric did in fact draw up formal complaints against him. Xenophon’s
straightforward, realistic portrait of Socrates is extraordinarily
valuable.

5 The most important dialogues in this connexion are the _Protagoras_,
the _Gorgias_, the _Phædrus_, the _Symposium_, the _Phædo_, and the
_Philebus_.

6 Of the writings of the Cyrenaics and the Cynics, of Democritus,
Epicurus, Zeno, and the older Stoics hardly anything has come down to
us. Our knowledge of them is derived mostly from Diogenes Laertius.

The Cyrenaics were known as the philosophers of pleasure because
Aristippus, the first preacher of the world-wisdom of joy, hailed from
Cyrene. The Cynics, or dog-philosophers, derived their name from the
fact that they despised the amenities of life and often delighted in a
coarse naturalness. The best known of them is Diogenes of Sinope (died
323 B.C.).

Zeno’s philosophy was called Stoicism because he taught at Athens in a
colonnaded portico called the Stoa Poikile (_i.e._, the painted
portico).

7 _Translator’s Note_.—Irony is intentional self-depreciation or
disclaiming what one really possesses.

8 Of Seneca quite a series of ethical treatises have come down to us.
We mention here: _On Clemency_ (_De Clementia_, addressed to Nero);
_On Benefits_ (_De Beneficiis_); _On Tranquillity of Soul_ (_De
Tranquillitate Animi_), _On Anger_ (_De Ira_).

Our knowledge of the teachings of Epictetus we owe to his pupil,
Flavius Arrianus, the historian. The latter has recorded a number of
his master’s lectures in eight books, of which four have survived. In
addition to these he collected and published a number of his sayings
on morality in the _Enchiridion_.

In the popular philosophizings of Cicero (106-43 B.C.) as well, we can
see an attempt to produce a new ethic which is really living.


CHAPTER VI Notes

9 Bacon was Lord Chancellor under James I. of England, but was in 1621
deprived of his office because found guilty of corruption. His two
chief works are the _Novum Organum Scientiarum_ (1620) and _De
Dignitate et Augmentis Scientiarum_ (1623). Of the _New Atlantis_ only
a fragment has survived.

10 See the writer’s books: _Das Messianitäts- und Leidensgeheimniss.
Eine Skizze des Lebens Jesu_ (1901). English version: _The Mystery of
the Kingdom of God_ (1914 A. &amp; C. Black). _Geschichte der
Leben-Jesu Forschung_ (1906; new edition, 1922). English version: _The
Quest of the Historical Jesus_ (1911; 3rd impression, 1922 A. &amp; C.
Black).

11 Gassendi: _De vita, moribus, et doctrina Epicuri_ (1647) and
_Syntagma philosophiæ Epicuri_ (1649).


CHAPTER VII Notes

12 D. Hartley: _Observations on Man, his Frame, his Duty, and his
Expectations_ (1749; 6th ed., 1834).

13 D. von Holbach: _Système de la nature ou des lois du monde physique
et du monde moral_ (1770).

14 Thomas Hobbes: _Elementa philosophica de cive_ (1642); _Leviathan,
or the Matter, Form, and Authority of Government_ (1651); _De homine_.

15 John Locke: _An Essay concerning Human Understanding_ (2 vols.,
1690).

16 Adrien Helvetius: _Traité de l’Esprit_ (1758).

17 Jeremy Bentham: _An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation_ (1780). E. Dumont (1759-1828) of Geneva, an admirer of
Bentham who was domiciled in England, reproduced this work in French
in a free abbreviation as _Traités de législation civile et pénale_
(1802). Frederick Edward Beneke followed this abbreviation when he
produced a German translation with the title: _Grundsätze der Civil-
und Criminalgesetzgebung_ (1830).

18 _Translator’s Note_.—German “enthusiastisches Handeln.” The
explanatory periphrasis is added once for all, since “enthusiastic”
implies a kind and degree of feeling which is not implied in these
philosophical passages.

19 David Hume: _A Treatise of Human Nature: Being an Attempt to
introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects_
(1740). German translation by Heinrich Jacob (2 vols., 1791): _Inquiry
Concerning the Principles of Morals_ (1751).

20 Adam Smith: _The Theory of Moral Sentiments_ (1759); _Inquiry into
the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations_ (1770). German
translation of _The Theory of Moral Sentiments_ by L. Th. Kosegarten
(1791). Adam Smith was Professor of Moral Philosophy at Glasgow.

21 “L’amour de la gloire est inné dans les belles âmes; il n’y a qu’à
l’animer, il n’y a que l’exciter, et des hommes qui végétaient
jusqu’alors, enflammès par ce heureux instinct, vous paraîtront
changés en demi-dieux.”—_Œuvres de Frédéric le Grand_, vol. ix., p.
98.

22 R. Cudworth: _Intellectual System of the Universe_ (1678);
_Treatise concerning Eternal and Immutable Morality_ (postumous,
1731).

23 H. More: _Enchiridium Ethicum_ (1667).

24 S. Clarke: _A Discourse concerning the Unchangeable Obligations of
Natural Religion, and the Truth and Certainty of the Christian
Revelation_ (1706).

25 R. Cumberland: _De legibus naturæ disquisitio philosophica_ (1672).

26 W. Wollaston: _The Religion of Nature Delineated_ (1722).

27 _Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times_ (3 vols., 1711).
In the second volume there is included his ethical treatise entitled,
_Inquiry concerning Virtue or Merit_, which appeared first, in 1699,
independently. It was published in French in 1745 by Denis Diderot.

28 F. Hutcheson: _An Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty
and Virtue_ (1725); _A System of Moral Philosophy_ (1755, posthumous).

29 Joseph Butler: _Fifteen Sermons upon Human Nature, or Man
considered as a Moral Agent_ (1726).


CHAPTER VIII Notes

30 The freely thinking, anti-dogmatic religiousness of Socinianism had
maintained itself chiefly in Poland, Holland, Hungary, England, and
North America. Its closer adherents called themselves also
Latitudinarians, the more distant ones Unitarians. The fact that
religious rationalism had already existed in a literary form made its
appearance in the eighteenth century easier.

31 Tindal’s work bears the title _Christianity as Old as the Creation_
(1730). Pierre Bayle’s famous _Dictionnaire historique et critique_
appeared for the first time in two volumes in 1695.

32 The most impressive, and perhaps the most profound document of the
religion of reason is the confession of faith which Rousseau in his
novel _Emile_ (1762) puts into the mouth of a country minister from
Savoy.

33 F. V. Reinhard: _Essay concerning the Plan which the Founder of the
Christian Religion drew up for the Benefit of Mankind_ (1791; 4th ed.,
1798). K. H. Venturini: _Natural History of the Great Prophet of
Nazareth_ (1800-1802). See for an account of them the writer’s work:
_The Quest of the Historical Jesus_ (1906; 4th ed., 1922 (German); 1st
English ed., 1910; 3rd, 1922).

34 Expulsion of the Jesuits from Portugal, 1759; from France, 1764;
from Spain and Naples, 1767; from Parma, 1768.

35 _Short Theses upon the Sin of Witchcraft and the Practice of Trial
Therefor_.

36 See G. Lenôtre: “Les Agents Royalists sous la Revolution” (_Revue
des Deux Mondes_, 1922).

37 Her dictum is given in the English periodical, _The Atlas_, in its
issue of January 27th, 1828.

38 _Esquissè d’un tableau historique des progrès de l’esprit humain_.
It was published in 1795, after the author’s death, at the expense of
the National Convention.


CHAPTER IX Notes

39 Immanuel Kant: _Kritik der reinen Vernunft_ (1781); _Grundlegung
zur Metaphysik der Sitten_ (1785); _Kritik der praktischen Vernunft_
(1788); _Kritik der Urteilskraft_ (1790); _Die Religion innerhalb der
Grenzen der blossen Vernunft_ (1793); _Metaphysik der Sitten_ (1797).


CHAPTER X Notes

40 _Tractatus theologico-politicus_ (anonymous, 1670); _Ethica ordine
geometrico demonstrata_ (posthumous and anonymous, 1677; German
translation by Johann Lorenz Schmidt, 1744); _Tractatus politicus_
(posthumous and anonymous, 1677). First complete edition of Spinoza’s
works, 1802-3.

41 Lao-tze (born, _circa_. 604 B.C.): _Taoteking_; Chwang-tse (fourth
century B.C.): _The True Book of the Southern Flower Land_; Lie-tse
(fourth century B.C.): _The True Book of the Primitive Water-spring_.

42 G. W. Leibniz: _Système nouveau de la nature, et de la
communication des substances_ (1695); _Nouveaux Essais_ (1704); _La
Monadologie_ (1714).


CHAPTER XI Notes

43 The greatest representatives of Gnosticism are Basilides,
Valentinus, and Marcion, all three living in the first half of the
second century B.C. At the beginning of that century all sorts of
Gnostic systems spring up, as did speculative ones at the beginning of
the nineteenth. The two great Christian teachers of Alexandria,
Flavius Clemens at the end of the second century A.D., and Origen at
the beginning of the third, try to bring the Gnostic speculations into
harmony with the doctrine of the Church.

44 J. G. Fichte: _The Foundations of All Scientific Theories_ (1794);
_The System of Moral Teaching According to the Principles of Science_
(1798); _The Destiny of Man_ (1800); _How to Attain to the Happy Life_
(1806); _Addresses to the German Nation_ (1808).

A complete edition of J. G. Fichte’s works was edited by his son, J.
H. Fichte, in 1845 and the following years. A good selection has been
published by F. Medicus (1908 to 1912).

45 This and the following quotations are from _The Destiny of Man_.


CHAPTER XII Notes

46 D. E. Schleiermacher: _Discourses on Religion for the Educated
among its Contemners_ (1799); _Monologues_ (1800); _Outlines of a
Critique of Moral Philosophy down to the Present Day_ (1803);
_Christian Belief_ (1821-23); _Draft of a System of Moral Philosophy_
(posthumous, 1835).


CHAPTER XIII Notes

47 Friedrich Hegel: _Phenomenology of the Spirit_ (1807); _The Science
of Logic_ (3 vols., 1812-26); _Encyclopædia of the Philosophical
Sciences_ (1817); _The Philosophy of Law_ (1821); _The Philosophy of
History_ (posthumous, 1840). Complete edition of his works in eighteen
volumes, prepared by his pupils, 1832-45.

48 _The Encyclopædia_, Part III. (1845 ed.), p. 386.

49 _The Encyclopædia of Philosophical Sciences_, Part III. (1845 ed.),
p. 359.


CHAPTER XIV Notes

50 F. E. Beneke: _Prolegomena to a Physiology of Morals_ (1822); _The
Natural System of Practical Philosophy_ (3 vols., 1837-40). By his
appearance as a champion of utilitarianism and his consequent attitude
of hostility to Kant, Beneke drew upon himself the enmity of Hegel,
and was compelled in 1822 to stop the course of lectures which he was
giving as a _Privat-dozent_ at Berlin University. After Hegel’s death
he filled a professorship at Berlin.

51 L. A. Feuerbach: _What is Christianity?_ (1841); _Divinity,
Freedom, and Immortality from the Standpoint of Anthropology_ (1866).

52 Ernst Laas: _Idealism and Positivism_ (3 vols., 1879-84).

53 _The Physiology of Society_ is the fourth volume of Comte’s _Course
of Positive Philosophy_ (6 vols., 1830-42).

54 John Stuart Mill: _Principles of Political Economy_ (2 vols.,
1848); _Utilitarianism_ (1861). There is a German translation of his
works by Th. Gomperz (12 vols., 1869-86). It was J. S. Mill who
introduced into philosophy the word “utilitarian” as the descriptive
title of this particular school of ethic.

55 Charles Darwin: _The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to
Sex_ (1871).

56 Herbert Spencer: _Social Statics_ (1851); _The Data of Ethics_
(1879); _The Principles of Ethics_ (1892).

57 Henri de Saint-Simon: _L’Organisateur_ (1819-20); _Catéchisme des
Industriels_ (1823-24).

58 Charles Fourier: _Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire_
(1829).

59 P. J. Proudhon: _Qu’est-ce que la Propriété?_ (1840).

60 Robert Owen: _A New View of Society_ (1813); and _Book of the New
Moral World_ (7 parts, 1836-49).

61 Ferdinand Lassalle: _Das System der erwonbenen Rechte_ (2 vols.,
1861); _Offenes Antwortschreiben an das Centralkomitee zur Berufung
eines allgemeinen deutschen Arbeiterkongresses_ (1863).

62 Karl Marx: _Manifesto of the Communist Party_ (1848, in
collaboration with Friedrich Engels); _Capital_ (vol. i., 1867; the
second and third volumes were published in 1884 and 1894 by Friedrich
Engels).

63 The same spirit pervades the work of the national economist, Gustav
Schmoller of Berlin: _Concerning Some Questions of Law and National
Economy_ (1875). Schmoller was the leader of the so-called “Socialists
of the Chair.”

64 The first to set before Christendom its duty to take part in the
solution of the social question is Félicité de Lamennais (1782-1854)
in his _Paroles d’un croyant_ (1833). This book was condemned by the
Pope in 1834.

65 The English public was made familiar with working-class misery by
Kingsley’s novel _Yeast_ (which appeared in 1848 in _Fraser’s
Magazine_, and in 1851 was printed as a book), and by two articles of
Henry Mayhew’s in the _Morning Chronicle_ (December 14th and 18th,
1849). That Christian Socialism made its appearance first in England
and France is connected with the fact that the industry which creates
social problems developed earliest in these countries.

66 Leo Tolstoi: _My Confessions_; German translation as _Worin besteht
mein Glaube_ (1884); French as _Ma Religion_ (1884); English as
_Christ’s Christianity_ (1885). See also _What then shall we do?_
(German, 1886). The fact that Tolstoi’s ethical Christianity
associates itself with contempt for civilization brings it near to
primitive Christianity. But the all-important question, how the power
of the ethical thoughts of Jesus are to work in the temper and the
circumstances of modern times, it does not answer. Tolstoi is a great
stimulator but no guide.

67 Eduard Bernstein: _The Presuppositions of Socialism, and the Tasks
of Social Democracy_ (1899).


CHAPTER XV Notes

68 What Schopenhauer wrote after this, his chief work, which was
printed when he was thirty, are only appendixes and popular
explanations of it: _Concerning the Will in Nature_ (1836), _The Two
Fundamental Problems of Ethics_ (1840), _Parerga and Paralipomena_ (2
vols., 1851).

69 In 1802-1804 Anquetil Duperron (1731-1805) published in two
volumes, with a Latin translation, the _Oupnek’hat_, a collection of
fifty Upanishads, which he had brought back from India in a Persian
text.

70 _The World as Will and Idea_, vol. ii., chap. xli.

71 _The World as Will and Idea_, vol. i., chap. lxix.

72 That the man who has won through to complete world- and life-denial
remains holy even if he commits actions which according to accepted
ideas are unethical, is taught by the Bhagavadgita as well as by the
Upanishads.

73 _The World as Will and Idea_, vol. i., chap. lxviii.

74 Friedrich Nietzsche: _Old-fashioned Reflexions_ (4 parts,
1873-1876), _Human and All too Human_ (3 vols., 1878-1880), _Joyous
Science_ (1882), _Thus spake Zarathustra_ (4 parts, 1883-1885),
_Beyond Good and Evil_ (1886), _On the Genealogy of Morality_ (1887),
_The Will to Power_ (posthumous, 1906).

75 Max Stirner (1806-1856), whose real name was Kaspar Schmidt, has
recently been regarded as a predecessor of Nietzsche’s on account of
his book, _The Individual and His Property_ (1845), in which he
supports the theory of merciless egoism. But he is not one. He has
provided no really deep philosophical background for his anarchistic
egoism. He speaks as a mere logician, and does not rise above the
level of the Greek sophists. A religious reverence for life, such as
Nietzsche feels, is not to be found in him.


CHAPTER XVI Notes

76 H. Sidgwick: _The Method of Ethics_ (1874). (German translation by
C. Bauer, 1909.)

77 Leslie Stephen: _The Science of Ethics_ (1882).

78 S. Alexander: _Moral Order and Progress: An Analysis of Ethical
Conceptions_ (1889).

79 Wm. Wundt: _Ethics: An Examination of the Facts and Law of the
Moral Life_ (1887).

80 Friedrich Paulsen: _A System of Ethics_ (1889).

81 Friedrich Jodl: _A History of Ethics as Philosophical Science_ (2
vols., 2nd ed., 1906 and 1912).

82 Georg von Gizyki: _Moral Philosophy, expounded so as to be
intelligible to all_ (1888).

83 Harald Höffding (a Dane): _Ethics_ (1887). (German translation,
1888.)

Georg Simmel (1858-1918) adopts a critical attitude towards modern
“scientific” ethics in his _Introduction to Moral Science_ (1892).

84 H. Cohen: _Kant’s Foundation given to Ethics_ (1877); _The Ethic of
the Pure Will_ (1904).

85 W. Herrmann: _Ethics_ (1901).

In France Charles Renouvier (1838-1903) tries, in his _Science of the
Moral_ (1869), to restore the Kantian system of ethics.

86 Jas. Martineau: _Types of Ethical Theory_ (2 vols., 1885).

87 F. H. Bradley: _Ethical Studies_ (1876).

88 T. H. Green: _Prolegomena to Ethics_ (posthumous, 1883).

89 Simon Laurie: _Ethica, or the Ethics of Reason_ (1885). (A French
translation by Georges Remack, 1902.)

90 James Seth: _Study of Ethical Principles_ (3rd ed., 1894).

91 Josiah Royce: _The Spirit of Modern Philosophy_ (1892); _Religious
Aspects of Philosophy_ (4th ed., 1892).

92 A. Fouillée: _Critique des systèmes de morale contemporaine_
(1883); _Evolutionisme des idées-forces_ (1890; German translation,
1908); _La morale des idées-forces_ (1907).

93 Jean Marie Guyau: _La morale anglaise contemporaine_ (1879);
_Esquisse d’une morale sans obligation ni sanction_ (1885);
_L’irreligion de l’avenir_ (1886). A German version of his works
appeared in 6 vols. in 1912.

94 “Toute idée enveloppe un élément impulsif; nulle idée n’est un état
simplement représentatif.” (Every idea contains an element of impulse;
no idea is merely a condition of re-presenting something in thought.)

95 . . . “notre conscience de nous-même tendant à sa plénitude par son
expansion en autrui.” ( . . . our consciousness of ourselves, which
presses on to its full growth by expanding into others.)

96 “Agis envers les autres comme si tu avais conscience des autres en
même temps que de soi.”

97 Fouillée reveals his attitude towards Nietzsche in a work entitled
_Nietzsche and Immoralism_. Notes on the works of Fouillée and Guyau
have been preserved by Nietzsche.

98 Eduard von Hartmann: _Philosophy of the Unconscious_ (1869);
_Phenomenology of the Moral Consciousness_ (1879).

99 _Phenomenology_, p. 670.

100 _Phenomenology_, p. 700.

101 Henri Bergson: _Sur les données immédiates de la conscience_
(1888). (English translation by F. L. Pogson, 1910: _Time and
Freewill; An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness_.) _Matière
et memoire. Essai sur la relation du corps et de l’esprit_ (1896).
(English translation by N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer: _Matter and
Memory_, 1911.) _L’énvolution créatrice_ (1907). (English translation
by A. Mitchell: _Creative Evolution_, 1911.)

102 H. S. Chamberlain: _The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century_
(1899). (14th impression, 1922.) _Immanuel Kant_ (1905); _Goethe_
(1912).

103 Count Hermann Keyserling: _The Structure of the World_ (1906); _A
Philosopher’s Travel-Diary_ (2 vols., 1919); _Philosophy as Art_
(1920).

104 So Otto Braun in his essay “Monism and Ethics” in the volume
entitled _Monism Expounded in Contributions from its Representatives_
(edited by Arthur Drews; vol. i., 1908). The poverty of this ethic is
clearly revealed when the editor tries to indicate its content.


CHAPTER XX Notes

105 This book dates from about the eleventh century A.D. It has been
translated into English by James Legge (_Sacred Books of the East_,
1891) and by T. Susuki and P. Carus (Chicago, 1906); into French by M.
A. Rémusat (_Le livre des récompenses et des peines_, 1816), and by
Stanislas Julien (1835); into German by W. Schüler (_Zeitschrift für
Missionskunde_, 1909).

“Be human with animals, and do no harm to insects, plants, and trees,”
is the command of one saying in this book. The following acts are
condemned: “Hunting men or animals to death; shooting with bow and
arrow at birds; hunting quadrupeds; driving insects out of their
holes; frightening birds which are asleep in the trees; blocking up
the holes of insects, and destroying birds-nests.” To delight in
hunting is described as a serious moral perversion.




[pg 286]

INDEX


Alexander the Great, 50
Alexander II., 103
Alexander, Samuel, 182
Amos, 21
Antisthenes, 36
Anti-Utilitarians(ism), 86, 87, 107
Aristippus, 36 n.
Aristotle, 21,42,44 ff., 65
Arrian, 53 n.
Augustine, 58

Bach, J. S., 91
Bacon, Lord Verulam, 64
Basilides, 125 n.
Bayle, 93
Beneke, 151
Bentham, 75, 77, 79, 83, 96, 103,
144, 151, 159, 222, 233
Bergson, 198 f., 203
Bernstein, 163
Bodin, 68
Bradley, 184 f.
Braun, 201 n.
Buddha, 21, 25, 27, 133, 172, 174, 214, 238
Butler, Bp., 89

Carus, P., 234 n.
Chamberlain, 198 f.
Charron, 68
Cherbury, Lord H. of, 93
Chwang-tse, 27, 54, 118, 120 f.,
131, 133, 139, 179, 236 f., 272
Cicero, 52 n., 65
Clarke, 86
Clemens, Flavius, 126 n.
Clement XIV., 95
Cohen, 183 f.
Collins, 93
Comte, 152, 154
Condorcet, 89, 104
Confucius (Kung-tse), 21, 27, 34,
54, 91, 104, 139, 237 f., 272
Copernicus, 61, 114
Cudworth, 86
Cumberland, 86
Cynics, 34, 36, 43
Cyrenaics, 34, 36, 43

Darwin, Chas., 14,153 ff., 193, 233
Democritus, 36 f.
Descartes, 13, 62, 116, 123, 137,
233, 246
Diderot, 87 n., 89
Diogenes Laertius, 32 n., 36 n.
Diogenes of Sinope, 36 n.
Domitian, 52
Drews, 201 n.
Du Bois-Raymond, 209

Engels, 161
Epictetus, 52-6, 58, 60, 65
Epicurus(ism), 21, 36-9, 51, 58, 68
Erasmus, 66 f.
Ernesti, 93
Essenes, The, 98

Feuerbach, 152
Fichte, J. G., 21, 126 ff., 136-145,
147, 150 f., 166-171, 177, 185,
189, 209, 223, 231, 237 f.
Fichte, Imm. H., 126 n., 166
Firmian, Archbishop, 95
Fouillée, 186-193, 198
Fourier, 161
Frederick the Great, 81, 96
Freemasons, 97

Galileo, 62
Gassendi, 68
Giordano, Bruno, 62, 88
Gizyki, von, 182
Gnostics, 60, 125 f.
Goethe, 89, 136 ff., 140, 199
Gomperz, 153 n.
Green, T. H., 184 ff.

[pg 287]

Grotius, 68, 96
Guyau, 187-93

Haeckel, 201
Hartley, 72, 152
Hartmann, 194-197
Hegel, 21, 102, 126, 141-149, 150,
162, 167, 170, 173, 197, 202,
237 f.
Helvetius, 75-79
Heraclitus, 32
Herbart, 166
Herder, 89
Herrmann, 183-185
Hobbes, 75-79, 85, 120
Höffding, 182
Holbach, von, 72, 152
Humanism, 92
Hume, 80-84, 93, 152, 155, 181,
188
Hutcheson, 89

Illuminati, The, 97
Indian Philosophy, 11, 14, 17, 25,
27, 28, 30, 34, 42, 54, 66, 88,
113, 117 f., 121, 123, 145 f.,
158, 166, 171, 194, 214, 223,
231, 237, 239
Intellectualists, 87, 106
Intuitionists, 87, 106, 184
Isaiah, 21

Jacobi, 116
James, 210
Jenner, 97
Jesuits, 95, 98
Jesus, 21, 25, 27, 34, 63, 64, 65,
66, 67, 94, 98, 158, 202
Jodl, 24, 182
Joseph II., 99
Josephus, 98

Kant, 13, 21, 23, 25, 41, 87,
106-115, 122, 127-129, 134,
136, 137, 140, 147, 150, 151,
166, 169, 184, 190, 199, 206,
209, 223, 231, 233, 252
Kepler, 62
Keplerbund, 209
Ketteler, 162
Keyserling, 198-200, 203
Kingsley, Charles, 162 f.

Laas, 152
Lamennais, 162 n.
Lange, 162, 192 f.
Lao-tse, 21, 27, 34, 37, 118, 120,
121, 133, 139, 179, 236 f.
Lassalle, 161, 164
Latitudinarians, 93 n.
Laurie, 184 f.
Legge, 234 n.
Leibniz, 93, 116, 122-124, 137
Leonardo da Vinci, 61, 200
Lenôtre, 96 n.
Lessing, 89, 93
Lie-tse, 118, 120, 179
Locke, 21, 75-79, 85

Machiavelli, 68
Marcus Aurelius, 52-60, 65, 68
Marcion, 125 n.
Martineau, 184 f.
Marx, 161 f.
Maurice, F. D., 162
Mayhew, 163 n.
Mendelssohn, Moses, 89, 93, 116
Meng-tse, 27, 47, 51, 54, 237
Michaelis, 93
Mill, James, 153
Mill, John Stuart, 150, 153
Mo-di, 237
Mohammed, 27
Monism, 60, 90, 114, 138, 189,
201
Montaigne, 67
More, Henry, 86

Napoleon Buonaparte, 100, 102
Neoplatonism, 60
Neopythagoreanism, 60
Nero, 52

[pg 288]

Newton, Isaac, 69, 86
Nicolai, 129
Nietzsche, 21, 23, 165, 174-180,
188 f., 197, 201, 223, 231, 236
Origen, 126 n.
Orphism, 42
Owen, Robert, 161

Paracelsus, 62
Paulsen, 182
Paul (the Apostle), 21
Plato, 21, 33-35, 40-52, 85, 223
Plotinus, 60
Positivism, 152
Prophets, the Jewish, 21, 27, 34, 231
Proudhon, 161
Pythagoreanism, 42

Rationalists (ism), 6, 90-105,124-131,
135, 139, 147, 150 f., 190,
211
Reformation, 66
Reimarus, 93
Reinhard, 94
Renaissance, 21, 61 f., 69
Renouvier, 183
Ritschl, 210
Rousseau, 93
Royce, 186

Saint Simon, 161
Schelling, 126
Schiller, 136-138, 140
Schleiermacher, 138-140, 145
Schmoller, 162
Scholasticism, 61
Schopenhauer, 11, 13, 21, 23, 30,
165-174, 179 f., 189, 197, 223,
231, 234
Schweitzer, Albert, 67 n., 94 n.
Semler, 93
Seneca, 52-60, 65
Seth, 184 f.
Sforza, 200
Shaftesbury, Lord, 21, 85-87, 138
Sidgwick, H., 182
Simmel, 182 n.
Smith, Adam, 80-84, 87, 152
155 f., 185
Socinians, 92
Socrates, 21, 33-47, 52, 71, 74,
177
Sophists, 32, 48, 178
Spencer, H., 153-158, 202
Spinoza, 13, 21, 25, 88, 104
116-124, 133, 137-140, 143
167, 189, 223, 237 f.
Staël, Madame de, 103
Stephen, Leslie, 182
Stern, 192 f., 234
Stirner, 179 n.
Stoics, 21, 35-9, 54, 57, 237

Taoism, 37
Telesio, 62
Thomasius, 95
Tindal, 93
Toland, 93
Tolstoi, 163

Unitarians, 93
Unold, 201
Utilitarianism, 80-83, 87-89, 107
109, 150-164, 166, 221, 232

Valentinus (Gnostic), 125 n.
Venturini, 94, 98
Voltaire, 89, 90, 93, 122

Wieland, 89
Wollaston, 86
Wolff, 93, 124
Wundt, 182, 233

Xenophanes, 32
Xenophon, 33, 39

Yang-tse, 179, 236

Zarathustra, 21, 27 f., 179, 231
Zelter, 91
Zeno, 36 f., 54, 57
Zwingli, 92




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


The formatting of both the .htm and .txt files followed that of three
similar books, The Quest of the Historical Jesus, The Mystery of the
Kingdom of God and The Decay and Restoration of Civilization already
in Project Gutenberg. I have included page numbers in the format [pg
xxx] for both .htm and .txt.

I made several hyphenation choices, forced by de-hyphenation at
the ends of lines:

1. Will-lessness p. 194.
2. birds-nests note 105 p. 234.

Cases of inconsistent use (both hyphenated and unhyphenated are
present) were left as they are: two-fold, non-sensible, Kung-tse,
un-civilization, pre-conceptions, pre-suppositions, thorough-going,
re-fashion, present-day, world-view, driving-force, sum-total,
will-to-power, belief-in-progress, nature-philosophy,
rationally-pleasurable, ever-new, general-notion, world-and-life
affirmation, matter-of-fact, wage-system, fellow-men, bass-note,
world-religions, so-called, will-to-action, ready-made, all-round,
optimistic-ethical.

I left the misspelled word “postumous” in footnote 22 from p. 86, the
misspelled word “alway” from p. 262 but I corrected the birth date for
Henri Bergson from 1560 to 1860 on p. 198, I corrected the spelling of
the translator of Mill in the Index to “Gomperz”, the spelling of the
German philosopher “Leibniz” on p. 93 and the Index and the spelling
of the German philosopher “Nietzsche” on p. 175 and 176. I eliminated
the small caps used for the first name of each starting letter in the
Index.

In the .txt version I have used utf8 encoding and the following
markers:

1. italic text surrounded by _
2. footnote references in the form _(_number_)_










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CIVILIZATION AND ETHICS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


