The Project Gutenberg eBook of His brother's keeper
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: His brother's keeper

Author: W. C. Tuttle

Release date: May 31, 2025 [eBook #76208]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Doubleday, Page & Co, 1928

Credits: Roger Frank and Sue Clark


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS BROTHER'S KEEPER ***





                          HIS BROTHER’S KEEPER


                            by W. C. Tuttle
 Author of “Letters from a Home-Made Cowboy” “The Wages of Greed,” etc.


    WHEN THE SHERIFF OF CALOR STARTED OUT INTO THE BAD LANDS
    AFTER RED COWAN, MEN WOULD HAVE BET THAT HE WOULD GET HIS
    MAN. BUT THE DESERT GODS SAW STRANGE JUSTICE BEFORE THE LAW
    WAS SATISFIED

It was always hot in the Bitter Water Valley, and the hills were like
rumpled yellow and gray blankets, shimmering in the summer sun. Folks
didn’t tan there--they simply charred. The winds were hot, even in the
shade--when there was any wind.

The old dirt road, inches deep in dust, wound in and out among the old
lava beds, like a long, yellow worm, with its head in the town of Calor,
its few tails ending at the scattered ranches. The valley was not a
summer resort, and those who were financially able went into the far
mountains, to escape the heat.

Along this winding, yellow road came a team and wagon, almost hidden in
a cloud of dust, which drifted up from wheel and hoof like the smoke
from a foundry stack. On the seat were a man and a woman, and in the
back of the wagon was a single trunk, already dust covered.

The woman had a scarf twisted about her mouth and nose, while the man’s
face to his eyes was covered with a bandana handkerchief; two masked
figures, their dusty eyes blinking, red-rimmed. Their conversation was
limited; had been limited for several weary miles, but now they struck a
slight raise, where the dust was less deep.

“I had to do it, Joe,” said the woman, as though picking up the
conversation of an hour gone. “I just had to.”

“I know it, Mrs. Deming,” said the man nodding slowly. “I seen it
comin’.”

He spat dryly, still nodding. “I told Jim. I told him he was a fool.
But,” resignedly, “yuh can’t tell him nothin’. Bull-headed as hell, Jim
is. He read me the riot act. Said fer me to mind my own business.”

“And he’ll fire you, Joe.”

The man turned slowly and looked at the woman. She had removed the scarf
now. Mrs. Jim Deming, wife of Jim Deming, sheriff of Calor, had been a
pretty girl in her youth. She was still pretty, except that her hair was
gray and her once smooth face was creased with deep lines. Her gray eyes
were clouded with sadness, as she looked at Joe Mills, her husband’s
deputy.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Joe was tall, thin, harsh-faced, burned to the color of a dark Indian.
Joe Mills was as hard as the lava beds, but he had found a man harder
than he. Jim Deming, known as “Duty” Deming, was so hard that he rather
appalled even Joe Mills.

“Yeah, he’ll fire me,” agreed Joe slowly. “But that’s fine, ma’am. I’m
kinda sour on this county, anyway. Seems to me that I’d kinda like to go
somewhere else, where there’s green grass and lakes. I’ve allus lived
here, yuh see. Don’t you worry about me, ma’am; you’ve got a-plenty to
worry about for yourself.”

“Thank you, Joe. I’m glad you don’t blame me. It had to come. He--he
wasn’t so bad until they elected him sheriff. We got along, yuh know.
Goin’ onto three years now. I--I hoped they’d defeat him last election.”

“Shore. Prob’ly been better if they had. But they say he’s the best
sheriff they ever had--I dunno.”

“Because he sent my son to prison,” she said painfully.

“Yeah. It was his son, too.”

“Joe, you know Harry wasn’t a thief, don’t yuh?”

“I don’t reckon he was. The JB outfit started out to git Harry--and they
got him.”

“His own father got him, you mean!” exclaimed Mrs. Deming. “Jim was
alone when he found that evidence at Harry’s place. It was nothing but a
JB hide. Jim could have buried it and warned Harry. That hide was
planted there by the JB. But Jim took the evidence and arrested Harry.
Ten years! It was Jim’s evidence that sent my boy to the penitentiary.”

“Yes, ma’am.”

“And he sent Al Seymour up for stealing a horse, which he didn’t steal.
Al was drunk that night and got the wrong one. It was wrong for him to
get drunk, I know; but he didn’t intend to take the wrong horse. Jim
knew it. Oh, yes, he did. But he went straight out and arrested Al,
instead of bringing the horse back. He could have explained it all. Al
was no thief.”

“He was going to marry Jane, wasn’t he, Mrs. Deming?”

“Yes. It broke her heart, Joe. I’m going to her now. Oh, I’ve pleaded
with Jim; talked and pleaded until my throat was raw. But what’s the
use? He defends himself by saying that he swore to uphold the law, and
both Harry and Al broke the law. His duty to the law! He sits in
judgment on this whole desert; brags about his iron hand. Oh, it’s iron,
all right. It smashed his home; it will smash him, too.”

“I dunno; he’s pretty hard, ma’am. I never knowed a man as hard as Jim,
and I’ve knowed a lot of hard ones. His job is a religion with him.”

“And some day it will raise up and kill him.”

“His star is his god,” said the deputy slowly.

“And don’t the Bible say something about thou shalt have no other gods
before me?”

“Mebbe. I dunno much about the Bible. I don’t reckon that God operates
much around here--it’s too hot.”

“I’ve wondered about it,” she said, wearily. “I’ve prayed a lot, Joe;
but nothing came of it.”

“Too hot, Mrs. Deming. I don’t reckon a fried prayer ever got any
further than a fried aig. Mebbe not as far, because yuh can eat the aig.
Well, there’s the town. Yuh’ve got plenty time, ’cause the train ain’t
never on time. Lotsa folks would miss the train if it ever came on
time.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

The train was of the mixed variety, half passenger, half freight; a
branch line train, using something like seven hours to complete the
sixty mile run from Santa Leone to Levering, which was twenty miles
south of Calor.

Calor was the usual desert type of town. Perhaps a little larger, due to
the fact that it was a county seat, but the buildings were unpainted,
scourged by wind and sand, until they blended nicely with the gray of
the desert. Two huge water tanks, thrusting their ungainly bulk upward
on their scaffolding, like huge, rotund giants, with spindling legs,
supplied the town with water, which was always warm.

The depot had once been painted a bright red, but time had dimmed its
luster until it was a sickly pink, where any color yet remained.

The team came up to the depot platform, guided in close to the high
platform. The deputy helped the woman down, and unloaded the trunk. He
tied both horses securely to the platform, because they were unused to
trains, and then began twisting the trunk around to the front, the woman
following him.

The telegraph wires hummed in the hot wind, and there was a strong odor
of pitch frying up from the planks of the platform. A man stood near the
doorway to the waiting room; a tall, lean figure of a man, harsh of
feature, his gray eyes deep set under beetling brows, and separated with
a high-arched nose. His mouth was wide and thin lipped.

In raiment he was practically the same as ninety-nine per cent of the
desert men; well-worn sombrero, colorless shirt, stringy vest, overalls,
from which the color had long since fled, tucked in the tops of
high-heeled boots. Around his lean waist hung a belt and holstered gun,
and on the lapel of his vest gleamed the insignia of office. Such was
Duty Deming, sheriff of Calor.

He shot one sharp glance at his deputy, who handled the trunk awkwardly
as he rolled it out near the edge of the platform. The woman stopped
short and studied the face of her husband.

“You didn’t think I’d come, did you?” she asked.

“If I hadn’t, I wouldn’t be up here,” he said slowly.

The deputy walked from the trunk to the waiting room. He had Mrs.
Deming’s ticket, and was going to check the trunk. The sheriff’s eyes
followed him.

“You don’t need to blame Joe,” she said.

His eyes shifted from the doorway and came back to her.

“You’re not sorry?” she asked.

“What for? I’ve got nothing to be sorry about.”

“After thirty years, Jim?”

“No. You said you’d go away. I’ve provided for yuh all these years,
and----”

“And sent my son to prison; drove my daughter away.”

His jaw set grimly for a moment. “Well?”

“I guess that’s all, Jim.”

They were silent now. Came the soft humming of the rails, as the train
came creeping through the desert. The telegraph instrument in the office
clanked spasmodically.

“They call you Duty,” she said bitterly. “And you’re proud of it. You
think more of that than you do of your family. Your evidence ruined the
happiness of your daughter; your evidence ruined my happiness.”

“I swore to do my duty,” he said slowly. “I raised my right hand and
swore to uphold the law. It doesn’t mean that an officer can be lenient
to _anybody_. I’ve been the best sheriff this county ever had, and I’ll
keep on bein’ the best sheriff. The voters put their trust----”

“I’ve heard all that, Jim. I’m going away now; going to be gone forever.
I’ll never come back to the desert--to you. You’ve made a god of your
job, Jim. Maybe they’ll put up a monument to you some day.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

The train whistled shrilly, as it came into view. The deputy came out
and gave Mrs. Deming her ticket and her trunk check.

“Thank you, Joe,” she said, holding out her hand. They shook hands, and
she turned her back on her husband, watching the train come in. There
were only a few people at the station. The engine clanked past and the
train ground to a stop. The sheriff’s eyes were looking down the train,
and without a word he walked away from his wife and strode down the
platform.

She looked curiously after him, but he did not look back. So this was
his good-by. Stifling a sob she climbed up the steps of the coach and
went inside, while the agent’s helper threw her trunk in the baggage
car.

Duty Deming walked down to a box-car and hunched on his heels, speaking
to a man who clung to the rods beneath the car.

“Come out of that,” he ordered gruffly.

The man slowly edged off the rods and almost fell headlong. His legs
were cramped from the uncomfortable position, and he was black with dirt
and sand; his clothes driven full of it.

“Stealin’ a ride, eh?” grunted the sheriff.

The hobo straightened up, looked around through bloodshot eyes, which
finally came back to the sheriff. The train was moving again.

“What’s the big idea?” asked the hobo hoarsely. “What right have you to
drag me off here? You’re just a hick sheriff and this is a little town.
I was just travelin’.”

“Stealin’ a ride,” said the sheriff grimly. He did not look up as the
coaches passed him. “You know it’s agin the law, young man.”

“That’s up to the railroad company. Or do you own this particular
branch?”

“No, I don’t own the railroad,” replied the sheriff harshly, “but I do
represent the law around here.”

“Represent it, eh?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

The hobo sighed deeply and looked at the passing coaches. The sheriff
did not look at them.

“Hot ridin’ under there,” said the hobo. “I was just heading out of this
country. Tough riding, I’ll tell you; but they had all them box-cars
sealed. Still, I could have made it to Levering.”

“Well, yuh didn’t!” snapped the sheriff.

“That’s true. Still, you haven’t any rock pile. All you can do is to put
me in jail and feed me. That’s not a profitable thing. Better let me sit
here in the shade, until the next train comes along.”

“And let you steal another ride, eh?”

“What do you care, as long as you don’t own the railroad?”

“I’m paid to uphold the law,” said the sheriff stiffly.

The hobo sighed wearily, as he scraped his heel against the cinders.

“Do you always uphold the law?”

“Always--that’s what I’m here for.”

“A little authority has made you your brother’s keeper, eh?”

“I’m the sheriff.”

“Oh, I can see that. But what right have you to haul me off that train?
It isn’t your train. You’re not paid to guard that train, are you? Don’t
shove me. Can’t you see I’m a sick man?”

“Sick man!” sneered the sheriff. “Sick because I’m goin’ to lock yuh up
for a few days. Don’t play ’possum with me.”

“I’m not playing ’possum, as you say; I’m sick.”

The man really looked sick, in spite of his grimy face, but the sheriff
twisted him around by the shoulder and started him toward the jail.
Several persons, including the deputy, waited on the depot platform to
see what the sheriff was going to do, and as the sheriff marched his
prisoner past them he told the deputy to come with him.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The deputy followed down to the jail, where the hobo was locked behind
the bars. The deputy made no comment, but followed the sheriff back to
the office, where they sat down.

“Said he was sick,” remarked the sheriff disgustedly.

“Looked sick,” said the deputy wearily, fanning himself with his
sombrero.

The sheriff studied the lean face of his deputy for a length of time.
“How did you happen to bring the old lady in today, Joe?” he asked.

“She asked me to. I came past the ranch. I told her I’d take the team
back and get my horse. She was comin’, anyway,” as though to defend his
position in the matter.

“She was, eh? You never stopped to think that you were workin’ for me,
did yuh? You waste a day, bringin’ her in, and waste another day in
goin’ back with that team. Do you think I’m payin’ you to use up time
that way?”

The deputy flushed slightly and his lips tightened.

“I didn’t know that _you_ paid me anythin’, Deming. Ain’t I paid by the
county?”

“I’m part of that county, Joe; the sheriff part of it. I hired yuh,
didn’t I?”

The deputy got slowly from his chair and put on his hat.

“You hired me, Deming, but I’ll be damned if you fire me; I quit right
now.”

“All right; suit yourself.”

“I intend to, Deming. In fact, I intended to quit yuh when I came down
here. You never even told yore wife good-by; just walked away to arrest
a hobo, who wasn’t doin’ you any harm. Yo’re plumb loco over duty, ain’t
yuh? I’m scared of yuh, Jim; honest, I am. Yore wife said you was
worshippin’ that tin god on yore vest; that sheriff’s star. I reckon yuh
are.

“She said somethin’ about it raisin’ up and killin’ yuh. Said somethin’
about what the Bible said about not havin’ wrong gods. I don’t sabe just
what she meant. But I do sabe how she feels toward yuh. Deming, you’ve
gone crazy over duty to the law. It’s all right to enforce the law, but
yo’re just a damn’ fool over it. I knowed you was crazy when yuh sent
Harry to the pen. You didn’t need to do it, and you know yuh didn’t. Oh,
I’m glad I quit yuh.”

Deming’s face flushed hotly and he started to rise from his chair, but
sank back heavily, a queer expression in his hard gray eyes.

“What did she mean by sayin’ that it would rise up and kill me?” he
demanded. “That’s fool talk; women’s talk. Nobody can scare me. I’m glad
yuh quit, if yuh feel the way yuh do about me--and yore job. You didn’t
always fulfill yore oath, Joe. Mebbe it’s best that yuh did quit. I’m
goin’ to be more particular in the next deputy I hire.”

“They’ll probably be, too,” said Joe. “You’ll have a hell of a time,
hirin’ a new man, ’cause everybody knows how hard yuh are, Deming. Well,
I’ll pack my stuff and get out.”

“All right, Joe; give me your star. And them ca’tridges in yore belt
belong to the county.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Several days passed in which Deming was obliged to run the office alone,
which meant that twice a day he must carry food to his prisoner, against
whom no formal complaint had been made. But the hobo was far too ill to
care whether he had food or freedom. He spent most of the time on his
cot, talking deliriously, and in the dim light of the little cell the
sheriff could see nothing wrong with the man, except a fever.

But finally he called in the doctor, who was also the coroner, and he
immediately pronounced it a malignant case of smallpox; quarantining the
jail. He was minded to quarantine the sheriff, but while he was making
up his mind just what to do a cowboy, Slim Delong, fairly tore up the
street of Calor, bringing news of a murder.

Delong was fairly incoherent. Red Cowan, another cowboy working for the
JB outfit, had murdered Al Mitchell, owner of the outfit, and had headed
for the lava beds. Delong, riding in at the ranch, had seen Red Cowan
riding away swiftly toward the lava bed country, and a few minutes later
he had found Mitchell lying on the front porch, shot through the heart.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Mitchell was a big cattleman in that part of the country, and the
sheriff’s son had been sent to the penitentiary for stealing Mitchell’s
cattle. The town was rather in an uproar over the murder, but the
sheriff did not ask any of the cowboys to ride with him.

He saddled his roan horse, tied a quantity of food to his saddle, filled
a canteen and headed for the lava bed country. He did not need help. He
knew every inch of the lava bed country, although he did not know Red
Cowan. Red had only been there a short time and he had heard Joe speak
of meeting him at the JB.

Shortly after Delong had delivered his message to the sheriff, Delong
imbibed a few drinks before starting back to the JB ranch with the
coroner and several others, who were going out there to bring the body
to town. He happened to be riding a half-broke bronco, and in the flurry
at the hitchrack, as they were starting out, Delong’s horse bucked
wickedly, throwing Delong against one of the hitchrack posts.

In the parlance of the range, it knocked Delong flatter than a snake’s
belly, and he was unable to get on his horse; so they half carried, half
led him back to the saloon, where they left him propped up in a chair.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The sheriff did not hurry his horse. He swung in west of the JB ranch
and headed for the lava bed country, making no attempt to pick up the
tracks of Red’s horse. He knew that Red would cut straight through the
lava beds and head for the Mesquite River country, sixty miles away;
sixty miles of waterless waste, a broken mass of twisted lava, which
seemed never to have cooled since those prehistoric days, when it had
been poured indiscriminately over the landscape.

The sheriff felt reasonably certain that Red Cowan had started without
any preparations for food or water, and would probably expect, at least,
to find water. But there was no water in that part of the country. And a
man must ride slowly, because the sharp lava would soon ruin the feet of
his horse, unless the animal was allowed to make its own pace.

Mile after mile he plodded along, squinting his eyes against the glare
of the sun, until he developed a queer sort of a headache; a dull throb
in the back of his head, which caused him to wince at times. It bothered
his eyes. He drank from his canteen, but the water did not seem to
quench his thirst.

His mouth felt dry a moment later; so he took another drink, which
caused him a slight nausea. Must be the sun, he decided. Still, the idea
did not seem so good, because he was used to the sun. It made him angry.
After a while he filled and lighted his pipe, but after the first few
puffs of the pungent weed, he put the pipe in his pocket.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Ahead of him stretched the interminable wastes of the lava beds, where
the heat devils danced before his eyes, and he cursed them aloud, as
though they could heed his voice. Then it seemed as though he realized
the utter absurdity of such things, and cursed himself.

The setting sun found the sheriff riding aimlessly. His eyes ached
continuously now, and he had lost all desire to scan the country. But he
was not going to turn back. He was following a murderer, a cold-blooded
killer, and the law must be avenged.

He felt a little better when the sun went down and the short desert
twilight had blended with the night; a time in which the temperature
drops swiftly from a hundred and fifteen in the shade to sixty in the
dark. The sheriff had ridden away without any blankets, and now he
shivered in a sudden chill, which seemed to crinkle his vertebrae.

Queer thing, that chill. It rattled his teeth like castanets and
increased his headache until every movement of the horse brought him
fresh misery. So he dismounted, uncoiled his lariat and picketed his
horse. It was only after several minutes that he was able to summon
enough energy to remove the saddle.

Duty Deming was a sick man--and knew it. He thought of saddling his
horse and heading for Calor, but he had lost all sense of direction. The
stars blurred in his eyes, and he flopped down beside his saddle,
burying his aching head in his arms.

                   *       *       *       *       *

It was possibly two hours later that the sheriff’s horse nickered softly
in the darkness, but the sheriff did not lift his head. Came the sound
of a horse walking, and the bulky form of a horse and rider came in
through the broken rocks, plainly visible by the light of the stars.

The rider drew rein near the picketed horse, as though rather surprised
to find a horse there. He dismounted and discovered the rope, speaking
softly to the horse. He turned away and soon discovered the sheriff.

“Sleepin’ kinda heavy, ain’t yuh, pardner?” he asked in a soft, drawling
voice; but the sheriff did not move.

Coming in closer, the man scratched a match. He was of medium height,
thin-faced, blue-eyed, dressed in a faded blue shirt, well-worn bat-wing
chaps, black Stetson. The light of the match glistened on the butt of a
big Colt in the holster swinging at his thigh. As he removed his hat to
shield the match the light glistened on his copper-colored hair.

He was Red Cowan, the murderer. He knelt down beside the sheriff and
shook him by the shoulder.

“Wake up, pardner,” he said softly, but the sheriff merely grunted and
began mumbling deliriously.

“Sick, eh?” muttered the red headed one. “Funny. Got a bad fever and
he’s plumb loco. And it’s a long ways to a doctor. Jist what’ll I do
next?”

                   *       *       *       *       *

He squatted on his heels and rolled a cigarette. After due deliberation
and another cigarette he saddled the sheriff’s horse. The sheriff was
not easy to arouse but he talked steadily, mumbling his words, swearing
and laughing foolishly, while Red Cowan swung him into the saddle and
roped him on. He swayed forward, both arms dangling loosely, while Cowan
mounted his own horse and picked up the lead-rope.

Cowan took his bearings from the North Star and started out, looking
back at the humped figure of the sheriff, swaying in the saddle.

“Stay with her, pardner,” he grunted. “We’ll make the old Alkali Spring
ranch by mornin’, and mebbe we’ll find somebody there.”

And all through the night they wended their way through the lava beds,
and it was just about daybreak when they came out at an old tumbledown
ranch house. The old buildings seemed about to fall down, the corrals
were in bad repair, and only one fan was left on the old windmill, which
creaked in the morning breeze.

Down by the old stable was an alkali spring, where a few cattle,
drifters from the herds in the Mesquite River ranges, came to drink. Red
Cowan looked them over appraisingly. They meant fresh meat.

He unroped the sheriff and lifted him to the ground, propping him
against the wall while he went inside. The inside of the house was not
as bad as the exterior, as it had been used by some cattlemen during a
recent roundup. There was a roll of blankets, tightly wrapped in a
tarpaulin, swinging from a rafter, while from a tightly closed box he
took flour, baking powder, salt, sugar, beans and some cans of
vegetables and fruit.

“Thought there might be a cache here,” he said, as he removed the
provisions.

He took down the bed-roll and spread it out on one of the bunks, before
going out after the sheriff, whom he dragged in and put to bed. He
looped the sheriff’s belt around a bunk post, removed his clothes, and
prepared a breakfast, before attending to the horses.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The sheriff was burning with fever, tossing his arms, mumbling
incoherently all the while.

After a breakfast, in which the sheriff did not join him, Cowan brought
a pail of the cold water to the house and proceeded to give the sheriff
a sponge bath. This treatment seemed to sooth the sick man, and he
dropped into a slumber.

Cowan found an old pair of hopples, which he put on the sheriff’s horse,
and turned his own mount loose to forage. There was little to be done.
Cowan did not want to leave the sick man long enough to go after a
doctor, which would take at least two days; so there was only one thing
for him to do, and that was to stay and see it through, hoping that
someone might come along and lend them a hand.

For the next three days and nights he worked with the sheriff. There
were no medicines of any kind, and it seemed to be a losing battle. He
killed a steer and made beef broth, which the sheriff could not eat,
gave him both cold and hot baths, worked over him like a mother over a
child, and on the evening of the third day the sheriff awoke--conscious
for the first time.

                   *       *       *       *       *

After a period of deliberation he remembered starting out after Red
Cowan. Seated near the bed, his head in his hands, snoring loudly, was a
red-headed man. The sheriff did not know any red-headed men. He was very
weak; so he shut his eyes and tried to think. After a while he heard the
man move, and opened his eyes.

“That’s better,” said the red-head wearily.

“Who are you?” asked the sheriff, and was surprised that his voice was
so weak.

“I’m Red Cowan.”

The sheriff closed his eyes quickly.

“I guess I don’t know yuh,” he said slowly.

“Mebbe not. I was with the JB a while. What’s the matter with yuh,
anyway? You’ve been here three days.”

“Three days?” The sheriff’s eyes popped open.

Red told him all about it.

“Didn’t have no medicine,” he explained. “Had to do the best I could.”

“Know who I was?”

“Saw yore star. Yo’re Deming of Calor, ain’t yuh? Yeah, I thought yuh
was. I’ve heard of yuh. How’d yuh happen to be out there in the lava
beds?”

The sheriff closed his eyes, thinking swiftly. Cowan must not know why
he was out there.

“I dunno,” he said. “Took sick. Must have ridden a long ways.”

“You picketed yore horse.”

“Oh, I wasn’t plumb out until after--just awful sick.”

“You shore know how to be sick,” grinned Cowan. “Do you feel like some
eats?”

The sheriff shook his head.

“Better not talk any more, pardner. You’ve been pretty sick, and it
might fever yuh up, if yuh talked much.”

That suited the sheriff. He didn’t want to talk; he wanted to think. His
eyes shifted to his belt and gun on the bunk-post at the head of his
bed, and he wondered if the gun was loaded.

When Cowan went outside he lifted a hand toward the gun, and as he did
so he glanced at his hand. He felt of his stubby face, and a look of
horror spread over his face.

“Smallpox!” he exclaimed to himself. “That’s what it is--all them little
red specks. I got it from that damn’ hobo!”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Cowan came back into the house, but the sheriff did not tell him. He was
afraid that Cowan might leave him in fear of the disease. Not exactly
that he felt an immediate need of Cowan, but he wanted to take Cowan
back a prisoner.

“Still feelin’ pretty good?” asked Cowan as he busied himself around the
stove.

“I don’t feel so good, Cowan.”

“Probably not. Can’t expect to. But I reckon I’ve busted the fever. How
about a little broth, eh?”

“Not now.”

“Uh-huh. Tomorrow mornin’, if yo’re feeling pretty good, I think I’ll
head for Mesquite River and send some folks in to take care of yuh. You
need a doctor pretty bad, and you’ll need the right kinda food.”

That was not so good. The sheriff huddled down in bed, trying to think
of some way to prevent Cowan from leaving. Just now his thoughts ran in
circles, because his head ached again. Ten minutes later he was
delirious again.

And all that night Cowan had to use force to keep him in bed. He babbled
of murderers, horse thieves and of his own prowess as a sheriff. And in
the light of the candle Cowan saw the rash on the sheriff’s hands and
face.

“Smallpox!” grunted Cowan. “So that’s what’s the matter, eh? Lucky I’ve
had a good dose of it. Tomorrow I’ll tie him down and head for a
doctor.”

It was daylight again before the sheriff became conscious. The fever had
abated enough to allow him to realize and recognize again. Cowan’s face
was drawn and tired, his eyes red from lack of sleep.

“Sane again, eh?” he grunted. “Well, you’ve shore been off yore nut
a-plenty, pardner. Listen to me and get this straight. I’m goin’ out and
round up my bronc. You’ve got a sweet case of smallpox, which means
yo’re goin’ to be here mebbe a couple weeks. I can’t stay all that time;
so I’m headin’ for Mesquite River to get yuh a doctor and a nurse.

“Yuh take her easy while I get my horse. Mebbe I better tie yuh down,
’cause you might go wanderin’ around and die out in the desert. Anyway,
yo’re all right for a while, and I’ll see yuh before I pull out. I’ll
leave plenty water, such as it is, where yuh can reach it. But you’ve
got to have plenty nursin’ and the right kinda food.”

Red Cowan picked up his rope and went out, leaving the sheriff staring
at the rafters, trying to force his mind to function properly. He didn’t
want Red Cowan to leave him. He had never failed to bring in his man,
and if Red Cowan ever left that ranch----

                   *       *       *       *       *

His hand reached up weakly and drew the heavy Colt from the holster. It
was fully loaded. The weight of it quickly tired his wrist, and he
stared at his bloodless hand. The fever had sapped his strength badly,
and he lay back wearily, cursing himself for a quitter.

He was no match for Red Cowan now. Hadn’t Cowan said something about
tying him down? The sheriff tried to sit up. If Red Cowan tied him
down----

“Get up, you fool!” he told himself. “Yo’re all right. Are you goin’ to
lie here and let a murderer escape? You are Duty Deming, sheriff of
Calor!”

With a superhuman effort he managed to swing around on the bunk and get
his feet over the edge; but toppled back, where he lay breathing
heavily, gripping the gun in his right hand.

He could feel the fever coming back, but he would not let that stop him.
It was now or never. No thought of the future--only the present. The law
must be served.

He managed to reach the doorway, where he went to his knees, blinking
out at the sunlight. It dazzled his eyes, until the tears ran down his
cheeks, and he dropped his head to one knee, covering his eyes with his
arm.

“No other gods before Me,” he muttered. “What did she mean? What would
rise up and kill me?”

His fumbling fingers tried to locate his star, not realizing that he
wore nothing but his underclothes. He laughed foolishly in the crook of
his elbow. His mind was clouding again.

“I can’t die,” he told himself. “It’s my duty to live. I’ve got to
live!”

He got slowly to his feet, fighting hard. “They’ll hang him--hang Red
Cowan. Eye for an eye. The law demands that. I’m the law of Calor, ain’t
I? Don’t the law demand his life?”

The sheriff sagged wearily, gripping the side of the door with his left
hand.

“I’m the law,” he muttered drunkenly. “I demand----”

The fever cloud was enveloping him again, and the little blue devils
with their sledges were beating on his brain, trying to batter him into
insensibility.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Where was Red Cowan, he wondered? Where had he gone? He was obliged to
use both hands to cock the Colt. Red Cowan. That was what he wanted. The
man with the flame-colored hair. There was no gratitude for what Red had
done for him. No thought of the days and nights of nursing. The law must
be satisfied, and Duty Deming was the law.

He went stumbling across the uneven ground, sagging at the knees, his
head swinging from side to side, almost trailing the cocked revolver in
his right hand; fighting, fighting all the while.

Then he saw his quarry just at the corner of the old stable. It was Red
Cowan, looking at him. The big Colt swung up and his finger tightened on
the trigger. The recoil jerked the gun from his hands and he almost
fell.

He did not look for the gun. One shot had been enough. He hunched one
shoulder against the old stable wall, gasping for breath. The law had
been satisfied. He closed his eyes for a moment. The devils were still
hammering on his brain, but above it all he could hear another sound; a
thump, thump, thump of horses walking.

Slowly he opened his eyes and tried to see what the blurred thing was.
He knew it was a man on a horse, although his eyes did not register the
figures.

“Jim Deming!” said a voice. “For God’s sake, Jim!”

It was Joe Mills, the ex-deputy.

“Don’t yuh know me, Jim?” he asked.

“This is Joe Mills.”

“I know,” whispered Deming. “Yuh quit me.”

“Aw, forget that. We’ve been huntin’ all over the country for you, Jim;
and I----”

“I had to do my duty,” whispered Deming. He lifted his right hand with a
supreme effort and pointed a finger waveringly.

“That’s Red Cowan,” he said.

“Yo’re crazy!” blurted the deputy. “That ain’t Red Cowan.”

For several moments the sheriff did not move. His face twisted
strangely. “You say that ain’t Red Cowan?” he whispered hoarsely.

“Of course not, you danged fool.”

“Don’t lie to me, Joe! My God, don’t lie.”

“I ain’t lyin’, Jim. Yo’re crazy, I tell yuh. Of course this ain’t Red
Cowan. I know Red.”

For a moment the sheriff’s head sagged heavily, but he swung himself
away from the stable, started toward the house on uncertain legs, but
collapsed, falling flat on his face.

“Now, wouldn’t that rasp yuh!” snorted the deputy, as he swung off his
horse and walked over to the prostrate sheriff. He picked him up and
took him to the shade, where he laid him on the ground.

Something about the sheriff caused the deputy to make a quick
examination.

“I’ll be totally darned!” he said slowly.

Then he turned his head and saw Red Cowan, riding in from beyond the
stable; riding a bareback horse and leading another.

“Hello, Mills!” yelled Cowan. “Where’d you come from?”

“C’mere,” said the ex-deputy, and Cowan rode up to him.

“By golly, I thought I should have tied him down,” said Cowan.

“He’s dead,” said Mills slowly.

“Dead? Whatcha know about that? I found him several nights ago, plumb
flat over there in the lava beds. He was too sick to talk; so I brought
him here. I’ve had one hell of a time, nursin’ him, Joe. Got smallpox, I
reckon.”

“Measles,” said Joe. “Must ’a’ got ’em from a hobo he had in jail at
Calor. Hobo almost died, too. Didn’t Deming tell yuh what he was doin’
in the lava beds?”

“Too sick, I guess.”

“He was lookin’ for you, Red. Wanted yuh for the murder of Mitchell.”

“What?”

“Fact. Delong brought the news of it, and Deming started on yore trail.
But Delong got throwed against a hitchrack post that mornin’, and it
hurt him so bad he died that same afternoon. But before he died he
confessed to murderin’ old Mitchell himself. He just thought he’d put
the deadwood on you, ’cause you quarreled with Mitchell before yuh
quit.”

                   *       *       *       *       *

Red Cowan laughed shortly. “So that was it, eh? Deming didn’t mention it
to me. Mebbe he was too sick.”

“Prob’ly. Too bad he didn’t live longer, Red. Delong confessed that
Mitchell hired him to plant evidence that sent Harry Deming to the pen.
We’ll have Harry out in a few days.”

“Well, I’ll be danged!”

“Queer, ain’t it?” mused Joe, looking down at the body of the sheriff.
“His wife said that some day his star would rise up and kill him. She
said he was makin’ a god out of his star. I dunno, Red. Things have a
queer way of workin’ out. If he hadn’t been so strong on duty he’d never
have taken that sick hobo off that train. Deming always had the idea of
bein’ his brother’s keeper, yuh know.”

“That’s what I’ve heard. Duty they called him, didn’t they?”

“Yeah. Awful set in his ways. I suppose we might as well start back with
him.”

“Sure; might as well. Sorry I didn’t rope him down. But he seemed to be
all right when I left. Fever made his heart weak, I suppose. But he
never told me he was after me, Joe.”

“He wouldn’t. I can figure out where he got the measles and I can figure
out why he didn’t tell yuh what he was doin’ in the lava beds, but I’ll
be damned if I can figure out why he killed the red bull calf and said
it was you.”

“I didn’t know about that, Joe. He must have been crazy.”

“Mm-m-m-m,” said Joe slowly. “I s’pose he was. Red, do yuh believe in
them Ten Commandments?”

“Never read any of ’em. What are they about?”

“Everythin’.”

“Must be good, eh?”

“Worth readin’. Git a rope and we’ll take him home.”


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the January 25, 1928 issue
of _Short Stories Magazine_.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HIS BROTHER'S KEEPER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


