The Project Gutenberg eBook of How to Visit the English Cathedrals
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: How to Visit the English Cathedrals

Author: Esther Singleton

Release date: August 1, 2020 [eBook #62810]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Sonya Schermann, Chuck Greif and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO VISIT THE ENGLISH CATHEDRALS ***

                  How to Visit the English Cathedrals

                        BOOKS BY MISS SINGLETON


     TURRETS, TOWERS, AND TEMPLES. Great Buildings of the World
     Described by Great Writers.

     GREAT PICTURES. Described by Great Writers.

     WONDERS OF NATURE. Described by Great Writers.

     ROMANTIC CASTLES AND PALACES. Described by Great Writers.

     FAMOUS PAINTINGS. Described by Great Writers.

     HISTORIC BUILDINGS. Described by Great Writers.

     FAMOUS WOMEN. Described by Great Writers.

     GREAT PORTRAITS. Described by Great Writers.

     HISTORIC BUILDINGS OF AMERICA. Described by Great Writers.

     HISTORIC LANDMARKS OF AMERICA. Described by Great Writers.

     GREAT RIVERS OF THE WORLD. Described by Great Writers.

     FAMOUS CATHEDRALS. Described by Great Writers.

     FAMOUS SCULPTURE. Described by Great Writers.

     MODERN PAINTINGS. Described by Great Writers.

     WONDERS OF THE WORLD. Described by Great Writers.

     PARIS. Described by Great Writers.

     LONDON. Described by Great Writers.

     RUSSIA. Described by Great Writers.

     JAPAN. Described by Great Writers.

     VENICE. Described by Great Writers.

     HOLLAND. Described by Great Writers.

     ROME. Described by Great Writers.

     GERMANY. Described by Great Writers.

     SWITZERLAND. Described by Great Writers.

     TURKEY AND THE BALKAN STATES. Described by Great Writers.

     FLORENCE. Described by Great Writers.

     EGYPT. Described by Great Writers.

     CHINA. Described by Great Writers.

     LOVE IN LITERATURE AND ART.

     THE GOLDEN ROD FAIRY BOOK.

     THE WILD FLOWER FAIRY BOOK.

     A GUIDE TO THE OPERA.

     A GUIDE TO MODERN OPERA.

     DUTCH NEW YORK. Manners and Customs of New Amsterdam in the
     Seventeenth Century.

     HOW TO VISIT THE GREAT PICTURE GALLERIES.

     HOW TO VISIT THE ENGLISH CATHEDRALS.

                 [Illustration: SALISBURY: CLOISTERS]




                             How to Visit
                        The English Cathedrals

                                  By
                           Esther Singleton
                  Member of the Royal Society of Arts

                     _With Numerous Illustrations_

                            [Illustration]

                               New York
                        Dodd, Mead and Company
                                 1912

                          COPYRIGHT, 1912, BY
                        DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
                        _Published April, 1912_




PREFACE


This little book is offered to the tourist in the most modest spirit and
with the hope that in this convenient form some gleanings from the works
of specialists may afford help and pleasure to those who run quickly
through the Cathedral towns of England. The subject has been done so
often and so well that an additional book would demand an apology if it
pretended to compete with the labours of those who have spent long years
in the study of special cathedrals, or with the charming recollections
of travel that others have given the world from time to time.

My plan has been merely to present in a single volume concise
descriptions of the great ecclesiastical buildings of England, together
with the story of their construction and historical associations
supplemented with criticisms from the best authorities of their most
striking architectural and artistic features. These authorities are duly
acknowledged by initials.--E. S.

     NEW YORK, _March, 1912_.




STYLES OF ENGLISH ARCHITECTURE


The cathedral usually grew architecturally from age to age, or rose like
a phœnix from the ashes of an earlier building.

     “Not only is there built into a mediæval cathedral the accumulated
     thought of all the men who had occupied themselves with building
     during the preceding centuries, but you have the dream and
     aspiration of the bishop, abbot, or clergy for whom it was
     designed; the master mason’s skilled construction; the work of the
     carver, the painter, the glazier, the host of men who, each in his
     own craft, knew all that had been done before them, and had spent
     their lives in struggling to surpass the works of their
     forefathers. It is more than this: there is not one shaft, one
     moulding, one carving, not one chisel-mark in such a building, that
     was not designed specially for the place where it is found, and
     which was not the best that the experience of the age could invent
     for the purpose to which it is applied; nothing was borrowed; and
     nothing that was designed for one purpose was used for another. A
     thought or a motive peeps out through every joint; you may wander
     in such a building for weeks or for months together, and never know
     it all.”--(Fergusson.)

Most English cathedrals are built in the form of a Latin cross, the arms
of which are called the transepts. Over their point of intersection the
central tower is usually erected. The part of the church running
westward from this point to the entrance door is the nave and that
running eastward to the high altar is the choir.

Behind, or east of the choir, is situated the Lady-Chapel, or Chapel of
the Virgin, which sometimes contained additional altars to other
saints. Along the aisles we frequently find side chapels, containing
tombs and chantries of dignitaries, local saints and benefactors.

The nave usually consists of the main arcade; the _triforium_ (which
opens into a passage or gallery); and the _clerestory_.

The _triforium_ is the arcaded story between the lower range of piers
and arches and the clerestory. The name is supposed to be derived from
_tres_ and _fores_--three doors or openings, for such is often the
number of arches in each bay. Professor Willis, however, believed that
the word is traced to a monkish Latin word for thoroughfare.

_Clerestory_, or _clearstory_, is the upper story of the nave of the
church above the aisles and pierced with windows. The windows of the
clerestories of Norman work are less important than in the later styles.
They become larger in the Early English period and more important in the
Decorated, always lengthening as the _triforium_ diminishes.

Sometimes the choir occupies two bays of the nave, but usually begins
with the screen placed on the east side of the central tower. In olden
days this was the rood-screen, so called because a large crucifix, or
rood, stood on it. All roods were destroyed during the Reformation. At
the present time the organ is frequently placed here; and there is
diversity of opinion about the artistic propriety of its position.

Entering the choir we see the high altar often with a reredos (French
_l’arrière dos_, i.e., embroidered hangings). Along the sides of the
choir are the seats, or stalls, usually of carved oak, surmounted with
tracery, arches and pinnacles. Among these is the bishop’s seat, or
throne. Frequently the stalls exhibit beautiful tabernacle-work and the
misereres (_miséricorde_), which turn up and afford support to a person
in a position between sitting and standing, are generally carved with
grotesque and quaint figures and caricatures. Vestries for the use of
priests and choristers are often situated near the choir.

At the back of the choir (the retro-choir) was placed the chief shrine,
where relics of the great saint of the cathedral were kept and to which
the streams of pilgrims passed. In many churches the steps and pavements
are worn away. Near the shrine was a watching-chamber, where a monk
guarded the shrine and its treasures.

Further east the Lady-Chapel was situated, though in a few cases it is
found on the north side, e. g. Bristol and Ely.

     “In Italy the bones of a saint or martyr were almost invariably
     deposited either beneath or immediately in front of the altar. But
     in the Gothic nations this original notion of the burial-place of
     the Saints became obscured, in the increasing desire to give them a
     more honourable place. According to the precise system of
     orientation adopted by the German and Celtic nations, the eastern
     portion of the church was in those countries regarded as
     pre-eminently sacred. Thither the high altar was generally moved,
     and to it the eyes of the congregation were specially directed. And
     in the eagerness to give a higher and holier even than the highest
     and holiest place to any great saint, on whom popular devotion was
     fastened, there sprang up in most of the larger churches during the
     Thirteenth Century a fashion of throwing out a still further
     eastern end, in which the shrine or altar of the saint might be
     erected,--and to which, therefore, not merely the gaze of the whole
     congregation, but of the officiating priest himself, even as he
     stood before the high altar, might be constantly turned. Thus,
     according to Fuller’s quaint remark, the superstitious reverence
     for the dead reached its highest pitch, ‘the porch saying to the
     churchyard, the church to the porch, the chancel to the church, the
     east end to all--“Stand further off, I am holier than thou.”’ This
     notion happened to coincide in point of time with the burst of
     devotion towards the Virgin Mary, which took place under the
     Pontificate of Innocent III., during the first years of the
     Thirteenth Century; and, therefore, in all cases where there was no
     special local saint, this eastern end was dedicated to Our Lady and
     the chapel thus formed was called The Lady-Chapel. Such was the
     case in the Cathedrals of Salisbury, Norwich, Hereford, Wells,
     Gloucester and Chester. But when the popular feeling of any city or
     neighbourhood had been directed to some indigenous object of
     devotion, this at once took the highest place, and the Lady-Chapel,
     if any there were, was thrust down to a less honourable position.
     Of this arrangement, the most notable instances in England are, or
     were (for in many cases the very sites have perished), the shrines
     of St. Alban in Hertfordshire, St. Edmund at Bury, St. Edward in
     Westminster Abbey, St. Cuthbert at Durham, and St. Etheldreda at
     Ely.”--(A. P. S.)

_Sedilia_, seats used by the priest, deacon and sub-deacon during the
pauses in the mass, are generally cut into the south walls of churches,
separated by shafts or species of mullions and surmounted by canopies,
pinnacles or other elaborate adornments. The _piscina_ and _aumbry_ are
sometimes attached to them.

The _piscina_ is a hollowed out niche with drain to carry away the water
used in the ablutions during mass. After the Thirteenth Century there is
scarcely an altar in England without one. Sometimes the _piscina_ is in
the form of a double niche.

Beneath the cathedral there is often a crypt--in reality a second
church, often of great size.

     “We may be tempted to ask, what is the purpose of a crypt? Some
     have said that it was merely meant to give dignity to the church,
     or to avoid the damp. It appears, however, to be a custom taken
     from the very early Christian churches at Rome, which were in many
     cases built over the tomb of a martyr, and had therefore a lower
     and an upper church. Indeed if we imagine the central portion of
     the choir steps removed so that the nave floor might extend without
     interruption to the crypt, and a clear view of the crypt be open to
     the nave, we should have an arrangement precisely similar to that
     of several Italian churches, notably that of San Zenone, at
     Verona.”--(F. and R.)

As a rule, the monastic buildings, refectory, dormitory, infirmary,
etc., were built on the south side, and here were also the cloisters,
those pleasant walks and seats for exercise and recreation surrounding a
peaceful quadrangle. The slype, or passage on the east side, led to the
monks’ cemetery.

In the chapter-house the monks transacted their business.

The chapter-house, often one of the richest and most beautiful portions
of the cathedral, may be of any form. Those of Canterbury, Exeter,
Chester and Gloucester are oblong; those of Salisbury, Wells, Lincoln,
York and Westminster are octagonal; and that of Worcester is circular.
At Salisbury, Wells, Lincoln and Worcester a single massive shaft
supports the vault.

In examining a cathedral we must remember that many changes have taken
place since the first stone was laid. If the monks were fortunate enough
to have a full treasury, they kept up with the architectural styles.
They would pull down the old nave, or choir, or transepts, and erect new
buildings, lower the pitch of the roof, add a new porch or door, or
insert new windows in the ancient walls. Fires were frequent and
lightning and winds often played havoc with towers and spires. Such
manifestations of the displeasure of the elements or saints necessitated
rebuilding; and, as a rule, this rebuilding was undertaken in the latest
fashion. Therefore, we find in most cathedrals specimens of many styles
of architecture.

     “As we see our cathedrals now, the view that meets us differs much
     from that which would have greeted us in mediæval times. Then all
     was ablaze with colours. Through the beautiful ancient glass the
     light gleamed on tints of gorgeous hues, and rich tapestries and
     hangings, on walls bedight with paintings, and every monument, pier
     and capital were aglow with coloured decorations. We have lost
     much, but still much remains. At the Reformation the avaricious
     courtiers of Henry VIII. plundered our sacred shrines, and carried
     off under the plea of banishing superstition vast stores of costly
     plate and jewels, tapestry and hangings. In the Civil War time
     riotous, fanatical soldiers wrought havoc everywhere, hacking
     beautifully-carved tombs and canopies, destroying brasses, and
     mutilating all that they could find. Ages of neglect have also left
     their marks upon our churches; and above all the hand of the
     ignorant and injudicious ‘restorer’ has fallen heavily on these
     legacies of Gothic art, destroying much that was of singular
     beauty, and replacing it by the miserable productions of early
     Nineteenth Century fabrication.”--(P. H. D.)

And now, in order to make our visits more enjoyable, let us refresh our
memories with a slight _résumé_ of the four leading styles of English
Architecture.

The Pointed Arch appeared almost simultaneously in all the civilized
countries of Europe. It was probably discovered by the Crusaders in the
Holy Land and brought home by them. None of its charming and beautiful
accessories, however, accompanied it; the graceful clusters of pillars,
the tracery and mullions were to be developed by the Europeans. One of
the first to use the word _Gothic_ to define Pointed Architecture was
Sir Henry Wotton; and it seems that the word was finally determined as a
definition by Sir Christopher Wren. An English critic says:

     “The pointed arch was a graft on the Romanesque, Lombard and
     Byzantine architecture of Europe, just as the circular arch of the
     Romans had been on the columnar ordinances of the Greeks; but with
     a widely different result. The amalgamation in the latter case
     destroyed the beauty of both the stock and the scion; while in the
     former the stock lent itself to the modifying influence of its
     parasitical nursling, gradually gave up its heavy, dull and
     cheerless forms, and was eventually lost in its beautiful
     offspring, as the unlovely caterpillar is in the gay and graceful
     butterfly.”

Although Pointed or Gothic Architecture developed with almost equal
vigour in every country of Europe, it reached its greatest perfection in
France. Many of the finest earliest buildings in England were, to a
great extent, French in their origin, or development; but, in the course
of time, English Gothic Architecture became very original. In this
country

     “Gothic architecture seems to have attained its ultimate perfection
     in the Fourteenth Century, at which period everything belonging to
     it was conceived and executed in a free and bold spirit, all the
     forms were graceful and natural, and all the details of foliage and
     other sculptures were copied from living types, with a skill and
     truth of drawing which has never been surpassed. Conventional forms
     were in a great measure abandoned, and it seems to have been
     rightly and truly considered that the fittest monuments for the
     House of God were faithful copies of His works; and so long as this
     principle continued to be acted on, so long did Gothic architecture
     remain pure. But in the succeeding century, under the later Henrys
     and Edwards, a gradual decline took place: everything was moulded
     to suit a preconceived idea, the foliage lost its freshness, and
     was moulded into something of a rectangular form; the arches were
     depressed, the windows lowered, the flowing curves of the tracery
     converted into straight lines, panelling profusely used, and the
     square form everywhere introduced; until at length the prevalence
     of the horizontal line led easily and naturally to the Renaissance
     of the classic styles, though in an impure and much degraded form.
     The mixture of the two styles first appears in the time of Henry
     VII.,--a period in which (though remarkable for the beauty and
     delicacy of its details) the grand conceptions of form and
     proportion of the previous century seem to have been lost.
     Heaviness or clumsiness of form, combined with exquisite beauty of
     detail, are the characteristics of this era.”--(J. H. P.)

The styles are generally classified as follows: I. Norman, or
Romanesque; II. Early English; III. Decorated; IV. Perpendicular.

     “Soon after the Norman Conquest a great change took place in the
     art of building in England. On consulting the history of our
     cathedral churches, we find that in almost every instance the
     church was rebuilt from its foundations by the first Norman bishop,
     either on the same site or on a new one; sometimes, as at Norwich
     and Peterborough, the cathedral was removed to a new town
     altogether, and built on a spot where there was no church before;
     in other cases, as at Winchester, the new church was built near the
     old one, which was not pulled down until after the relics had been
     translated with great pomp from the old church to the new. In other
     instances, as in York and Canterbury, the new church was erected on
     the site of the old one, which was pulled down piecemeal as the new
     work progressed. These new churches were in all cases on a much
     larger and more magnificent scale than the old.

     “Strictly speaking, the Norman is one of the Romanesque styles,
     which succeeded to the old Roman; but the Gothic was so completely
     developed from the Norman that it is impossible to draw a line of
     distinction between them; it is also convenient to begin with the
     Norman, because the earliest complete buildings that we have in
     this country are of the Norman period, and the designs of the
     Norman architects, at the end of the Eleventh Century and the
     beginning of the Twelfth, were on so grand a scale that many of our
     finest cathedrals are built on the foundations of the churches of
     that period, and a great part of the walls are frequently found to
     be really Norman in construction, although their appearance is so
     entirely altered that it is difficult at first to realise this; for
     instance, in the grand cathedral of Winchester, William of Wykeham
     did not rebuild it, but so entirely altered the appearance that it
     is now properly considered as one of the earliest examples of the
     English Perpendicular style, of which he was the inventor; this
     style is entirely confined to England; it is readily distinguished
     from any of the Continental styles by the _perpendicular lines_ in
     the tracery of the windows, and in the panelling on the walls; in
     all the foreign styles these lines are flowing or flame-like, and
     for that reason they are called Flamboyant; a few windows with
     tracery of that style are met with in England, but they are quite
     exceptions.”--(J. H. P.)

The works of this period were colossal. Peterborough was begun in 1117
and finished in 1143; the nave of Norwich was built between 1122 and
1145; Canterbury was finished in 1130; and part of Rochester in the same
year.

In the time of William Rufus all the Saxon cathedrals were being rebuilt
on a larger scale. From this reign date the crypt of Worcester; crypt,
arches of the nave and part of the transepts of Gloucester; the choir
and transepts of Durham; and the choir and transepts of Norwich.

In the reign of Henry I. the choirs of Ely, Rochester, Norwich and
Canterbury were dedicated; and among the new works begun were the nave
of Durham and the choir of Peterborough.

     “The piers in the earlier period are either square solid masses of
     masonry, or recessed in the angles in the same manner as the
     arches, or they are plain, round massive pillars, with frequently
     only an impost of very simple character, but often with capitals.

     “The capitals in early work are either plain, cubical masses with
     the lower angles rounded off, forming a sort of rude cushion shape,
     as at Winchester, or they have a sort of rude volute, apparently in
     imitation of the Ionic, cut upon the angles; and in the centre of
     each face a plain square block in the form of the Tau cross is left
     projecting, as if to be afterwards carved. The scalloped capital
     belongs to rather a later period than the plain cushion or the rude
     Ionic, and does not occur before the time of Henry I. This form of
     capital was perhaps the most common of all in the first half of the
     Twelfth Century, and continued in use to the end of the Norman
     style. The capitals were frequently carved at a period subsequent
     to their erection, as in the crypt at Canterbury, where some of the
     capitals are finished, others half-finished, with two sides blank
     and others not carved at all. In later Norman work the capitals are
     frequently ornamented with foliage, animals, groups of figures,
     etc., in endless variety. The abacus throughout the style is the
     most characteristic member, and will frequently distinguish a
     Norman capital when other parts are doubtful.

     “Norman ornaments are of endless variety; the most common is the
     chevron, or zigzag, and this is used more and more abundantly as
     the work gets later; it is found at all periods even in Roman work
     of the Third Century and probably earlier, but in all early work it
     is used sparingly, and the profusion with which it is used in late
     work is one of the most ready marks by which to distinguish that
     the work is late. The sunk star is a very favourite ornament
     throughout the style; it occurs on the abacus of the capitals in
     the chapel of the White Tower, London, and it seems to have been
     the forerunner of the tooth-ornament. The billet is used in the
     early part of Peterborough, but discontinued in the later work,
     and does not often occur in late work. It is sometimes square,
     more frequently rounded. The beak-head, the cat’s-head, the small
     medallions with figures and the signs of the zodiac, all belong to
     the later Norman period. In the later Norman mouldings a mixture of
     Byzantine character is seen on the ornaments as at Durham. It has
     also been observed that in the sculpture of the period of the late
     Norman style there is frequently a certain mixture of the Byzantine
     Greek character brought home from the East by the Crusaders, who
     had returned. This is also one of the characteristics of the period
     of the Transition.”--(J. H. P.)

The next period--that of the Transition--in which the science of
vaulting received great impetus and construction became more elegant and
graceful in line, is splendidly exhibited at Canterbury in the work of
the French William of Sens and his successor, the English William.
Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, is also a fine example of late Norman
and Transitional work.

The Early English Style covers the reigns of Richard I., John and Henry
III., from 1189 to 1272. It is known also as the First Pointed, or
Lancet, and is a purely English variety of Gothic Architecture. The
developments were always in the line of greater lightness and elegance.
There was also throughout this period a great use of delicate shafts of
polished Purbeck marble for doorways, windows and arcades.

Canterbury, Rochester and Lincoln are famous examples. Canterbury was
completed in 1184; Rochester in 1201-1227; and much of Lincoln was
finished (especially the choir and eastern transept with its chapels)
before 1200.

Salisbury Cathedral, however, is usually considered as _The Type_ of the
Early English style, because it is less mixed than any other building
of the same importance. It was commenced in 1220 and consecrated in
1258.

The choir and apse of Westminster Abbey and the north transept of York
Minster are also good examples of this period. We may note here that it
was customary to build the west front immediately after the choir and
leave the nave to be filled in afterwards.

     “New ideas and a new life seem to have been given to architecture,
     and the builders appear to have revelled in it even to exuberance
     and excess, and it was necessary afterwards in some degree to
     soften down and subdue it. At no period has ‘the principle of
     verticality’ been so completely carried out as in the Early English
     style, and even in some of the earliest examples of it.”--(J. H.
     P.)

     “The characteristic elegance of the general architectural design
     was carried out in all the details. The mouldings were delicately
     rounded and alternated with hollows so drawn as to give here
     delicate and there most forcible effects of light and shade. Thus
     the dark line produced by marble in a pier was continued by means
     of a dark shadow in the arch; and without considerable knowledge of
     the science of moulding, it is impossible to do justice to this
     part of the English Early Pointed work, which has never been
     surpassed, if, indeed, it has ever been equalled at any period
     elsewhere. The groined roofs were still simple in design, but a
     ridge rib was often added to the necessary transverse and diagonal
     ribs of the previous period. This gave a certain hardness of line
     to the vault; it was the first step to the more elaborate and later
     systems of vaulting, and was soon followed by the introduction of
     other ribs on the surface of the vaulting cells. Few works are more
     admirable than some of the towers and spires of this period.”--(G.
     S. S.)

The characteristic of lancet windows applies only to the early part of
the style from 1190 to about 1220 or 1230. After that time circles in
the head of the windows of two or more lights came in, and the circles
became foliated by about 1230, and continued to 1260 or 1270, when the
Decorated style began to come into fashion.

     “The windows in the earlier examples are plain, lancet-shaped and
     generally narrow; sometimes they are richly moulded within and
     without, but frequently have nothing but a plain chamfer outside
     and a wide splay within. In the Early English style we have, in the
     later examples, tracery in the heads of the windows, but it is
     almost invariably in the form of circles, either plain or foliated,
     and is constructed in a different manner from genuine Decorated
     tracery.

     “At first the windows have merely openings pierced through the
     solid masonry of the head, the solid portions thus left gradually
     becoming smaller and the openings larger, until the solid parts are
     reduced to nearly the same thickness as the mullions; but they are
     not moulded, and do not form continuations of the mullions until we
     arrive at real Decorated tracery. This kind of tracery was called
     by Professor Willis plate tracery; being in fact, a plate of stone
     pierced with holes: it is extensively used in early French work.
     The more usual kind of tracery is called _bar_ tracery, to
     distinguish it from the earlier kind.”--(J. H. P.)

Doorways are generally pointed or trefoiled, but sometimes round-headed,
and small doorways are frequently flat-headed, with the angles corbelled
in the form called the square-headed trefoil, or the shouldered arch.
Trefoiled arches are characteristic of this style. Arches are
frequently, but not always, acutely pointed; and in the more important
buildings are generally richly moulded, as in Westminster Abbey, either
with or without the tooth-ornament, as the arches at York Minster. The
pillars are of various forms, frequently clustered; but the most
characteristic pillar of the style is the one with detached shafts,
which are generally of Purbeck marble. These are frequently very long
and slender and only connected with the central shaft by the capital and
base, with or without one or two bands at intervals. These bands
sometimes consist of rings of copper gilt, as in the choir of Worcester
Cathedral, and are sometimes necessary for holding together the slender
shafts of Purbeck marble. The bases generally consist of two rounds, the
lowest one the largest, both frequently filleted, with a deep hollow
between, placed horizontally, as at Canterbury. In pure Early English
work, the upper member of the capital, called the abacus, is circular
and consists, in the earlier examples, simply of two rounds, the upper
one the largest, with a hollow between them; but in later examples the
mouldings are frequently increased in number and filleted.

Mouldings are chiefly bold rounds, with equally bold and deeply cut
hollows, which produce a strong effect of light and shade. Vaults are
bolder than during the Norman period and differ from succeeding styles
by their greater simplicity, as at Salisbury. In the earlier examples
there are ribs on the angles of the groins only; at a later period the
vaulting becomes more complicated, as at Westminster. There is a
longitudinal rib, and a cross rib along the ridge of the cross vaults,
and frequently also an intermediate rib on the surface of the vault. The
bosses are rare at first, more abundant afterwards: they are generally
well worked and enriched with foliage. English vaults are sometimes of
wood only, as in York Minster, and the cloisters at Lincoln. A vault is,
in fact, a ceiling, having always an outer roof over it. There is a
marked distinction in the construction of Gothic vaults in England and
France. In England, from the earliest period, each stone is cut to fit
its place; in France the stones are cut square or rather oblong, as in
the walls, and only wedged out by the thickness of the mortar at the
back in the joints. Fan-tracery vaulting is peculiar to England, and it
begins, in principle, as early as in the cloister of Lincoln about 1220,
where the vault is of wood, but the springings are of stone, and cut to
fit the ribs of the wooden vault.

Buttresses project boldly, and flying-buttresses become a prominent
feature. There is a fine example of a compound flying-buttress at
Westminster Abbey, which supports the vaults of the choir, the triforium
and the aisles and carries the thrust of the whole over the cloister to
the ground. Early English towers are generally more lofty than the
Norman, and their buttresses have a greater projection. The spire is
usually a noticeable feature. The East End is usually square; but
sometimes terminates with the apse, generally a half-octagon or a
half-hexagon, as at Westminster Abbey.

     “Throughout the Early English period there is an ornament used in
     the hollow mouldings which is as characteristic of this style as
     the zigzag is of the Norman; this consists of a small pyramid, more
     or less acute, cut into four leaves or petals meeting in the point,
     but separate below as in Chester Cathedral. When very acute, and
     seen in profile, it may be imagined to have somewhat the appearance
     of a row of dog’s-teeth, and from this it has been called the
     ‘dog-tooth[1] ornament,’ or, by some, the shark’s tooth ornament,
     more commonly the tooth-ornament. It is used with the greatest
     profusion on arches, between clustered shafts, on the architraves
     and jambs of doors, windows, piscinas and indeed in every place
     where such ornament can be introduced. It is very characteristic of
     this style, and begins quite at the commencement of the style, as
     in St. Hugh’s work at Lincoln; for though in the Norman we find an
     approach to it, in the Decorated various modifications of it occur;
     still the genuine tooth-ornament may be considered to belong
     exclusively to the Early English.

     “Another peculiarity consists of the _foliage_, which differs
     considerably from the Norman: in the latter it has more or less the
     appearance of being imitated from that of the Classic orders, while
     in this it is entirely original. Its essential form seems to be
     that of a trefoil leaf, but this is varied in such a number of ways
     that the greatest variety is produced. It is used in cornices, the
     bosses of groining, the mouldings of windows and doorways, and
     various other places, but particularly in capitals to which it
     gives a peculiar and distinctive character. The foliage of these
     capitals is technically called ‘stiff-leaf foliage,’ but this
     alludes only to the stiff stem or stalk of the leaf, which rises
     from the ring of the capital; the foliage itself is frequently as
     far removed from stiffness as any can be, as for instance in the
     capitals of Lincoln. The stiff stalk is, however, a ready mark to
     distinguish the Early English capital from that of the succeeding
     style. We must bear in mind, however, that foliage is by no means
     an essential feature of the Early English style; many of our finest
     buildings, such as Westminster Abbey, have their capitals formed of
     a plain bell reversed, with mouldings round the abacus like rings
     put upon it, and round the neck.

     “The ornaments so well known by the name of crockets were first
     introduced in this style. The name is taken from the shepherd’s
     crook, adopted by the bishops as emblematical of their office. They
     occur at Lincoln, in St. Hugh’s work, the earliest example of this
     style, and are there used in the unusual position of being in a
     vertical line between the detached shafts. They are found in the
     same position also in the beautiful work of the west front of
     Wells. Afterwards they were used entirely on the outside of
     pediments, or in similar situations, projecting from the face of
     the work, or the outer surface of the moulding, as in the very
     beautiful tomb of Archbishop Walter Grey in York Cathedral; and
     they continued in use in the subsequent styles, although their form
     and character gradually change with the style.”--(J. H. P.)

The transition from the Early English to the Decorated was very gradual.
It took place during the reign of Edward I. The transepts of Westminster
Abbey are held up as models of this transition and contain some of the
most beautiful work that can be found anywhere. The crosses erected by
Edward I. at all places where the body of Queen Eleanor had rested, on
the march from Lincolnshire to Westminster Abbey, where she was buried,
are usually regarded as fine early examples of the Decorated style. Easy
attitudes and graceful draperies characterise the sculpture of human
figures.

The Decorated Period dates from 1300 to 1377. It is also called the
Middle Pointed, Geometrical Pointed and the Flowing, or Curvilinear, and
also the Edwardian, because it covers the reigns of Edward I., II. and
III.

Exeter Cathedral is a superb example of this style. The nave of York
Minster and the lantern of Ely are also noteworthy illustrations.

     “The general appearance of Decorated buildings is at once simple
     and magnificent; simple from the small number of parts, and
     magnificent from the size of the windows, and the easy flow of the
     lines of tracery. In the interior of large buildings we find great
     breadth, and an enlargement of the _clerestory_ windows, with a
     corresponding diminution of the _triforium_, which is now rather a
     part of the _clerestory_ opening than a distinct member of the
     division. The roofing, from the increased richness of the groining,
     becomes an object of more attention. On the whole the nave of York,
     from the uncommon grandeur and simplicity of the design, is
     certainly the finest example; ornament is nowhere spared, yet there
     is a simplicity which is peculiarly pleasing.”--(Rickman.)

     “The Decorated style is distinguished by its large windows divided
     by mullions, and the tracery either in flowing lines, or forming
     circles, trefoils and other geometrical figures, and not running
     perpendicularly; its ornaments are numerous and very delicately
     carved, more strictly faithful to nature and more essentially parts
     of the structure than in any other style. There is a very fine
     window with reticulated tracery and richly moulded in the south
     walk of the cloisters at Westminster. No rule whatever is followed
     in the form of the arch over windows in this style; some are very
     obtuse, others very acute and the ogee arch is not uncommon.
     Decorated tracery is usually divided into three general
     classes--geometrical, flowing and flamboyant; the variety is so
     great that many sub-divisions may be made, but they were all used
     simultaneously for a considerable period. The earliest Decorated
     windows have geometrical tracery; Exeter Cathedral is, perhaps, on
     the whole, the best typical example of the early part of this
     style. The fabric rolls are preserved, and it is now evident that
     the existing windows are, for the most part, of the time of Bishop
     Quivil, from 1279 to 1291. In some instances windows with
     geometrical tracery have the mouldings and the mullions covered
     with the ball-flower ornament in great profusion, even to excess;
     these examples occur chiefly in Herefordshire, as at Leominster;
     and in Gloucestershire, as in the south aisle of the nave of the
     Cathedral at Gloucester: they are for the most part, if not
     entirely, of the time of Edward II. What is called the netlike
     character of tracery, from its general resemblance to a fisherman’s
     net, is very characteristic of this style at its best period, about
     the middle of the Fourteenth Century. Square-headed windows are
     very common. Windows in towers are usually different from those in
     other parts of the church. In the upper story, where the bells are,
     there is no glass; in some parts of the country there is pierced
     stonework for keeping out the birds, but more usually they are of
     wood only. These are called sound-holes. Clerestory windows of this
     style are often small, and either circular with quatrefoil cusps,
     or trefoils or quatrefoils; or the spherical triangle with cusps,
     which forms an elegant window. The clever manner in which these
     windows are splayed within and especially below, to throw down the
     light, should be noticed.”--(J. H. P.)

The large rose-window, so conspicuous a feature on the Continent, is
rarely seen in England. When it does occur it is usually found in the
transept ends.

The East Front generally consists of one large window at the end of the
choir, flanked by tall buttresses. A smaller buttress appears at the end
of each aisle. The arrangement of the West Front is the same, with a
doorway beneath the central window. The towers of the Decorated style
are usually placed at the west end and are, as a rule, similar to the
Early English. The spires differ slightly from those of the Early
English, except that there are generally more spire-lights and small
windows at the bases and sides of the spire. Lichfield Cathedral is one
of the best examples of the exterior of a perfect church of the
Decorated style. Its three spires are perfect.

The ogee arch is frequently used in small arcades and in the heads of
windows. The dripstones, or hood moulds, are generally supported by
heads and are frequently enriched with crockets and finials. The arcades
that ornament the walls and those over the _sedilia_ are characteristic
features of the style. Pillars are clustered and arches richly moulded;
they often have the hood-moulding over them. Very often they have what
is called a stilted base. The capitals are ornamented with beautiful
foliage: each leaf is copied from nature and often arranged round the
bell of the capital. The ornamental sculptures in the hollow mouldings
are numerous, but there are two which require more particular notice;
they are nearly as characteristic of the Decorated style as the zigzag
is of the Norman, or the tooth-ornament of the Early English. The first
is the ball-flower, which is a globular flower half opened, and showing
within a small round ball. It is used with the utmost profusion in the
mouldings of windows, doorways, canopies, cornices, arches, etc. The
other ornament is the four-leaved flower. This has a raised centre, and
four petals cut in high relief; it is frequently much varied, but may be
distinguished by its being cut distinctly into four petals, and by its
boldness: it is sometimes used abundantly, though not quite so profusely
as the ball-flower. In some instances the centre is sunk instead of
being raised. The battlement, as an ornamental feature in the interior
of buildings, is frequently used in this style, although it is more
common in the Perpendicular.

The foliage in this style is more faithfully copied from nature than in
any other: the vine-leaf, the maple and the oak with the acorn, are the
most usual. The surface of the wall is often covered with flat foliage,
arranged in small squares called diaper-work, which is believed to have
originated in an imitation of the rich hangings then in general use, and
which bore the same name.

The groined roofs or vaults are distinguished from those of the
preceding style, chiefly by an additional number of ribs, and by the
natural foliage on the bosses. Many fine examples of these remain, as in
the Cathedral of Exeter and at York in the chapter-house; at Norwich in
the cloisters; at Chester the vault is of wood with stone springers.

After culminating in the Decorated style, Gothic Architecture began to
decline in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries. The transition from
the Decorated to the Perpendicular took place from 1360 to 1399:

     “This change began to show itself in the choir and transepts of
     Gloucester Cathedral before the middle of the Fourteenth Century.
     The panelling and the window-tracery have so much the appearance of
     the Perpendicular Style, that they have been commonly supposed to
     have been rebuilt or altered at a late period; but the vaultings
     and the mouldings are pure Decorated, and the painted glass of the
     Fourteenth Century is evidently made for the places which it now
     occupies in the heads of the windows with Perpendicular tracery; it
     must therefore be considered as the earliest known example of this
     great change of style. In this work of alteration the walls and
     arches of the Norman church were not rebuilt but cased with
     panelling over the inner surface, so as to give the effect of the
     latter style to the interior. This was just the same process as was
     afterwards followed at Winchester by William of Wykeham, in
     changing the Norman to the Perpendicular style without any actual
     rebuilding.”--(J. H. P.)

The work at Gloucester was begun as early as 1337. Another fine example
is the nave of Winchester Cathedral.

Bishop Edington, who died in 1366, began to alter Winchester into the
Perpendicular style. His work was continued by William of Wykeham.

     “Before the death of Bishop Edington the great principles of the
     Perpendicular style were fully established. These chiefly consist
     of the Perpendicular lines through the head of the window, and in
     covering the surface of the wall with panelling of the same kind.
     These features are as distinctly marked at Winchester as in any
     subsequent building, or as they well could be.”--(J. H. P.)

The cloisters of Gloucester Cathedral are decidedly Perpendicular in the
fan-tracery of the vaults, but are partly of earlier date and character.
Another example of the transition from Decorated to Perpendicular is the
choir of York Minster, begun in 1361 and finished in 1408. Its general
appearance is Perpendicular.

     “This style is exclusively English, _it is never found_ on the
     Continent, and it has the advantage of being more _economical_ in
     execution than the earlier styles. It remains to describe its
     characteristic features. The broad distinction of the Perpendicular
     style lies in the form of the tracery in the head of the windows;
     and in fully developed examples the distinction is sufficiently
     obvious. We have no longer the head of the window filled with the
     gracefully flowing lines of the Decorated tracery, but their place
     is supplied by the rigid lines of the mullions, which are carried
     through to the architrave mouldings, the spaces between being
     frequently divided and subdivided by similar Perpendicular lines;
     so that _Perpendicularity_ is so clearly the characteristic of
     these windows that no other word could have been found which would
     at once so well express the predominating feature. The same
     character prevails throughout the buildings of this period: the
     whole surface of a building, including its buttresses, parapets,
     basements, and every part of the flat surface, is frequently
     covered with panelling in which the Perpendicular line clearly
     predominates; and to such an excess is this carried that the
     windows frequently appear to be only openings in the panel-work.
     Panelling, indeed, now forms an important feature of the style; for
     though it was used in the earlier styles, it was not to the same
     extent, and was of very different character, the plain surfaces in
     those styles being relieved chiefly by diaper-work.”--(J. H. P.)

The great idea of the architect was to correct and restrain the
exuberant tracery by introducing vigorous straight vertical and
horizontal lines. Another feature of the Perpendicular style was the
groined roof. The ribs of the vaulting were now enriched by cross ribs,
which were intersected by more ribs into small panels, which were filled
in with tracery. The key-stones were formed into pendants. This network
of ribs is called fan-tracery because the ribs spread out like the
sticks of a fan. Very beautiful examples occur in Henry VII.’s Chapel,
Westminster Abbey, and in the cloisters of Gloucester Cathedral.

     “The light and elegant style of vaulting known as fan-tracery,
     which is peculiar to this style, with its delicate pendants and
     lace-like ornaments, harmonises finely with the elaborate ornament
     of the tabernacle-work ornament. Fan-tracery vaulting is
     _peculiarly English_. The principle of it began with the earliest
     English Gothic style, as in the cloisters of Lincoln Cathedral,
     each stone of the vaulting being cut to fit its place. In France
     this is never done, each block of stone is oblong, as in those for
     the walls, and is only made to curve over in a vault by the mortar
     between the joints.

     “Arches are not so acute as in the earlier periods; capitals and
     bases of columns are distinguished by the shallowness of the
     mouldings; mullions are carried straight through the arch of the
     windows; doorways consist of a depressed arch within a square frame
     with a label above; the label moulding is frequently filled with
     foliage and the space round the arch parallel; towers are often
     extremely rich and elaborately ornamented with four or five stories
     of windows, canopies, pinnacles and tabernacles; porches are also
     fine, highly enriched with panel-work, buttresses and pinnacles,
     and often with a richly-groined vault in the interior; and
     mouldings are generally more shallow than the earlier ones.

     “There is an ornament which was introduced in this style and which
     is very characteristic. This is called the ‘Tudor-flower,’ not
     because it was introduced in the time of the Tudors, but because it
     was so much used at that period. It generally consists of some
     modification of the fleur-de-lis alternately with a small trefoil
     or ball, and is much used as a crest for screens on fonts, niches,
     capitals and in almost all places where such ornament can be used.
     The foliage of this style is frequently very beautifully executed,
     almost as faithful to nature as in the Decorated style, in which
     the fidelity to nature is one of the characteristic features. There
     is comparatively a squareness about the Perpendicular foliage,
     which takes from the freshness and beauty which distinguished that
     of the Decorated style. Indeed, the use of square and angular forms
     is one of the characteristics of the style; we have square panels,
     square foliage, square crockets and finials, square forms in the
     windows--caused by the introduction of so many transoms--and an
     approach to squareness in the depressed and low pitch of the roofs
     in late examples.”--(J. H. P.)

The woodwork of the Perpendicular period is very beautiful: open timber
roofs (met with in the eastern counties), screens and lofts across the
chancel-arch and richly carved bench ends exist in considerable numbers.

     “The frequent use of figures, simply as corbels between the windows
     of the clerestory to carry the roof, is a good characteristic of
     the late Perpendicular style; they are generally of the time of
     Henry the Seventh or Eighth. The figure used is generally that of
     an angel, and each angel is sometimes represented as carrying a
     different musical instrument so as to make up a heavenly
     choir.”--(J. H. P.)

Among the best examples of late Perpendicular are Henry VII.’s Chapel,
Westminster Abbey; St. George’s Chapel, Windsor; King’s College Chapel,
Cambridge; and Bath Abbey Church.

In writing of the latter W. D. Howells so beautifully describes this
style that no excuse is needed for bringing his definition into this
place. He says:

     “It is mostly of that Perpendicular Gothic which I suppose more
     mystically lifts the soul than any other form of architecture, and
     it is in a gracious harmony with itself through its lovely
     proportions; from the stems of its clustered column, the tracery of
     their fans spreads and delicately feels its way over the vaulted
     roof as if it were a living growth of something rooted in the earth
     beneath.”




ABBREVIATIONS OF AUTHORS QUOTED

    A. A.--Alexander Ansted

    F. B.--Frederic Bond
    J. E. B.--J. E. Bygate

    A. B. C.--A. B. Clifton
    A. C.-B.--A. Clutton-Brock
    J. C.-B.--J. Cavis-Brown
    H. C. C.--Hubert C. Corlette

    A. D.--Arthur Dimock
    C. D.--Charles Dickens, Jr.
    P. D.--Percy Dearmer
    P. H. D.--P. H. Ditchfield
    T. F. D.--Thomas Frognall Dibdin

    A. H. F.--A. Hugh Fisher
    E. A. F.--E. A. Freeman
    F. W. F.--F. W. Farrar
    W. H. F.--W. H. Fremantle

    H.--Hope
    C. H.--Cecil Hallet
    L. H.--Leigh Hunt
    W. H. H.--W. H. Hart

    A. F. K.--A. F. Kendrick
    G. W. K.--Dean Kitchin
    R. J. K.--Richard J. Knight

    L.--Dr. Luckock
    W. J. L.--W. J. Loftie

    M.--Dean Milman
    J. McC.--Justin McCarthy
    H. J. L. J. M.--H. J. L. J. Massé

    P.--Dean Patrick
    P.-C.--Dean Pury-Cust
    F. A. P.--F. A. Paley
    G. H. P.--G. H. Palmer
    J. H. P.--J. H. Parker
    T. P.--T. Perkins

    C. H. B. Q.--C. H. B. Quennell

    R.--Rickman
    F. and R.--Field and Routledge

    S.--Dean Spence
    A. P. S.--Dean Stanley
    E. F. S.--Edward F. Strange
    G. G. S.--G. G. Scott
    W. D. S.--W. D. Sweeting

    T.--Canon Talbot

    W.--Willis
    Wal.--Walcott
    A.-à-W.--Anthony-à-Wood
    C. W.--Winston
    E. W.--Edward Walford
    F. S. W.--F. S. Waller
    G. W.--Gleeson White
    Geo. W.--George Worley
    H. W.--Hartley Wither




CONTENTS

                                                                    PAGE

CANTERBURY                                                             1

ROCHESTER                                                             33

WINCHESTER                                                            46

CHICHESTER                                                            66

SALISBURY                                                             76

EXETER                                                                90

WELLS                                                                107

BATH ABBEY                                                           134

BRISTOL                                                              140

GLOUCESTER                                                           151

HEREFORD                                                             174

WORCESTER                                                            188

LICHFIELD                                                            200

CHESTER                                                              215

MANCHESTER                                                           222

CARLISLE                                                             227

DURHAM                                                               233

RIPON                                                                249

YORK MINSTER                                                         260

LINCOLN                                                              284

SOUTHWELL                                                            313

PETERBOROUGH                                                         319

ELY                                                                  334

NORWICH                                                              349

ST. ALBANS                                                           360

OXFORD                                                               375

ST. PAUL’S, LONDON                                                   393

ST. SAVIOUR’S, SOUTHWARK                                             415

WESTMINSTER ABBEY                                                    425

INDEX                                                                445




ILLUSTRATIONS


Salisbury: Cloisters                                       _Frontispiece_

                                                             FACING PAGE

Canterbury: South Porch                                               12

Canterbury: Nave, east                                                13

Canterbury: Choir, east                                               24

Rochester: West front                                                 25

Rochester: Nave, east                                                 40

Rochester: Choir, west                                                41

Winchester: Nave, west                                                52

Winchester: Font                                                      53

Winchester: Choir, east                                               64

Winchester: West front                                                65

Chichester                                                            72

Chichester: Nave, east                                                73

Chichester: Screen                                                    76

Salisbury: North                                                      77

Salisbury: Nave, east                                                 88

Exeter: South-west                                                    89

Exeter: Nave, east                                                    98

Exeter: Choir, east                                                   99

Wells: West front                                                    114

Wells: North Porch                                                   115

Wells: Nave, east                                                    128

Wells: South-west                                                    129

Bath Abbey: West front                                               136

Bath Abbey: Choir, west                                              137

Bristol: North                                                       144

Bristol: Nave, east                                                  145

Gloucester: East                                                     154

Gloucester: Tomb of Edward II                                        155

Gloucester: Choir, east                                              164

Gloucester: Cloisters                                                165

Hereford: Nave, east                                                 176

Hereford: North-east                                                 177

Hereford: Choir                                                      186

Worcester: South-west                                                187

Worcester: Nave, east                                                192

Worcester: Choir, east                                               193

Lichfield: West front                                                200

Lichfield: Nave, east                                                201

Lichfield: from East window                                          212

Chester: North                                                       213

Chester: Choir, west                                                 218

Chester: Choir-stalls                                                219

Manchester: South                                                    224

Manchester: Nave, east                                               225

Carlisle: South-west                                                 228

Carlisle: Choir                                                      229

Carlisle: East End                                                   232

Durham: West front                                                   233

Durham: Nave, east                                                   240

Durham: Galilee Chapel                                               241

Durham: Neville Screen                                               248

Ripon: South                                                         249

Ripon: Nave, east                                                    254

Ripon: Choir, east                                                   255

York Minster: West front                                             268

York Minster: South                                                  269

York Minster: Choir, east                                            278

York Minster: Choir, west                                            279

Lincoln: West front                                                  288

Lincoln: Great West Door                                             289

Lincoln: Angel Choir                                                 298

Lincoln: Choir, east                                                 299

Lincoln: East Window                                                 306

Southwell: North-west                                                307

Southwell: Chapter-House                                             316

Peterborough: West front                                             317

Peterborough: Choir, east                                            328

Peterborough: South                                                  329

Ely: West Towers                                                     336

Ely: Choir, east                                                     337

Ely: East End and Lady-Chapel                                        346

Ely: Lady-Chapel                                                     347

Norwich: East                                                        356

Norwich: Choir                                                       357

St. Albans: North                                                    366

St. Albans: Nave, east                                               367

Oxford: Tower and Entrance                                           382

Oxford: Choir, east                                                  383

Oxford: Latin Chapel                                                 392

St. Paul’s: West front                                               393

St. Paul’s: Choir, east                                              414

St. Saviour’s, Southwark                                             415

St. Saviour’s, Southwark: Nave, east                                 424

Westminster Abbey: West front                                        425

Westminster Abbey: Poets’ Corner                                     432

Westminster Abbey: Choir, east                                       433

Westminster Abbey: Chapel and Shrine of
  Edward the Confessor                                               436

Westminster Abbey: Henry VII.’s Chapel                               437

Westminster Abbey: Cloisters                                         440

Westminster Abbey: South-west                                        441




CANTERBURY

     DEDICATION: CHRIST CHURCH. FORMERLY THE CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE
     MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: BECKET’S CROWN; DOOR OF CHAPTER-HOUSE; WEST
     DOORWAY; CRYPT.


Canterbury Cathedral presents a beautiful effect when seen from a
distance, keeping watch over the city that lies in the valley of the
Stour, girdled by hills. On one of these hills stands the village of
Harbledown, the “Bob Up and Down,” where Chaucer’s Pilgrims halted, and
from which a charming view of the ancient Cathedral is to be enjoyed.

Another fine prospect is gained from St. Martin’s:

     “Let any one sit on the hill of the little church of St. Martin,
     and look on the view which is there spread before his eyes.
     Immediately below are the towers of the great Abbey of St.
     Augustine, where Christian learning and civilisation first struck
     root in the Anglo-Saxon race; and within which now, after a lapse
     of many centuries, a new institution has arisen, intended to carry
     far and wide to countries of which Gregory and Augustine never
     heard, the blessings which they gave to us. Carry your view
     on,--and there rises high above all the magnificent pile of our
     Cathedral equal in splendour and state to any, the noblest temple
     or church, that Augustine could have seen in ancient Rome, rising
     on the very ground which derives its consecration from him. And
     still more than the grandeur of the outward buildings that rose
     from the little church of St. Augustine, and the little palace of
     Ethelbert, have been the institutions of all kinds, of which these
     are the earliest cradle. From Canterbury, the first English
     Christian city--from Kent, the first English Christian
     kingdom--has, by degrees, arisen the whole constitution of Church
     and State in England, which now binds together the whole British
     Empire.”--(A. P. S.)

This great Cathedral stands on the site of the primitive Roman, or
British, Church, attributed to King Lucius and granted by Ethelbert,
King of Kent, to St. Augustine (who had converted him in 597). It is,
therefore, the earliest monument of the English union of Church and
State, and the cradle of English Christianity. Pope Gregory had intended
to fix the Primacy in London and York alternately; but the sentiment of
St. Augustine’s landing in Kent prevailed; and, therefore, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the See of which was founded in 597, is still
Primate of England. He crowns the King and ranks next to royalty.

The first Cathedral was injured by the Danes in 1011 and it was burned
down during the Norman Conquest in 1067. Lanfranc, the first Archbishop
after the Conquest (1070-1089), reconstructed both church and monastery
from their foundations. Anselm (1093-1109), took down the eastern part
of the church and reërected it with far greater magnificence. Ernulf,
Prior of the monastery, was responsible for the architecture; but the
chancel being finished by his successor, Prior Conrad, and beautifully
decorated, became known as the “glorious Choir of Conrad.” Canterbury
Cathedral was dedicated by Archbishop William in 1130. Henry I., King of
England, David, King of Scotland, and all the Bishops of England were
present at what Gervase calls “the most famous dedication that had ever
been heard of on the earth since that of the temple of Solomon.” In
1170, Thomas à Becket was murdered here, having fled for protection to
the church after a violent scene in his chamber with Henry’s knights.
Becket was buried at the east end of the Crypt and remained there
forty-six years.

     “Most men were persuaded that a new burst of miraculous powers,
     such as had been suspended for many generations, had broken out at
     the tomb; and the contemporary monk, Benedict, fills a volume with
     extraordinary cures, wrought within a very few years after the
     ‘Martyrdom.’ Far and wide the fame of ‘St. Thomas of Canterbury’
     spread. The very name of Christ Church, or of the Holy Trinity, by
     which the Cathedral was properly designated, was in popular usage
     merged in that of The Church of St. Thomas. For the few years
     immediately succeeding his death there was no regular shrine. The
     popular enthusiasm still clung to the two spots immediately
     connected with the murder. The Transept in which he died, within
     five years from that time acquired the name by which it has ever
     since been known, ‘The Martyrdom.’ The flagstone on which his skull
     was fractured and the solid corner of the masonry in front of which
     he fell, are probably the only parts which remain unchanged. But
     against that corner may still be seen the marks of the space
     occupied by a wooden altar, which continued in its original
     simplicity through all the subsequent magnificence of the church
     till the time of the Reformation. It was probably the identical
     memorial erected in the first haste of enthusiasm after the
     reopening of the Cathedral for worship in 1172. It was called the
     Altar of the Martyrdom or more commonly the Altar of the Sword’s
     Point (_Altare ad Punctum Ensis_) from the circumstance that in a
     wooden shed placed upon it was preserved the fragment of Le Bret’s
     sword, which had been left on the pavement after accomplishing its
     bloody work. Under a piece of rock crystal surmounting the chest,
     was kept a portion of the brains. To this altar a regular keeper
     was appointed from among the monks, under the name of ‘_Custos
     Martyrii_.’ In the first frenzy of desire for relics of St. Thomas,
     even this guarantee was inadequate.

     “Next to the actual scene of the murder, the object which this
     event invested with especial sanctity was the tomb in which his
     remains were deposited in the Crypt behind the Altar of the Virgin.
     It was to this spot that the first great rush of pilgrims was made
     when the church was reopened in 1172, and it was here that Henry
     performed his penance. Hither on the 21st of August, 1179, came the
     first King of France who ever set foot on the shores of England,
     Louis VII., warned by St. Thomas in dreams, and, afterwards, as he
     believed, receiving his son back from a dangerous illness through
     the Saint’s intercession. He knelt by the tomb and offered upon it
     the celebrated jewel,[2] as also his own rich cup of gold.”--(A. P.
     S.)

In 1174 a fire destroyed “Conrad’s Glorious Choir.” Rebuilding was
immediately begun under a French architect, William of Sens, who fell
from a scaffolding and had to relinquish the work to another William,
who completed the Choir and eastern buildings in 1184.

Everything was now in readiness for the removal of the Martyr’s remains.
Stephen Langton gave two years’ notice of the intended “Translation”;
and a marvellous assemblage gathered from all parts of Europe on July 7,
1220. The Archbishop opened the tomb the night before the coffin was
carried to the Shrine above in Trinity Chapel, and the “Vigil of the
Translation,” July 6, was kept in the English church until 1537. The
great procession to the Shrine was led by Henry III., then aged
thirteen. Pilgrims came to the new Shrine, as they had done to the one
below, in thousands. Seven great “jubilees” were held before 1530.

     “The outer aspect of the Cathedral can be imagined without much
     difficulty. A wide cemetery, which, with its numerous gravestones,
     such as that on the south side of Petersborough Cathedral, occupied
     the vacant space still called the Churchyard, divided from the
     garden beyond by the old Norman arch since removed to a more
     convenient spot. In the cemetery were interred such pilgrims as
     died during their stay in Canterbury. The external aspect of the
     Cathedral itself, with the exception of the numerous statues which
     then filled its now vacant niches, must have been much what it is
     now. Not so its interior. Bright colours on the roof, on the
     windows, on the monuments; hangings suspended from the rods which
     may still be seen running from pillar to pillar; chapels and
     altars, and chantries intercepting the view, where now all is
     clear, must have rendered it so different, that at first we should
     hardly recognise it to be the same building.”--(A. P. S.)

At the church door the company of pilgrims arranged themselves “every
one after his degree,” and a monk sprinkled their heads with holy water
with the “Sprengel.” The great tide of pilgrims then passed through the
Cathedral. Sometimes they paid their devotions to the Shrine first, and
sometimes they visited the lesser objects first and the Shrine last. In
this case, they entered the Transept of the Martyrdom, through the dark
passage under the steps leading to the Choir. Before the wooden altar
and in the soft radiance of the glorious representation of the Martyr in
the transept window (of which there remains only the central band with
the donors, Edward IV., his Queen, with their daughters and the two sons
who perished in the Tower), while the priest showed them the relics of
which he had charge, including the rusty fragment of Le Bret’s sword,
which all kissed in turn. Proceeding down the steps on the way to the
Crypt, new guardians exhibited in the dim light of a row of lamps
suspended from rings in the roof, the actual relics of St. Thomas,--part
of his skull cased in silver, which all kissed devoutly, and his shirt
and drawers of haircloth.

Mounting the steps of the Choir, the pilgrims were then shown the great
array of about four hundred relics preserved in ivory, gilt or silver
coffers, including the arm of St. George. And now, passing behind the
altar and up the steps, which many ascended on their knees, chanting the
hymn to St. Thomas, they entered Trinity Chapel. They were first led
beyond the Shrine to the easternmost apse to see a golden head of the
Saint studded with gems, in which the scalp or crown of the Saint was
preserved.

     “The Shrine occupied the central part of the upper platform, and
     the extent of the railed space round it may be readily perceived by
     examining the floor on which the depression made by the feet of the
     pilgrims is plainly visible. The pavement inside this limit is
     composed of the original steps and platform of the Shrine, and
     consists in part of rich African marbles, as do also two whole
     pillars to north and south, and two half pillars to the east. These
     are said to have been the gift of a Pope to the Shrine, and,
     indeed, to have once formed part of a Roman Temple. The Shrine
     itself was simply the coffin of the Saint, richly adorned and cased
     with gold and precious stones. It rested on a structure of stone
     arches some five or six feet high, and was, as a rule, concealed
     under a wooden cover, working on pulleys, like many covers of fonts
     in our churches now. When raised the cover would reveal to the
     venerating gaze of the pilgrims, plates of precious metal studded
     with jewels of fabulous value, the most remarkable of which would
     be pointed out by the attendant with a white wand. When the Shrine
     was destroyed, by order of Henry VIII., these treasures filled two
     great chests ‘such as six or seven strong men could no more than
     convey one of them out of the church.’ West of the Shrine stood an
     altar, and west of the altar a gate in the railings, in fact just
     between the altar and the beautiful fragment of Italian marble
     pavement.”--(F. and R.)

We can imagine the long line of kneeling pilgrims and those who were
allowed behind the iron gates rubbing themselves against the marble, so
that the wonder-working body within could effect a cure in anticipation
of the moment when the wooden canopy would be lifted.

     “At a given signal this canopy was drawn up by ropes, and the
     Shrine then appeared blazing with gold and jewels; the wooden sides
     were plated with gold and damasked with gold wire; cramped together
     on this gold ground were innumerable jewels, pearls, sapphires,
     blassas, diamonds, rubies and emeralds, and ‘in the midst of the
     gold’ rings or cameos of sculptured agates, cornelians and onyx
     stones.

     “As soon as this magnificent sight was disclosed, every one dropped
     on his knees, and probably the tinkling of the silver bells
     attached to the canopy would indicate the moment to all the
     hundreds of pilgrims in whatever part of the Cathedral they might
     be. The body of the Saint in the inner iron chest was not to be
     seen except by mounting a ladder, which would be but rarely
     allowed. But whilst the votaries knelt around, the Prior, or some
     other great officer of the monastery, came forward, and with a
     white wand touched the several jewels, naming the giver of each,
     and for the benefit of foreigners, adding the French name of each,
     with a description of its value and marvellous qualities. A
     complete list of them has been preserved to us, curious, but devoid
     of general interest. There was one, however, which far outshone the
     rest, and indeed was supposed to be the finest in Europe. It was
     the great carbuncle, ruby, or diamond, said to be as large as a
     hen’s egg or a thumb-nail, and commonly called ‘The Regale of
     France.’ The attention of the spectators was riveted by the figure
     of an angel pointing to it. It had been given to the original tomb
     in the Crypt by Louis VII. of France, when here on his
     pilgrimage.[3]

     “The lid once more descended on the golden ark; the pilgrims

                    ‘telling heartily their beads
    Prayed to St. Thomas in such wise as they could,’

     and then withdrew, down the opposite flight of steps from which
     they had ascended.”--(A. P. S.)

Next the pilgrims received the small leaden bottles, or _ampulles_,
filled with water mixed with the Martyr’s blood; and in the numerous
booths and stalls that lined Mercery Lane, the narrow street running
from the Cathedral to the Chequers Inn, bought other memorials of the
Pilgrimage, particularly the leaden brooches representing the mitred
head of the saint with the legend, _Caput Thomæ_.

From the middle of the Fourteenth to the end of the Fifteenth Century a
wonder-working well was shown to pilgrims in the Precincts.

Among the great visitors to the shrine of the “holy blissful Martyr”
were all the English kings from Henry II. to Henry VIII.; Edward I.
(1299), who presented the golden crown of Scotland, the crown given by
Edward to John Balliol and carried off by him, but recaptured at Dover;
Richard and John of England; Louis VII. of France; Isabella, wife of
Edward II.; John, the captive king of France; Henry V. on his return
from Agincourt; Emmanuel, Emperor of the East in 1400, and Sigismund,
Emperor of the West in 1417; and great lords and ladies from England,
France and Scotland. The barons of the Cinque Ports, after every
coronation, presented the canopies of silk and gold which they held and
still hold over the head of the king.

In 1538 Henry VIII. issued a writ of summons against Thomas à Becket
accusing him of treason, contumacy and rebellion and had the document
read before the Martyr’s tomb. The suit was tried in Westminster, and
the long defunct Archbishop condemned. His bones were ordered to be
burnt and all his offerings handed over to the Crown. Becket’s body,
however, escaped burning and was re-buried. The Shrine was destroyed and
all the offerings of jewels and gold carried off. They filled twenty-six
carts. Becket was deprived of the name of Saint and his images destroyed
throughout the country.

Returning now to the architectural history of the Cathedral, Prior
Chillenden (1378-1410) took down Lanfranc’s Nave and Transepts. About
1473 Prior Goldstone II. added the splendid Angel Tower that rises from
the centre of the roof, and upon which the figure of a golden angel
welcomed the pilgrims to Canterbury.

In 1642, the Puritans battered the windows, hacked and hewed the altars
and monuments and committed ravages of all kinds under a ringleader,
Richard Culmer, known as “Blue Dick.”

After the Restoration, £10,000 was devoted to repairs. At a later period
the Choir-stalls, said to be carved by Grinling Gibbons, were replaced.

In 1834, the northwest (Arundel) tower had to be pulled down. It was
rebuilt on a different plan.

Nothing of importance happened until 1872, when a fire broke out on the
roof of Trinity Chapel at half-past ten in the morning. Little damage
was done, however; but the Black Prince’s Tomb was in danger and the
relics above it were temporarily removed.

Canterbury was four centuries in building. It, therefore, exhibits
specimens of nearly all the classes of Pointed Architecture. It is
chiefly, however, Transitional Norman and Perpendicular.

     “The existing cathedral, although of such various dates, covers, as
     nearly as can be ascertained, the same ground as the original
     building of Lanfranc, with the exception of the Nave, which is of
     greater length westward, and of the Retro-Choir, or extreme eastern
     portion, which is also longer.”--(R. J. K.)

Passing the traditional site of the Chequers Inn, where Chaucer’s
Pilgrims were housed, we walk up Mercery Lane to =Christ Church Gate=,
built by Prior Goldstone in 1517. It is a fine example of late
Perpendicular and once contained a figure of Christ in the central
niche.

This gate leads into the =Precincts= of the Cathedral. The close is
surrounded by the gardens of the Canons’ houses. We now look upon the
beautiful south side of the Cathedral.

     “In the immediate Precincts, a delightful picture is presented from
     the Green Court, which was once the main outer court of the
     monastery. Here are noble trees and beautifully kept turf, at once
     in perfect harmony and agreeable contrast with the rugged walls of
     the weather-beaten Cathedral: the quiet, soft colouring of the
     ancient buildings and that look of cloistered seclusion only to be
     found in the peaceful nooks of cathedral cities are seen here at
     their very best.

     “The chief glory of the exterior of Canterbury Cathedral is the
     central Angel, or Bell, Tower. This is one of the most perfect
     structures that Gothic architecture inspired by the loftiest
     purpose that ever stimulated the work of any art, has produced. It
     was completed by Prior Selling, who held office in 1472, and has
     been variously called the Bell Harry Tower from the mighty Dunstan
     bell, weighing three tons and three hundredweight, and the Angel
     Tower from the gilded figure of an angel poised on one of the
     pinnacles, which has long ago disappeared. The tower itself is of
     two stages, with two-light windows in each stage; the windows are
     transomed in each face, and the lower tier is canopied; each angle
     is rounded off with an octagonal turret; and the whole structure is
     a marvellous example of architectural harmony and in every way a
     work of transcendent beauty.”--(H. W.)

The =South-west=, or =Chichele, Tower=, (formerly St. Dunstan’s Tower) was
completed by Prior Goldstone (1449-1468). It is now the Bell Tower. The
=Northern=, or Arundel, steeple was rebuilt by Austen in 1840 in place of
the old Norman Tower, which had become dangerous.

     “The western towers are built each of six stages: each of the two
     upper tiers contains two two-light windows, while below there is a
     large four-light window uniform with the windows of the aisles. The
     base tier is ornamented with rich panelling. The parapet is
     battlemented and the angles are finished with fine double
     pinnacles. At the west end there is a large window of seven-light
     transoms. The gable contains a window of very curious shape, filled
     with intricate tracery. The space above the aisle windows is
     ornamented with quatrefoiled squares, and the clerestory is pierced
     by windows of three lights.”--(H. W.)

Above the aisle windows are quatrefoiled squares. The clerestory, Choir
and Becket’s Crown contain lancet windows. In the main transept there is
a fine Perpendicular window of eight lights.

The South side of the Cathedral is the one most generally admired.

     “On the south side is seen the porch; the nave (a beautiful
     design); and the charming pinnacle of the south-west transept. East
     of the Warrior’s Chapel is the projecting end of Stephen Langton’s
     tomb. East of this, the two lower rows of windows are those of
     Conrad’s Choir; the upper row that of William of Sens. The middle
     windows in the south-east transept were the clerestory windows of
     Conrad; the windows above them are those of William of Sens. The
     three upper stages of the tower on the south of this transept are
     late Norman work; one of the prettiest bits in Canterbury. Farther
     east we have French design, pure and simple; here, for the first
     time in English architecture, the flying-buttresses are openly
     displayed; notice how flat and plain they are; it had not yet
     occurred to architects to make them decorative. The grand sweep of
     apse and ambulatory seems to send one straight back to France. Then
     comes the broken rocky outline of the _corona_--the great puzzle of
     Canterbury. North-east of the _corona_ are two groups of ruined
     Norman pillars and arches discoloured by fire; once they were
     continuous, forming one very long building, the Monk’s Infirmary,
     of which the west end was originally an open dormitory, open to the
     roof, and the east end, separated off by a screen, the Chapel;
     which has a late Geometrical window. On the north side of Trinity
     Chapel is seen the Chantry of Henry IV.; then St. Andrew’s Tower
     and the barred Treasury; the lower part of the latter is late
     Norman work, largely rebuilt.”--(F. B.)

The =Porch= on the south side of Chichele Tower is the work of Prior
Chillenden. It has a central niche on which the _Martyrdom of Becket_
was represented on a panel of the Fifteenth Century. The niches are
filled with statues. Through it we now pass into the Cathedral.

The =Nave= (Perpendicular) resembles the bolder nave of Winchester, built
at the same period. The most striking feature is the manner in which the
Choir is raised above the level of the floor, owing to the fact that it
stands over the crypt. The

[Illustration: CANTERBURY: SOUTH PORCH]

[Illustration: CANTERBURY: NAVE, EAST]

flight of steps placed between the Nave and the Choir adds to the
effect.

     “The nave, of eight bays, has no triforium. Each bay consists of a
     huge arch resting on filleted pillars, and is subdivided into the
     pier-arch, with the clerestory and panelling reaching to the
     string-course above. It is paved with Portland stone. The vaulting
     and vaulting-shafts are the prominent features of the nave, and the
     pier-arches are quite subordinate; these shafts are banded, as at
     Bath, like Early English. The main transept has no aisles.”--(W. J.
     L.)

Of the Nave windows none remain entire. The great =West Window= is made up
of fragments from the others. It contains the arms of Richard II.
impaling the Confessor’s; and those of Anne of Bohemia (north); and
Isabella of France (south).

The beautifully carved =Screen= of solid stone, separating the Nave from
the Choir, was placed there in the Fifteenth Century. Of the six crowned
figures in the lower niches, the one holding the church is supposed to
be Ethelbert; and the one on the extreme right, Richard II. The figures
of Christ and the Twelve Apostles, which filled the thirteen mitred
niches around the arch, were destroyed by “Blue Dick” and his
companions. A staircase leads to the top of the Screen.

Another Screen partly fills the space between the two western piers of
the central, or Angel, Tower.

     “The piers which support the central tower are probably the
     original piers of Lanfranc’s erection, cased with Perpendicular
     work by Prior Chillenden at the same time with the building of the
     nave. To this Prior Goldstone II. (1495-1517) added the vaulting of
     the tower, and all the portion above the roof, together with the
     remarkable buttressing-arches supporting the piers below, which had
     perhaps shown some signs of weakness. These arches have on them
     the Prior’s rebus, a shield with three golden bars, or stones. The
     central arch occupies the place of the ancient roodloft, and
     probably the great rood was placed on it until the
     Reformation.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Choir= of five bays shows the earliest instance of the Pointed Arch
in England and groining on a large scale. The clerestory of the Choir is
filled with windows representing the genealogy of the Saviour. The
carvings on the stalls are said to be by Grinling Gibbons.

In 1096, Prior Ernulf began a longer and wider Choir than originally
existed; and this was dedicated in 1114, before he left Canterbury to
become Bishop of Rochester. Prior Conrad, his successor, finished the
decoration of it and “the glorious Choir of Conrad,” as it was somewhat
unjustly called, was consecrated in 1130. In 1174 it was destroyed by
fire to the great distress of everybody. All that remains is a portion
of the pavement consisting of large slabs of “stone or veined marble of
a delicate brown colour,” between the two Transepts.

     “About four years after the murder on the 5th of September, 1174, a
     fire broke out in the Cathedral which reduced the Choir--hitherto
     its chief architectural glory--to ashes. The grief of the people is
     described in terms which show how closely the expression of
     Mediæval feeling resembled what can now only be seen in Italy or
     the East--‘They tore their hair; they beat the walls and pavements
     of the church with their shoulders and the palms of their hands;
     they uttered tremendous curses against God and his saints--even to
     the patron saint of the church; they wished they had rather have
     died than seen such a day.’ How far more like the description of a
     Neapolitan mob in disappointment at the slow liquefaction of the
     blood of St. Januarius than of the citizens of a quiet cathedral
     town in the county of Kent! The monks, though appalled by the
     calamity for a time, soon recovered themselves; workmen and
     architects, French and English, were procured; and among the
     former, William, from the city of Sens, so familiar to all
     Canterbury at that period as the scene of Becket’s exile. No
     observant traveller can have seen the two Cathedrals without
     remarking how closely the details of William’s workmanship at
     Canterbury were suggested by his recollections of his own church at
     Sens, built a short time before. The forms of the pillars, the
     vaulting of the roof, even the very bars and patterns of the
     windows are almost identical.... The French architect unfortunately
     met with an accident which disabled him from continuing his
     operations. After a vain struggle to superintend the works by being
     carried round the church in a litter, he was compelled to surrender
     the task to a namesake, an Englishman, and it is to him that we owe
     the design of that part of the Cathedral which was destined to
     receive the sacred Shrine.”--(A. P. S.)

     “On entering the choir, the visitor is immediately struck by the
     singular bend with which the walls approach each other at the
     eastern end. By this remarkable feature, together with the great
     length of the Choir (180 feet; it is the longest in England) and
     the lowness of the vaulting; the antique character of the
     architecture enforced by the strongly contrasted Purbeck and Caen
     stone, and the consequent fine effects of light and shadow. The
     style is throughout Transition, having Norman and Early English
     characteristics, curiously intermixed. The pillars with their
     pier-arches, the clerestory wall above and the great vault up to
     the Transepts, were entirely finished by William of Sens. The whole
     work differed greatly from that of the former choir. The richly
     foliated and varied capitals of the pillars, the great vault with
     its ribs of stone, and the numerous slender shafts of marble in the
     triforia, were all novelties exciting the great admiration of the
     monks.”--(R. J. K.)

William of Sens, however, retained the second or Eastern Transepts,
which had existed in the former church.

Before the Reformation the Choir contained the high altar and the
altar-shrines of St. Alphege and St. Dunstan. No trace of the former
remains; but on the south wall of the Choir, between the monuments of
Archbishops Stratford and Sudbury, there is some diaper-work of open
lilies that adorned St. Dunstan’s altar.

The =High Altar= is on a higher level than the floor of the choir. It is
approached by two flights of steps (one on either side) in the
Presbytery, about 25 feet higher than the floor of the Nave. The Altar
was placed over the new Crypt, which is a good deal higher than the
older, or western, Crypt. The =Reredos=, erected in 1870, was designed in
the style of the screen-work in the Lady-Chapel in the Crypt. The
crimson velvet altar-coverings, now in use, were presented by Queen
Mary, wife of William III., and the gold chalice by the Earl of Arundell
in 1636. The =Archbishop’s Throne=, a gift of Archbishop Howley (£1200),
was carved by Flemish workmen from designs by Austen. The stone-pulpit,
by Butterfield, was erected in 1846. The eagle used as a Litany desk is
dated 1663.

The organ, built by Samuel Green, is believed to be the one used at the
Händel Festival in Westminster Abbey in 1784. It was remodelled in 1886.
Among the tombs and monuments of Archbishops and Cardinals are: Cardinal
Bourchier, who crowned Edward IV., Richard III. and Henry VII.;
Archbishop Howley, who crowned Queen Victoria; Stratford, Grand
Judiciary to Edward III.; Simon of Sudbury, whose head was cut off
during Wat Tyler’s rebellion; and Cardinal Kemp, who was present at
Agincourt.

In the north aisle, in a coloured and gilt altar-tomb, lies Archbishop
Chichele (died 1443), according to Shakespeare, the instigator of the
war with France (see _Henry V._, Act I., Sc. I.). Here also lies Orlando
Gibbons, Charles I.’s organist.

Of the six splendid =windows= in the north aisle of the Choir described by
the old authorities, only two remain.

     “They should not be overlooked by the visitor, as they are full of
     curious symbolism. The birth of Christ and His early life are
     depicted in the central panels and the types from the Old Testament
     with them. Observe the Magi all asleep in one bed; Shem, Ham and
     Japhet, dividing the earth, which one of them holds in his hands,
     like a gorgeously painted map; and in the sixth panel of the first
     window a very curious scene, in which we see depicted a bronze idol
     or statue, similar, no doubt, to some the artist had seen as of
     Roman work. Whoever he was who designed the work, he knew what was
     classical art. The exaggerated muscular development which came in
     again under Michael Angelo and his contemporaries in Italy, is seen
     here quite plainly.”--(W. J. L.)

The same fire that destroyed the Choir also damaged the Transepts. The
windows and arcades in them are more completely reconstructed than those
in the side aisles. One feature here is the double range of triforia, or
open galleries. The lower triforium belongs to Ernulf’s time: the
windows in the upper one were his clerestory.

The pilgrims were usually conducted into the =North Transept=, or =Transept
of the Martyrdom= through the dark passage under the choir steps. In the
west wall here, a door opened into the cloister, through which Becket
passed to his tragic death.

Directly opposite, on the other side of the Choir, the =Warriors’ Chapel=
is situated.

The apse, approached by a broad flight of steps, is entirely occupied by
the =Chapel of the Holy Trinity=, which contained the =Martyr’s Shrine=. The
work here shows the influence of the French. From the =Transept of the
Martyrdom= the pilgrims were conducted through the North Aisle of the
Choir on their way to the great Shrine; and, at the end of the aisle,
close to the steps ascending to the =Retro-Choir=, we find the door of =St.
Andrew’s Tower=. This is part of Lanfranc’s building and now used as a
vestry; but it was once the sacristy, where the rich offerings and
precious relics connected with Becket were exhibited to privileged
pilgrims.

The =Retro-Choir= is reached by steep flights of steps necessitated by the
height of the Crypt below. Up these steps the pilgrims climbed on their
knees, chanting the hymn to St. Thomas:

    “Tu per Thomæ sanguinem
     Quem pro te impendit,
     Fac nos Christo scandere
     Quo Thomas ascendit.”

All this part of the Cathedral is the work of English William, which is
lighter, in general character, than that of William of Sens.

The =Chapel of the Holy Trinity= (or that of =St. Thomas=) occupies the
central portion of the Retro-Choir between the piers formed by double
columns. In the old Chapel of the Trinity (destroyed by fire at the same
time as Conrad’s Choir) Becket celebrated his first Mass as Archbishop.
His body lay in the Crypt immediately below this spot.

     “In earlier times the easternmost chapel had contained an altar of
     the Holy Trinity, where Becket had been accustomed to say mass.
     Partly for the sake of preserving the two old Norman towers of St.
     Anselm and St. Andrew, which stood on the north and south side of
     this part of the church--but chiefly for the sake of fitly uniting
     to the church this eastern chapel on an enlarged scale, the pillars
     of the choir were contracted with that singular curve which
     attracts the eye of every spectator, as Gervase foretold that it
     would, when, in order to explain this peculiarity, he stated the
     two aforesaid reasons. The eastern end of the Cathedral, thus
     enlarged, formed, as at Ely, a more spacious receptacle for the
     honoured remains; the new Trinity Chapel, reaching considerably
     beyond the extreme limit of its predecessor, and opening beyond
     into a yet further chapel, popularly called Becket’s Crown. The
     windows were duly filled with the richest painted glass of the
     period, and amongst those on the northern side may still be traced
     elaborate representations of the miracles wrought at the
     subterranean tomb, or by visions and intercessions of the mighty
     Saint. High in the tower of St. Anselm, on the south side of the
     destined site of so great a treasure, was prepared--a usual
     accompaniment of costly shrines--the Watching Chamber. It is a rude
     apartment with a fireplace where the watcher could warm himself
     during the long winter nights, and a narrow gallery between the
     pillars, whence he could overlook the whole platform of the shrine,
     and at once detect any sacrilegious robber who was attracted by the
     immense treasures there collected. On the occasion of fires the
     Shrine was additionally guarded by a troop of fierce ban-dogs.

     “When the Cathedral was thus duly prepared, the time came for what,
     in the language of those days, was termed the ‘Translation’ of the
     relics.”--(A. P. S.)

Becket’s body was removed here on July 7, 1220 (See page 4), and
remained the only occupant of this chapel for more than a hundred
years.

It only proves in what deep affection the English nation held the Black
Prince to have placed his remains by the side of Becket. His body lay in
state in Westminster from June 8, 1376, to September 29; and on the
Feast of Michaelmas it was taken to Canterbury, which he had selected
for his resting-place. The procession from London to Canterbury was
magnificent; and the idol of the nation was laid not in the Crypt, as he
had expected, but in Trinity Chapel.

     “In this sacred spot--believed at that time to be the most sacred
     spot in England--the tomb stood in which ‘alone in his glory,’ the
     Prince was to be deposited, to be seen and admired by all the
     countless pilgrims who crawled up the stone steps beneath it on
     their way to the shrine of the saint.

     “Let us turn to that tomb, and see how it sums up his whole life.
     Its bright colours have long since faded, but enough still remains
     to show us what it was as it stood after the sacred remains of him
     had been placed within it. There he lies; no other memorial of him
     exists in the world so authentic. There he lies, as he had
     directed, in full armour, his head resting on his helmet, his feet
     with the likeness of ‘the spurs he won’ at Cressy, his hands joined
     as in that last prayer which he had offered up on his deathbed.
     There you can see his fine face with the Plantagenet features, the
     flat cheeks and the well-chiselled nose, to be traced perhaps in
     the effigy of his father in Westminster Abbey, and his grandfather
     in Gloucester Cathedral. On his armour you can still see the marks
     of the bright gilding with which the figure was covered from head
     to foot, so as to make it look like an image of pure gold. High
     above are suspended the brazen gauntlets, the helmet, with what was
     once its gilded leopard-crest, and the wooden shield, the velvet
     coat also, embroidered with the arms of France and England, now
     tattered and colourless, but then blazing with blue and scarlet.
     There, too, still hangs the empty scabbard of the sword, wielded
     perhaps at his three great battles, and which Oliver Cromwell, it
     is said, carried away. On the canopy, over the tomb, there is the
     faded representation--painted after the strange fashion of those
     times--of the Persons of the Holy Trinity, according to the
     peculiar devotion which he had entertained. In the pillars you can
     see the hooks to which was fastened the black tapestry, with its
     crimson border and curious embroidery, which he directed in his
     will should be hung round his tomb and the shrine of Becket. Round
     about the tomb, too, you will see the ostrich feathers, which,
     according to the old, but doubtful tradition, we are told he won at
     Cressy from the blind King of Bohemia, who perished in the thick of
     the fight; and interwoven with them the famous motto, with which he
     used to sign his name, ‘Houmout,’ ‘Ich diene.’ If, as seems most
     likely, they are German words, they exactly express what we have
     seen so often in his life, the union of _Hoch muth_ that is _high
     spirit_, with _Ich dien_, _I serve_. They bring before us the very
     scene itself after the battle of Poitiers, where, after having
     vanquished the whole French nation, he stood behind the captive
     king, and served him like an attendant.

     “And, lastly, carved about the tomb, is the long inscription,
     selected by himself before his death, in Norman French, and still
     the language of the court, written, as he begged, clearly and
     plainly, that all might read it. Its purport is to contrast his
     former splendour and vigour and beauty with the wasted body which
     is now all that is left.”--(A. P. S.)

The Black Prince’s effigy of brass was once entirely gilt. Round the
tomb are escutcheons of arms, and on the canopy there is a
representation of the Holy Trinity with emblems of the Evangelists at
the corners.

At the foot of the Black Prince’s Tomb is the monument of =Archbishop
Courtenay= (1381-1396), the great opponent of the Wycliffites; and
directly opposite is the =Tomb of Henry IV.= and his Queen, =Joan of
Navarre=, whose effigies lie under a most elaborate and beautiful
canopy.

     “In spite of some damage they remain the most interesting
     representations, not only of the costume of the time, but also, we
     cannot doubt, of the actual features of the persons. When the tomb
     was opened some time ago the features of the king were seen for a
     moment and corresponded closely with the representation on the
     tomb. The figures at the foot of the Queen, known in heraldry as
     genets, and to the ordinary person perhaps as weasels, appear also
     in the canopy combined with eagles and the motto ‘Soverayne and
     Atemperance.’ The defaced painting on wood at the foot of the tomb
     represented the Martyrdom of St. Thomas.”--(F. and R.)

Adjoining this tomb is the =Chapel of Henry IV.’s Chantry=, built, as
directed in the will of King Henry, who died in 1413, “a chauntrie
perpetual with twey prestis for to sing and pray for my soul.” It
contains the first example in Canterbury of the “fan-vaulting,” so
splendidly represented in the =Dean’s Chapel=.

The windows here and in the Corona should be studied.

     “They are of the Thirteenth Century, and among the finest of this
     date in Europe, excelling in many respects those of Bourges, Troyes
     and Chartres; ‘for excellence of drawing, harmony of colouring and
     purity of design they are justly considered unequalled. The skill
     with which the minute figures are represented, cannot even at this
     day be surpassed’ (Stanley). Remark especially the great value
     given to the brilliant colours by the profusion of white and
     neutral tints. The scrolls and borders surrounding the medallions
     are also of beauty.

     “The three windows remaining in the aisles surrounding the Trinity
     Chapel are entirely devoted, as were all the rest, to the miracles
     of Becket, which commenced immediately on the death of the great
     martyr. The miracles represented in the medallions are of various
     characters. The Lucerna Angliæ, a true St. Thomas of Kandelberg, as
     the Germans called him, restores sight to the blind. Loss of smell
     is recovered at the shrine of this _Arbor Aromatica_. Frequently
     he assists sailors, the rude crews of the Cinque Ports in his own
     immediate neighbourhood. At the Norway fishing his figure came
     gliding over the seas in the dusk, and descended, burning like
     fire, to the imperilled ships of the Crusaders. In the window
     toward the east, on the north of the Shrine, is represented a
     remarkable series of miracles, occurring in the household of a
     knight named Jordan, son of Eisulf, whose son is restored to life
     by the water from St. Thomas’s well, which, mixed with his blood,
     was always carried off by the pilgrims. The father vows an offering
     to the martyr before Mid-Lent. This is neglected; the whole
     household again suffer, and the son dies once more. The knight and
     his wife, both sick, drag themselves to Canterbury, perform their
     vow and the son is finally restored. On a medallion in one of the
     windows on the north side is a representation of Becket’s Shrine,
     with the martyr issuing from it in full pontificals to say Mass at
     the altar.”--(R. J. K.)

At the extreme east end, just behind Trinity Chapel, is the circular
apse called =Becket’s Crown=, or the =Corona=. On the north side lies
Cardinal Pole, Bloody Mary’s cousin, who died the day after she did.

     “The great lightness and beauty of the Corona, the extreme east end
     of the Cathedral, are remarkable. It is English William’s work.
     When Archbishop Anselm was at Rome in the early part of his
     episcopate and attending a council in the Lateran, a question arose
     as to his proper place, since no Archbishop of Canterbury had as
     yet been present at a Roman council. Pope Pascal II. decided it by
     assigning to the ‘_alterius orbis papa_,’ a seat in the ‘corona,’
     the most honourable position. It is possible that this fact may
     have led the architects, on the rebuilding of the choir, to make
     the addition of an eastern apse, or corona, which did not exist in
     the earlier church. In it were the shrines of Archbishop Odo and
     Wilfrid of York, and a golden reliquary in the form of a head,
     containing some relic of Becket, perhaps the severed scalp. By a
     confusion of its proper name with this relic the eastern apse came
     to be generally known as Becket’s Crown. On the north side is the
     tomb of Cardinal Pole, Queen Mary’s Archbishop (1556-1558) and the
     last Archbishop buried at Canterbury. His royal blood gave him a
     title to so distinguished a place of sepulture.”--(R. J. K.)

From here one gains the best view of the Cathedral as a whole.
Canterbury is one of the longest of cathedrals (514 feet).

The central window (Thirteenth Century) in =Becket’s Crown= is very
ornate.

     “It is very complete and an admirable example of the intricate
     symbolism of the time. The subjects are arranged in three
     quatrefoils and two lozenges: the Crucifixion occupying a square
     panel at the foot, surrounded by representations of the spies
     carrying the great bunch of grapes; of Moses striking the rock; of
     the sacrifice of a lamb in the Temple, and of Abraham offering up
     Isaac on Mount Moriah. Next above is a lozenge-shaped panel,
     painted with the Entombment, adjoining which we have Joseph’s
     brethren putting him in the pit; Samson shorn in his sleep by
     Delilah; Daniel in a walled city, labelled Babilonia, and Jonah let
     down into the jaws of the whale by two men in a ship. Above these
     scenes is a quatrefoil, in the centre of which we see the
     Resurrection, surrounded by representations of Moses and the
     burning bush; Noah in the Ark; Rahab letting the spies down by the
     wall, and Jonah landing near Nineveh from the mouth of a great
     whale. Then another lozenge represents the Ascension and the scenes
     surrounding it are the Ark of the Mercy-Seat; Elijah ascending in a
     chariot of fire; the burial of Moses, and Hezekiah sick, while an
     angel gives him the sign of the shadow on the dial of Ahaz. The
     last of the series is at the top. In a square panel we see the
     great event of the Day of Pentecost. Above it Christ sits enthroned
     in glory. Moses receiving the Two Tables of the Law is below. On
     one side is the first ordination of deacons, and on the other the
     descent of the Holy Spirit on the disciples. The whole style of
     this window is later than that of the Becket series.”--(W. J. L.)

[Illustration: CANTERBURY: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: ROCHESTER: WEST FRONT]

Passing west, down the steps worn by the pious pilgrims we reach =St.
Anselm’s Tower= and =Chapel=. Anselm’s Tower (like St. Andrew’s opposite)
is Prior Ernulf’s work. The elaborate south window (1336) is Decorated
of five lights.

St. Anselm’s Tower is entered through splendid gates of ancient wrought
iron.

At the east end behind the Altar of SS. Peter and Paul, the great Anselm
(1093-1109) was buried. Over the chapel is a small room with a window
looking into the Cathedral. This was the =Watching Chamber=, in which, as
we have seen, a monk was stationed at night to keep watch over the
Shrine of St. Thomas. There is a tradition that King John of France was
imprisoned here.

We now reach the =South-east Transept=, the work of both William of Sens
and English William on Ernulf’s walls.

At the corner of the =South-west choir-aisle= architects love to notice
the round arch and double zigzag of the Norman style fitted into the
Pointed Arch and dogtooth of the restoration of 1180. Under the windows
are the tomb of =Archbishop Reynolds= and the monument to =Hubert Walter=,
the latter the warrior-prelate and Crusader who kept the Realm for
Richard Cœur de Lion and raised the ransom for his release.

The steps leading down into the great =South Transept= are similar to
those of the opposite Transept of the Martyrdom.

Opening east from this Transept is =St. Michael’s=, or =The Warriors’
Chapel=, so named because of the martial monuments and tombs contained in
it.

The famous East Kent Regiment “The Buffs” place their memorials here.
This Chapel is particularly notable for containing the tomb of =Stephen
Langton=, the author of the Magna Charta, which is of earlier date than
the chapel. A very beautiful alabaster monument of =Lady Margaret Holland=
with her two husbands, John Beaufort, son of John of Gaunt, and the Duke
of Clarence, son of Henry IV., beautifully represents the armour and
dress of the Fifteenth Century.

The Warriors’ Chapel is Perpendicular (about 1370), with a complex
lierne vault. The architect is unknown.

Directly opposite, on the other side of the Choir, is the =Transept of
the Martyrdom=. Here was erected a wooden altar to the Virgin, where a
portion of the Martyr’s brains were exhibited under a piece of
rock-crystal and fragments of Le Bret’s sword.

Before this altar Edward I. was married to Queen Margaret in 1299. A
rude representation of the altar may be seen over the south-west door of
the Cathedral.

Returning to the =North-west Transept=, we visit the scene of the
Martyrdom which took place near St. Benedict’s apsidal chapel (now
occupied by the Dean’s Chapel) Dec. 29, 1170, during vespers. The west
door from the cloisters by which Becket entered and the pavement by the
wall, where he fell, remain. He was mounting the stairs to the north
aisle (now removed) when the knights attacked him.

We have already noticed the great =Window= here, which was the gift, in
1465, of Edward IV. and his Queen, whose
     “figures still remain in it, together with those of his daughters
     and of the two Princes murdered in the Tower. The ‘remarkably soft
     and silvery appearance’ of this window has been noticed by Mr.
     Winston. In its original state the Virgin was pictured in it ‘in
     seven several glorious appearances’ and in the centre was Becket
     himself at full length, robed and mitred. This part was demolished
     in 1642 by Richard Culmer, called Blue Dick, the great iconoclast
     of Canterbury, who ‘rattled down proud Becket’s glassie bones’ with
     a pike, and who, when thus engaged, narrowly escaped martyrdom
     himself at the hands of a malignant fellow-townsman.”--(R. J. K.)

In this transept stands the monument of =Archbishop Peckham= (1279-1292)
with his effigy in Irish oak. This is the earliest complete monument in
the Cathedral.

We now pass into the =Dean’s Chapel=, occupying the site of St. Benedict’s
Chapel. It was formerly the Lady-Chapel, built by Prior Goldstone in
1460 and dedicated to the Virgin. The beautiful fan-vault is similar to
that in Henry VII.’s Chapel in Westminster Abbey and to the roof of the
staircase leading to the dining-hall of Christ Church College, Oxford.
The Dean’s Chapel received its present name from the number of tombs and
monuments to deans here, one of the most curious of which is that of
=Dean Boys=, who died in 1625. He is represented as he was found dead in
his Library, and the arrangement of the books with the edges turned
outward from the shelves strikes every one as singular.

=Archbishop Warham=, the last Archbishop before the Reformation, also lies
here, his heavy tomb in great contrast to that of Archbishop Peckham,
already mentioned, near it,--good examples of the styles between 1292
and 1533.

The =East Window= is also notable.

     “The figures of Dean Neville and his brother, against the eastern
     wall, were transferred to this place on the destruction of the
     chapel which formerly projected from the south side of the nave,
     and of which the marks in the wall are clearly visible. In the east
     window some points may be noted. We see the Neville arms, and a red
     shield with white saltire, and also the elaborate Bouchier arms,
     the most distinguishable features of which are the water ‘budgets,’
     two curious red skins joined together at the top, sometimes given
     as an honourable blazon to those who supplied an army with water.
     We also see the Bouchier knot alternating in most of the panes with
     the oak leaf and acorn. This is the mark of Woodstock.”--(F. and
     R.)

A door here leads into the Great Cloister.

Opposite to St. Anselm’s, =St. Andrew’s Chapel=, now used as the Choir
Vestry, contains interesting remains of coloured decorations. In olden
days St. Andrew’s was a sacristy, where, as we have seen, were kept the
very precious offerings to the Shrine. On the inner side is a building
of late Norman work--this was originally the Treasury.

The =North-east Transept= is a repetition of the South-east Transept. It,
however, contains a monument to Archbishop Tait, designed by Boehm; and
in the north wall are three slits called hagiscopes. Through these “holy
spy holes,” the Prior could see Mass being celebrated at the High Altar
and in the altars in the Chapels of St. Martin and St. Stephen in the
Transept below.

Before descending into the Crypt we must stop to look at =St. Augustine’s
Chair=, by tradition the throne on which the kings of Kent were crowned
and given by Ethelbert to St. Augustine. All the Archbishops of
Canterbury have taken office in it.

     “This chair, which is sometimes called the chair of St. Augustine,
     but which belongs to the Thirteenth Century, is composed of Purbeck
     marble. In it each successive archbishop for the last six hundred
     years has sat when he has been admitted to his metropolitan
     functions.”--(W. H. F.)

The famous =Crypt= is usually entered from the South Transept. It is the
oldest part of the Church, having been built between 1093 and 1107 in
the reigns of William II. and Henry I. It is heavy, massive, dark and
low, like all Norman work. The capitals of the pillars are quaintly and
sometimes harmoniously carved; one under St. Anselm’s Chapel, for
instance, represents a concert of beasts playing on musical instruments.
The whole crypt was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin and in the centre
stood her altar and chapel. “The Virgin Mother,” Erasmus wrote, “has
there an habitation, but somewhat dark, enclosed with a double iron
rail, for fear of thieves; for indeed I never saw anything more loaded
with riches. Lights being brought we saw a more than royal spectacle.
This chapel is not shown but to noblemen and particular friends.”

The beautiful =Screen=, which resembles the screen behind the High Altar
of the choir, is thought to have been added with other decorations of
the Crypt at the time of the Black Prince’s marriage to the Fair Maid of
Kent (1363), when he founded two chantries in the Crypt. These now form
the entrance to the =French Church=, where the descendants of the Huguenot
and Walloon refugees still hold service in the ritual of their
ancestors.

Queen Elizabeth gave up the whole of the Crypt in 1561 to the Flemish
and French refugees “whom the rod of Alva bruised.” The silk-weavers
set up their looms here.

Before the magnificent shrine of the Virgin lies Henry VII.’s minister,
=Cardinal Morton=, whose tomb is enriched with the crown and roses of York
and Lancaster, the Cardinal’s hat, the Tudor portcullis and a passing
allusion to his name--Mort (hawk) and Ton or Tun (a barrel). He assisted
in building Bell Harry (or the Angel) Tower.

Another famous tomb in the Crypt is that of =Isabel, Countess of Atholl=,
granddaughter of King John and sister-in-law of John Balliol, King of
Scotland. She owned the castle of Chilham near Canterbury and died in
1292. Her tomb stands at the entrance to the =Chapel of St. Gabriel=. The
latter is extremely dark, but shows, when lighted up, some remarkable
frescoes of the Twelfth Century, representing the _Nativity of Christ_
and of _John the Baptist_.

     “Further beyond the Duchess of Atholl’s tomb the crypt is much
     loftier and becomes almost a church in itself. This is the part
     beyond the apse of the original Cathedral, the place of Becket’s
     first burial, where Henry II. did penance, passing the night in
     fasting and in the morning baring his back and receiving three
     lashes from each of the monks. Here the miracles began to be
     wrought and the Tumba, even after its contents were removed, was
     still reckoned a holy place. The present lofty crypt was built over
     and round the Tumba after the great fire of 1174; and, some forty
     years after its completion and that of the Trinity Chapel above it,
     the remains of Becket were translated by Stephen Langton, with
     great pomp, to the shrine prepared for them in the sanctuary
     above.”--(W. H. F.)

The Crypt is largely the work of Ernulf; and the diaper pattern and
marble shaft by the door that leads from the S. E. corner of the
Martyrdom, occur again in Rochester, where Ernulf became bishop (See
page 34). A statue of Ernulf, intended for the west front of the
Cathedral, is now in his Crypt.

The lower part of the Crypt ends towards the east in a semi-circular
sweep of pillars. The end of the Crypt was built by Ernulf in 1096.

The old Benedictine Convent of Christ’s Church that St. Augustine
established grew to be of the utmost importance. Portions of the massive
wall by which they were surrounded still remain. The monastic buildings
were numerous and extensive. The Prior, who had the right of wearing the
mitre and carrying the episcopal staff, lived in great dignity. In a set
of state chambers, known as the Meist’ Omers and belonging to the Prior,
pilgrims of high rank were lodged. Somewhere in the vicinity of the
Infirmary and its chapel was the miraculous =Well of St. Thomas=, which
appeared in the Fourteenth Century. A passage and the =Dark Entry=,
haunted by the ghost of Nell Cook of the _Ingoldsby Legends_, takes us
into the =Priors’=, or =Green Court=, planted with linden trees, or limes,
as the English call them. Here we find remains of the great Dormitory,
the Guest House, built by Prior Goldstone, the Norman Almonry Gate and
the =Norman Staircase=, the only construction of its kind existing. The
Hall above was built in 1855.

The beautiful =Cloisters=, the work of Prior Chillenden (about 1400), are
decorated on the roof with the arms of Kentish families. In the
northwest corner is the doorway through which Becket passed to his
doom.

     “The cloister occupies the same space as the Norman cloister built
     by Lanfranc, but of the Norman work only a doorway remains at the
     north-east corner; there is some Early English arcading on the
     north side, but the present tracery and fan-worked roof belong to
     the end of the Fourteenth Century, when Archbishops Sudbury,
     Arundell and Courtenay, and Prior Chillenden (1390-1411) rebuilt
     the nave, the cloister and the chapter-house. The latter work cuts
     across the older in the most unceremonious way, as is seen
     especially in the square doorway by which we shall presently enter
     the Martyrdom, which cuts into a far more beautiful portal of the
     Decorated period. If we take our stand at the north-west corner of
     the cloister, from which a very fine view is gained of the
     Cathedral, especially about sunset, we may picture to ourselves the
     life of the monks. Above the north-eastern side of the cloister are
     the old Norman arches of their dormitory, now taken in to the new
     library; on the eastern side is the chapter-house, with its fine
     geometrical ceiling, where they transacted their business; on the
     south the great church, the services of which occupied so many
     hours of the day.”--(W. H. F.)




ROCHESTER

     DEDICATION: ST. ANDREW. FORMERLY THE CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE
     MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: DOOR OF CHAPTER-HOUSE; WEST DOORWAY; CRYPT.


After landing in 567, St. Augustine preached in Rochester, where
Ethelbert soon founded the church of St. Andrew for secular canons. In
604, a bishop was appointed,--St. Augustine’s companion, Justus. Justus
became Archbishop of Canterbury in 624, and was succeeded in Rochester
by Paulinus; and he, in his turn, by the first English bishop, St.
Ythamar (644-655). Rochester’s three chief saints in early days were,
therefore, Justus, Paulinus and Ythamar.

Gundulf, a monk of Bec in Normandy, was appointed to Rochester in 1076.
He immediately turned it into a Benedictine monastery and built a church
for his monks. Gundulf was one of the greatest architects of his day: he
also built the great Keep of Rochester Castle, portions of the Tower of
London and the Castle of Dover. The Saxon Cathedral had suffered from
the ravages of the Danes and upon the ruins, Gundulf, with assistance
from Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury, completed a larger cathedral
between 1080 and 1089. The plan was peculiar: it was neither English nor
Norman.

     “All this work of Gundulf’s is now gone except portions of the
     crypt, the keep and the nave. Of Gundulf’s nave there remain on the
     south side five arches, together with the lower parts of the walls
     of both aisles. It is very doubtful whether he built any part of
     the triforium or clerestory. At present his work can only be seen
     in its original condition from the side of the aisles. The
     pierarches had originally two square orders, which remain unaltered
     on the side of the aisle (cf. Winchester transept). Gundulf’s
     masonry was in rough tufa.”--(F. B.)

Gundulf placed the relics of St. Paulinus in a silver shrine at the
eastern end of his new cathedral.

Ernulf, Prior of Canterbury, began the second Norman church about 1120.
This was continued by his successor, John of Canterbury.

     “Subsequently the choir was re-arranged and the nave partly
     rebuilt, partly re-faced, added to, and finished with the west
     front, which, to a great extent, still remains. This later Norman
     work was carried out from east to west during the episcopate of
     Ernulf (1115-24) and John of Canterbury (1125-37). The upper part
     of the west front and some of the carving may not have been
     completed within even that period. What seems certain is, that we
     are indebted to later Norman builders for the re-casing of the
     piers of the nave arcade, the greater richness of their capitals,
     the outer decorated order of the arches, the triforium with its
     richly diapered tympana, and the west front. Assigning most of
     these works to the time of Bishop John, as seems best, we can point
     to others that testify to Ernulf’s architectural skill. He is
     recorded to have built the refectory, dormitory and chapter-house.
     Portions of these still remain, and one feature, in the
     ornamentation of the chapter-house, especially, marks it as his
     work. This is a peculiar lattice-like diaper, which occurs
     elsewhere at Rochester--in fragments that belonged probably to a
     beginning by him of the renovation of the choir--but has only been
     noticed at one other place: by the entrance to the crypt at
     Canterbury, where also it is due to him.”--(G. H. P.)

The Cathedral was dedicated in 1130; but while King Henry I., the
Archbishop of Canterbury and many of the nobility were still in the
city a fire broke out “without any regard to the majesty of the King,
grandeur of the church or solemnity of the occasion,” as an old
chronicle quaintly observes, and greatly damaged the new church.

Two other fires occurred in the same century, and in 1179 the monks set
to work to rebuild the whole cathedral.

     “As usual they arranged their building operations so as to avoid
     interfering with the services in the choir as long as possible.
     First they rebuilt the north aisle of the choir, but not so high as
     it is at present. The aisle remained narrow because Gundulf’s tower
     was in the way. But the south aisle of the choir they doubled in
     width. Next they set to work at the east end, planning it, as at
     Hereford, as an eastern transept with an eastern aisle and
     projecting eastward an oblong sanctuary (cf. Southwell). The new
     transept was lofty and broad; and it is quite possible that it was
     built over the top of Gundulf’s east end without disturbing daily
     services within it. Then when all was finished Gundulf’s east end
     was pulled down. Unlike the Worcester monks they preserved the
     level of the Eleventh Century choir, and consequently had to
     continue Gundulf’s crypt eastward. In the new presbytery is seen
     the same curious mixture of quadripartite and sexpartite vaulting
     as in St. Hugh’s eastern transept at Lincoln. All this work was
     finished in 1227.”--(G. H. P.)

The monks were enabled to undertake rebuilding on this large scale
because in 1201 they acquired a new saint. A baker of Perth, named
William, famed for his piety, started to the Holy Land. He got as far as
the road to Canterbury, where his servant killed him for his money. The
monks found the body and buried it in the choir of St. Andrew’s. St.
William soon began to work miracles and attracted many of the pilgrims
on their way to the Shrine of St. Thomas at Canterbury. The choir,
rebuilt by means of the offerings, was first used for service in 1227.

     “The choir and transepts of Rochester Cathedral are a very
     beautiful and remarkable example of Early English. The architect
     was William de Hoo, first sacristan, then prior, and there is some
     reason to believe that he is the same person as William the young
     Englishman, who assisted William of Sens after his fall from the
     scaffold at Canterbury, and completed the work there. A young man
     at Canterbury in 1185, able to carry on and complete such a work,
     may very well have become the architect on his own account of the
     daughter church of Rochester in 1201-1227, and there is great
     resemblance in style between Rochester and the later work at
     Canterbury.”--(J. H. P.)

About this time the monks resolved to have a central tower and to
rebuild the nave. While all this work was going on, the church was
desecrated by the troops of Simon de Montfort. A chronicler relates that

     “They entered the church of St. Andrew on the day on which the Lord
     hung on the cross for sinners. Armed knights on their horses,
     coursing around the altars, dragged away with impious hands some
     who fled for refuge thither, the gold and silver and other precious
     things being with violence carried off thence. The buildings were
     turned into horses’ stables, and everywhere filled with the dung of
     animals and the defilement of dead bodies.”

In 1343 the central tower was completed by Bishop Hamo de Hythe, who
hung in its wooden spire four bells, named Dunstan, Paulinus, Ythamar
and Lanfranc. Bishop Hamo is said to have reconstructed in alabaster and
marble the shrines of Paulinus and Ythamar. To the middle of the
Fourteenth Century belongs also the beautiful doorway leading into the
Chapter-House and Library.

In the Fifteenth Century, the clerestory and vaulting of the
north-choir-aisle were finished and Perpendicular windows were placed in
the nave aisles. The great west window was inserted about 1470, and the
whole of the Norman clerestory was taken off and a new clerestory and a
new wooden roof were put up. The northern pinnacle of the west gable was
also rebuilt. About 1490, the Lady-Chapel was erected in the corner
between the south transept and the nave.

In 1540 the Cathedral surrendered to the King; and became known as the
Cathedral Church of Christ and the Blessed Virgin Mary. In 1558 the body
of Cardinal Pole rested here one night on its way to Canterbury. An
eyewitness speaks of

     “the funeral pompe which trulie was great and answerable both to
     his birth and calling, with store of burning torches and mourning
     weedes. At what time his coffin, being brought into the church, was
     covered with a cloth of black velvet, with a great cross of white
     satten over all the length and bredth of the same, in the midst of
     which cross his Cardinal’s hat was placed.”

The church suffered from the Puritans in 1642.

Samuel Pepys speaks of repairs in 1661. More were made in 1742-43. In
1749, the steeple was rebuilt. A new organ was acquired in 1791; and at
the close of the Eighteenth Century the upper part of Gundulf’s tower
was taken down.

Throughout the Nineteenth Century repairs and restorations were
constantly made. The glass chiefly consists of memorials to heroes of
the wars of the Nineteenth Century.

The best approach is from the High Street through the =College Gate=,
which marks the entrance to the Precincts, or Green Church Haw. This is
also known as Chertseys, or Cemetery Gate, which lovers of Dickens
remember as Jasper’s Gateway; for Cloisterham of _Edwin Drood_ is
Rochester. The =Deanery Gate= dating from the reign of Edward III. was
formerly the Sacristy Gate. The =Priors’ Gate= dates from the Fourteenth
Century.

The north side of the nave shows two-lighted Perpendicular windows with
irregular quatrefoils in their heads; the north transept (Early English)
a high gable with three circular windows and pinnacles. And on the north
side of the choir =Gundulf’s Tower= to which there are two entrances,--one
through an opening in the north wall, the other through a doorway in the
south-west corner. In the angle between the south aisle and transept we
note the Lady-Chapel (Perpendicular) with three-lighted windows three
bays long from east to west and well-buttressed; the south side of the
choir contains three lancet windows and a fine doorway that used to open
into the cloisters. The south transept (Early Decorated) is well
buttressed and its gable adorned with pinnacles and gargoyles. The
lowest row of windows belongs to the crypt.

=The West Front= has been restored. The great central window, and the flat
gable above, are Perpendicular (restored), but all the rest is either
original Norman work, or as accurate a reproduction of this as possible.

The great =West Doorway= (late Norman) dates from the first half of the
Twelfth Century.

     “It is formed by five receding arches and every stone of each of
     these is carved with varying ornamental designs. Between the second
     and third of them runs a line of cable moulding, an ornament which
     occurs also inside the door. Each arch has its own shaft and the
     groups of five on each side are elaborately banded. The shafts have
     richly sculptured capitals, and in those on the south side, as well
     as in the tympanum, the signs of the Evangelists appear. The shafts
     second from the door on either side are carved with statues, two of
     the oldest in England. These are much mutilated, but they were
     thought worthy of great praise by Flaxman. That on the spectator’s
     left is said to represent King Henry I. and the other his wife, the
     ‘good Queen Maud.’ This attribution is probably correct, as these
     sovereigns were both great benefactors to the Cathedral and were
     living when the front was being built. The figure of the Queen has
     suffered the more; it is recorded to have been especially ill-used
     by the Parliamentarians in the days of the great Civil War. The
     tympanum contains a figure of Our Lord, seated in Glory, within an
     aureole supported by two angels. His right hand is raised in
     benediction and his left hand holds a book. Outside the aureole are
     the symbols of the four Evangelists: the Angel of St. Matthew and
     the Eagle of St. John, one on each side above the Winged Lion of
     St. Mark and the Ox of St. Luke similarly placed below. A straight
     band of masonry crosses beneath the lunette, and has carved on it
     twelve figures, now much mutilated, but supposed to have
     represented the twelve Apostles. All the sculptured work of the
     portal has suffered greatly from age and exposure and from the hand
     of man. In the recent restoration the coping has been renewed, the
     shafts have been given separate bases once more and many of the
     most worn stones have been replaced by new ones carved in
     facsimile.”--(G. H. P.)

This doorway resembles those on the Continent and shows the influence of
the East. Freeman says: “The superb western portal at Rochester
Cathedral is by far the finest example of this kind, if not the finest
of all Norman doorways.”

The Mayor and Corporation of Rochester still have the right of entry in
their robes by this door, through which we now pass. Immediately we
descend four steps into the =Nave=:

     “The nave, 150 feet long to the cross of the lantern, is Norman, as
     far as the last two bays eastward. If, as is most probable, it is a
     part of Gundulf’s work, it was, no doubt, a copy of the Norman nave
     at Canterbury; and we are thus enabled to judge fairly what the
     appearance of the metropolitan cathedral was in this part of it.
     Its architecture is plainer than that of the contemporary examples
     in France, though owing to its having been always destined for a
     wooden roof, the piers and the design generally are lighter than
     where preparation was made for a stone vault. The triforium is
     richly ornamented; and the arches open to the space above the
     side-aisles as well as to the nave, a peculiarity which both
     Rochester and Canterbury may have received from the church of St.
     Stephen’s at Caen, where the same arrangement may still be seen.
     Lanfranc, the builder of the Norman church at Canterbury, had been
     Abbot of St. Stephen’s. The clerestory windows above, like those of
     the aisles, are Perpendicular; and the roof seems to have been
     raised at the time of their insertion. This is of timber and quite
     plain.

     “In passing beyond the Norman portion of the nave to the Early
     English, of which nearly all the rest of the Cathedral consists,
     the strong influence of Canterbury is at once apparent. The double
     transepts, the numberless shafts of Petworth marble, and perhaps
     the flights of stairs ascending from either side of the crypt,
     recall immediately the works of the two Williams in the
     metropolitan church, which always maintained the closest connection
     with Rochester, her earliest daughter.”--(R. J. K.)

At the end of the northern aisle we note the early Fourteenth Century
doorway for the use of the parishioners of St. Nicholas’s altar. The
lower end of the southern aisle terminates in a blind arcade of three
arches. Each aisle end has also a round-headed Norman window. The great
=West Window= is divided into eight lights separated into

[Illustration: ROCHESTER: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: ROCHESTER: CHOIR, WEST]

two rows by a horizontal mullion. The glass commemorates the officers
and men of the Royal Engineers who fell in the South African and Afghan
campaigns. The subjects are Biblical scenes and heroes.

In the south-west corner of the Nave, a charming little Norman doorway
opens into the tower. A fine embattled moulding runs round the arch.

The crossing is noticeable for the finely clustered shafts of the
tower-piers.

The =North Transept= (Early English) dates from about 1235. The =South
Transept= (Early Decorated) is later. The north transept is the richer of
the two. The corbels of monastic heads of great excellence deserve
notice.

In the east wall, opposite the entrance to the Perpendicular
Lady-Chapel, two bays were included under one arch to form a recess for
the altar of the Virgin Mary, about 1320.

The south transept underwent some alteration when the Lady-Chapel was
built. On the wall under the central window a monument to Richard Watts
was erected in 1736. Watts, a member of Queen Elizabeth’s second
Parliament, entertained her at “Satis House” in 1573. He also left
provisions in his will for the poor and founded in 1579 the “House of
the Six Poor Travellers,” where nightly six poor wayfarers are provided
with supper, bed and breakfast and presented with fourpence when they
leave.

Near the Watts monument a brass tablet to Charles Dickens, who made the
House of the Six Poor Travellers famous, connects “his memory with the
scenes in which his earliest and latest years were passed and with the
associations of Rochester Cathedral and its neighbourhood, which
extended over all his life.”

The =Choir=, reached by a flight of ten steps, is higher than the nave. It
is entered through iron gates in the central doorway of the screen,
which represent St. Andrew, King Ethelbert, St. Justus, St. Paulinus,
Bishop Gundulf, William de Hoo, Bishop Walter de Merton and Cardinal
John Fisher, designed by Mr. John Pearson.

The organ is on the screen beneath the choir-arch. The Choir, remodelled
in 1825-1830,

     “is entered by a flight of steps rendered necessary, as at
     Canterbury, by the height of the crypt below. It was completed
     sufficiently for use in 1127. It is thoroughly developed Early
     English, although much has evidently been borrowed, even in detail,
     from the Canterbury transition work. It is narrow and somewhat
     heavy; defects not lightened by the woodwork of the stalls, which
     is indifferent, or by the use of colour,--a single line of which,
     however, is carried along the ribs of the vaulting with very good
     effect.

     “The brackets of Early English foliage, from which the blind
     wall-arches spring, should be noticed. Two large ones especially,
     at the angles of the eastern transept, are excellent specimens of
     this period, before the naturalism of the Decorated had begun to
     develop itself. A fragment of mural painting, apparently of the
     same date as the choir itself, remains on the wall, close above the
     pulpit. The painting, when entire, is said to have represented a
     subject not uncommon in early churches--the Wheel of Fortune with
     various figures--king, priest, husbandman and others--climbing
     it.”--(R. J. K.)

This painting (5 feet 10 inches high and 2 feet 2 inches wide) dates
from the Thirteenth Century. Fortune dressed as a queen, and in yellow,
moves the wheel with her right hand.

Passing into the =North-choir-transept=, still Early English and a part
of William de Hoo’s work, the first point of interest is =St. William’s
Tomb=, at the north-east corner, of Purbeck marble, with a floriated
cross.

Towards the centre of the transept is a flat stone marked with six
crosses, upon which =St. William’s Shrine= is said to have rested. The
steps which descend into the north aisle of the Choir are, as at
Canterbury, deeply worn by the constant ascent of pilgrims.

West of the Saint’s tomb lies =Walter de Merton=, founder of Merton
College, Oxford, and Bishop of Rochester from 1274 to 1277. His tomb is
a very beautiful example of Early Decorated.

The present arrangement of the east end is the work of Sir G. Scott. The
=Choir-stalls= were designed by Sir G. Scott, who incorporated as much of
the old work as possible.

Just behind the =Altar=, above which is a picture of _The Angels appearing
to the Shepherds_, by Benjamin West (placed there in 1788), is a fine
=Piscina=. Opposite three stone =Sedilia= (late Perpendicular) deserve
notice.

In the railed-off transept aisle, known as =St. John the Baptist’s
Chapel=, or =Warner Chapel=, because of the monuments to members of the
Warner family (“Palladian” in style, 1666-1698), there is an old
weather-worn =statue= which tradition says is a portrait of =Gundulf=.

In the eastern aisle of the north-east transept is the =Tomb of Bishop
John De Sheppy= (1353-1360). It is

     “probably the most perfect specimen of ancient colour-work now
     existing in England. It had been bricked up within the arch where
     it still remains, and was discovered during the repairs in 1825.
     The colours and monuments deserve the most careful attention, as
     well for their own beauty as for their great value as authorities.
     In the maniple held over the left arm, some of the crystals with
     which it was studded still remain. Remark the couchant dogs at the
     feet. About their necks are scarlet collars, hung with bells. An
     inscription with the Bishop’s name surrounds the effigy.”--(R. J.
     K.)

The short =sacrarium=, or chancel, east of the transepts, probably formed
part of William de Hoo’s work. The beautiful =windows= at the east end are
Decorated. In the south side of the sacrarium, next the altar, a tomb of
plain marble is thought to be that of =Gundulf=.

In the east wall of the south-choir-transept we come to one of the
finest pieces of English Decorated in existence,--the =Chapter-House
Doorway=. It dates from the middle of the Fourteenth Century.

     “The full-length figures, one on each side of the door, symbolising
     the Church and the Synagogue, were both headless when Mr.
     Cottingham restored the doorway, between 1825 and 1830. Much fault
     has been found with him for turning the first, which is thought to
     have been like the other, a female figure, into a mitred, bearded
     bishop holding a cross in his right hand and the model of a church
     in his left. The blindfolded ‘Synagogue,’ by her broken staff and
     the tables of the law held reversed in her right hand, typifies the
     overthrow of the Mosaic dispensation. Above are figures, two on
     each side, seated at book-desks under canopies. These are supposed
     to be the four great Doctors of the Church: Saints Augustine,
     Gregory, Jerome and Ambrose. Quite at the head of the arch, under a
     lofty pyramidal canopy, we see a tiny nude figure which represents,
     probably, a pure soul just released from Purgatory. If this is so,
     it would account for the flames from which the angels, on each
     side, bearing scrolls, seem to be rising. It has been suggested
     likewise that the distorted heads, which alternate with squares of
     foliage in the wider inside moulding of the doorway, typify the
     sufferings of the soul in its passage. The outside moulding is also
     interesting, being a wide hollow in the bottom of which circular
     holes are cut at intervals. Through these can be seen the broad
     stem from which spring the leaves that ornament the intervening
     spaces. The arch-head is ogee-shaped outside, with large external
     and smaller, but not less rich, internal crockets. The square back
     to it, and the spaces beneath the corbels, on which the Church and
     Synagogue figures stand, are filled with noteworthy diapers. The
     first is divided diagonally into sunken squares, each containing a
     flower; and the others have lion masks in quatrefoils, with
     five-petalled roses in the alternate spaces.”--(G. H. P.)

A steep flight of stairs leads from this Transept to =St. Edmund’s
Chapel=, south of the Choir. From this we enter the =Crypt=,

     “which extends under the whole of the choir and is one of the best
     specimens of its class to be found in England. The west and east
     parts are evidently of a much earlier date than the central, which
     is Early English, and of the same period as the choir above. In
     building this, the ancient crypt was probably broken through, and
     in part reconstructed. The earlier portions are distinguished by
     very massive piers and circular arches. Between the piers are small
     pillars, with plain broad capitals. It is not impossible that this
     part of the crypt may date from before the Conquest. At all events,
     it is the earliest portion of the existing cathedral, and cannot be
     later than the work of Bishop Gundulf.”--(R. J. K.)




WINCHESTER

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY AND INDIVISIBLE TRINITY. FORMERLY THE CHURCH
     OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: NORMAN NAVE; TOWER; WEST WINDOW; CHOIR-STALLS;
     FONT; REREDOS.


Winchester is the largest cathedral in England and affords good examples
of every style from pure Norman to early Renaissance. It is the fifth
cathedral that has occupied this site, for tradition says that a British
church was founded here by Lucius, King of the Britons.

This first church was destroyed in 266 and the clergy martyred during
the persecutions of the Christians by Diocletian. The second church,
erected under Constantine, was in 515 transformed by Cerdic, founder of
the Kingdom of Wessex, into a Temple of Dagon, in which he was crowned
in 519 and buried in 534. Cerdic’s great grandson, Kynegils, converted
by St. Birinus, the first of Saxon bishops, began the third church which
his son, Kenwalk, completed in 648. Kenwalk’s buildings were, in their
turn, enlarged and repaired by Swithun, a prior of the Benedictine
monastery established here. Swithun, who became Bishop of Winchester and
tutor to King Alfred and Ethelwold, was, according to the chroniclers,
“a diligent builder of churches in places where there were none before,
and a repairer of those that had been destroyed or ruined.” When he died
in 862, he was buried, according to his own desire, in the churchyard of
Winchester, where “passersby might tread on his grave, and where the
rain from the eaves might fall on it.”

When this third church was destroyed by the Danes in 867, portions were
restored by Alfred the Great, St. Ethelwold and St. Alphege. St.
Ethelwold removed the body of St. Swithun to the golden shrine within
the cathedral, now dedicated to St. Swithun, St. Peter and St. Paul; but
the Translation being delayed by rain, gave the saint reputation as a
weather prophet. Hence the weather on the anniversary (July 15) is
foretold by the old rhyme:

    “St. Swithun’s Day, if thou dost rain,
     For forty days it will remain;
     St. Swithun’s Day, if thou be fair,
     Forty days ’twill rain na mair.”

One of the features of St. Ethelwold’s cathedral was a magnificent “pair
of organs,” of tremendous size and power, with twelve bellows above and
fourteen below and seventy strong men as blowers to fill the four
hundred pipes. Below, at two keyboards, sat two brethren in “unity of
spirit.”

Ethelwold was buried in the southern crypt.

This Saxon church was succeeded by the present cathedral, begun in 1079,
by Walkelyn, the first Norman bishop.

Walkelyn was of noble birth and related to William Rufus, who granted
him license to search for stone in the Isle of Wight and as much wood
from the forest of Hanepinges (on the Alresford road) as his carpenters
could take in four days and nights. The wily Bishop collected a large
force of men and within the assigned time cut down the whole forest. The
King was furious. The new Cathedral was finished in 1093, having been
rebuilt by Walkelyn, from the west front to the great tower, including
the transepts. He also removed, and with great pomp, St. Swithun’s
shrine from the old altar to the new one. Walkelyn died in 1098 and was
buried in the nave.

Bishop Lucy, Bishop William of Edington and William of Wykeham are the
next three great architects of Winchester.

     “It was Bishop Edington who commenced the alteration of Winchester
     Cathedral into the Perpendicular style; he died in 1366, and the
     work was continued by William of Wykeham, who mentions in his will
     that Edington had finished the west end, with two windows on the
     north side and one on the south: the change in the character of the
     work is very distinctly marked. Bishop Edington’s work at
     Winchester was executed at a later period than that at Edington,
     and, as might be expected, the new idea is more fully developed;
     but on a comparison between the west window of Winchester and the
     east window of Edington, it will at once be seen that the principle
     of construction is the same; there is a central division carried up
     to the head of the window, and sub-arches springing from each side:
     it may be observed that whenever this arrangement of the sub-arches
     occurs in Decorated work, it is a sign that the work is late in the
     style. Before the death of Bishop Edington the great principles of
     the Perpendicular Style were fully established. These chiefly
     consist of the Perpendicular lines through the head of the window,
     and in covering the surface of the wall with panelling of the same
     kind. These features are as distinctly marked at Winchester as in
     any subsequent building, or as they well could be.”--(J. H. P.)

In the eastern part of the Crypt there is ancient masonry undoubtedly
belonging to the time of St. Ethelwold; then we find above it the
massive Norman work of Bishop Walkelyn; then, to the east, the graceful
Early English of Bishop Lucy; along the nave, the Perpendicular columns
of Bishop Edington and William of Wykeham, on which rests the exquisite
groined roof. Above this roof the great rough-hewn beams cut from the
King’s forest by Walkelyn more than eight hundred years ago can still be
seen and in a perfect state of soundness.

     “In this great church many stirring scenes of English history have
     been enacted. The early kings made Winchester their home and the
     Cathedral their chapel. Here it was that Egbert, after being
     crowned _in regem totius Britanniæ_, with assent of all parties,
     issued an edict in 828, ordering that the island should thereafter
     be always styled England and its people Englishmen. Here King
     Alfred was crowned and lived and died. Here, in 1035, Cnut’s body
     lay in state before the high altar, over which was hung henceforth
     for many a year, a most precious relic, the great Norseman’s crown.
     Here William the Conqueror often came, and wore his crown at the
     Easter Gemôt; here, too, clustered many of the national legends:
     St. Swithun here did his mighty works, and here were the forty
     dismal days of rain; hard by is the scene of the great fight
     between Colbrand the Dane and Guy of Warwick; in the nave of the
     church Queen Emma trod triumphant on the red-hot plough-shares as
     on a bed of roses; hither came Earl Godwin’s body after his
     marvellous and terrible death, one of the well-known group of
     malignant Norman tales. It was in Winchester Cathedral that Henry
     Beauclerk took to wife his queen, Matilda, to the great joy of all
     English-speaking folk. Here Stephen of Blois was crowned King; and
     here, on the other hand, the Empress Maud was welcomed by city and
     people with high rejoicings; here, too, was drawn up and issued the
     final compact, in 1153, which closed the civil war of that weary
     reign and secured the crown to the young Prince Henry. He in his
     turn often sojourned in Winchester, and befriended in his strong
     way the growing city. The Cathedral witnessed another compact in
     the dark days of King John: the King was here reconciled to the
     English Church in the person of Stephen Langton; Henry III. and
     his Queen Eleanor, were here in 1242; and on May-day of that year
     ‘came the Queen into the Chapter-house to receive society.’ In 1275
     Edward I., with his Queen, was welcomed with great honour by the
     prior and brethren of St. Swithun, and attended service in the
     church. The christening of Arthur, Prince of Wales, elder brother
     of Henry VIII., was here; and here Henry VIII. met his astute
     rival, the Emperor Charles V. It was in Winchester Cathedral that
     the marriage of Philip and Mary took place, and the chair in which
     she sat is still to be seen in the church. The Stuart Kings loved
     the place. Here in the great rebellion was enacted that strange
     scene when, after the capture of the city, the mob rushed into the
     Cathedral, wild for booty and mischief, and finding in the chests
     nothing but bones, amused themselves by throwing them at the
     stained windows of the choir. It was at this time that Colonel
     Nathaniel Fiennes, a Parliamentary officer and an old Wykehamist,
     stood with drawn sword at the door of Wykeham’s chantry to protect
     it from violence. Since the days of the Merry Monarch, who was
     often at Winchester, and loved it so well that he built his palace
     here, no striking historical events have been enacted within its
     walls. The church by degrees recovered from the ruin of the
     Commonwealth time, and has had a quiet, happy life from that time
     onward, a tranquil grey building sleeping amidst its trees, in the
     heart of the most charming of all south English cities.”--(G. W.
     K.)

The best view of Winchester Cathedral is from the top of St. Catherine’s
hill, where the great mass rises solemnly over the distant city. Its
enormous length is broken by the bold transepts, which extend three bays
beyond the aisles. People are, as a rule, disappointed with their first
view of the exterior, because of its lack of decoration and the lowness
of the heavy Norman tower in the centre. The bright-green turf of the
Precincts and the trees, however, make with the grey walls an impressive
picture. A short avenue of trees leads through the Close to the western
door.

The =West Front= was originally the work of Edington (1345-1366). It is
118 feet in breadth and composed of a panelled gable of Perpendicular
style with hexagonal turrets. Immediately under the window in a gallery
over the entrance, the bishop used to give his benediction to the
people. The figure of William of Wykeham stands in the gable, replacing
an ancient bishop removed in 1860. No one seems to know whether it
represented William of Wykeham, Bishop Edington, or St. Swithun. Very
probably it was the latter, as its companions on the gable were St.
Peter and St. Paul, the three patron saints of the Saxon Cathedral.

The great =West Window= is divided by cross mullions into three
perpendicular and six horizontal compartments. It is said to be filled
with glass, collected from different parts of the building, after the
general smashing by the Parliamentary soldiers in 1646. Winston says
these pieces are very early Perpendicular glass, and may have been
placed together in the window, as we now see them, in Bishop Edington’s
time.

     “Before entering, the visitor should remark the grand view of the
     interior obtained through the open central door. The length of
     Winchester (520 feet from this entrance to the extreme eastern
     buttresses) exceeds that of any other cathedral on this side of the
     Alps, with the exception of Ely (560 feet) and of Canterbury, which
     is about five feet longer than Winchester. A certain coldness,
     arising from want of colour, is perhaps felt at first; but the eye
     soon learns to dwell contentedly on the magnificent forest of
     piers, and on all the graceful details above and around them. The
     string-course of corbel-heads and the light balustrade of the
     triforium in the nave should here be noticed as remarkably aiding
     the general effect.”--(R. J. K.)

The ground-plan shows a nave of eleven bays, a transept of three, a
choir of five, a presbytery of three and a Lady-Chapel at the east end
of three. All are furnished with side aisles.

Winchester is the longest cathedral in England, and the =Nave= is one of
the longest in the world. Fergusson says it is “perhaps the most
beautiful nave in England or elsewhere.” The view is overwhelmingly
grand and noble and the groining of the roof is striking in the extreme.

The triforium was sacrificed and the old Norman piers, recased, were
left to carry the lofty Perpendicular arches and exquisitely vaulted
roof. The Perpendicular lining and panelling disguise the fact that the
interior is really Norman.

     “The nave gains a special grandeur by the vaulting shafts rising
     from the very floor so that the eye follows them upwards tardily,
     as if they were more lofty than they actually are, to the capitals
     whence the groined roof springs. The aisle windows have a beauty
     worthy of careful notice.

     “A striking yet beautiful peculiarity is that Winchester nave,
     setting an example followed generally in Perpendicular churches,
     has no proper triforium--a balcony close above the nave arches
     taking its place. Owing to the thickness of the Norman masonry this
     arrangement was unavoidable.

     “The seven westerly piers on the south side retain the Norman
     stone-work faced with new mouldings. Norman arches remain behind
     the triforium wall; Norman shafts may be seen above the vaulting;
     and Norman flat buttresses are traceable outside between the
     southerly clerestory windows.”--(G. W. K.)

The Nave of Winchester, therefore, presents one of the most curious
examples of transformation from one style of architecture to another;
for here we have a perfect specimen of the Fourteenth and

[Illustration: WINCHESTER: NAVE, WEST]

[Illustration: WINCHESTER: FONT]

Fifteenth Centuries, yet it is from the ground to the roof the original
Norman building begun by Walkelyn. The extreme western part was rebuilt
by Edington, who began the transformation of the Nave from the Norman to
the Perpendicular, and continued by his successor William of Wykeham
(1366-1404).

At Wykeham’s death in 1404 the south side of the Nave was finished and
the north begun. The work was continued and finished by his successors,
Cardinal Beaufort and Bishop Waynflete (1404-1486). The arms on the
bosses of the vault of the nave are those of Wykeham, Cardinal Beaufort
and John of Gaunt (the latter’s father); the chained white hart is the
device of Richard II. and the lily that of Bishop Waynflete.

Students may compare the Nave of Winchester with the Choir of
Gloucester, which is also Norman in plan, “overlaid with a veneer of
masonry in the Pointed Style.” The Gloucester Choir is, however, of
later date, and instead of showing an amalgamation of the two styles, as
at Winchester, the Pointed is added to the Round-arched style.

The curious black basaltic stone =Font= was probably the gift of Bishop
Henry de Blois (1129-71), and some antiquarians think that it was
brought from Constantinople during the Second Crusade. The carvings
represent St. Nicholas of Myra, the patron saint of children, and much
honoured by the Normans.

     “Within the walls the most striking object of interest is
     undoubtedly the famous Norman font of black basaltic stone, which
     was probably placed in the church in the days of Walkelyn; it
     portrays in bold if rude relief the life and miracles of St.
     Nicholas of Myra. Next after the font may perhaps be noted the
     fine carved spandrels, Fourteenth Century work, of the
     choir-stalls, with the quaint _misereres_ of the seats; then Prior
     Silkstede’s richly carved pulpit of the Fifteenth Century, and the
     very interesting and valuable Renaissance panels of the pews, put
     in by William Kingsmill, last prior and first dean, in 1540. The
     chantries and tombs in this church are of unusual beauty and
     interest.”--(G. W. K.)

At the west end of the north aisle a square stone gallery called the
tribune is part of Edington’s work. It was used as a =Minstrels’ Gallery=
on great occasions.

The nave =Pulpit= was a gift from New College, Oxford, in 1885.

In the north aisle there is a monumental brass in memory of =Jane Austen=,
the authoress, and near the south-west door are fixed the flags of the
97th Regiment and memorials of the Crimean War. The west window of the
south aisle is filled with stained glass to their memory.

On the south side of the Nave and in the second bay from the Choir is
=Bishop Edington’s Chantry=. It was somewhat altered when the piers
against which it stands were transformed from Norman to Perpendicular.
This is the first of a number of very fine chantries, the most
interesting of which is that of =William of Wykeham=, which occupies the
entire space between two piers of the Nave on the south side in the
fifth bay from the west end.

This chapel was built by Wykeham on the site of an altar dedicated to
the Virgin, where he used to worship when a boy.

     “The design of William’s chantry is very beautiful; and it is one
     of the best remaining specimens of a Fourteenth Century monumental
     chapel. The foundation of the altar is still visible. The Bishop’s
     effigy, the comeliness of which, it has been suggested, may have
     induced Anthony Wood to describe him as having been of ‘a courtly
     presence,’ reposes on an altar-tomb in the centre, arrayed in cope
     and mitre. The pillow at the head is supported by two angels. At
     the feet three monks are represented offering up prayers for the
     repose of the departed soul. They are said, but questionably, to
     represent Wykeham’s three assistants in the cathedral
     works--William Wynford, his architect; Simon de Membury, his
     surveyor of the works; and John Wayte, controller.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Choir= is entered through a screen of stonework, by Garbett,
decorated with figures of James I. and Charles I., taken from an older
screen by Inigo Jones. The figure of Charles I. was much injured by the
Parliamentary troops who stabled their horses in the cathedral. It was
made by Hubert Le Seur, a pupil of John of Bologna and much employed by
Charles I.

The Choir consists of the old choir of the monks under the tower and of
the presbytery beyond it. This portion of the cathedral is of various
dates: the tower is late Norman; the piers, arches and clerestory of the
presbytery are Decorated (about 1350); the screen enclosing it is
Perpendicular (the work of Bishop Fox about 1524); the vaulting of the
presbytery (also the work of Bishop Fox); and the ceiling under the
tower, dates from 1634.

The visitor is struck by the enormous piers of the =Tower=, rebuilt after
1107 when Walkelyn’s tower, under which William Rufus was buried, fell.
Many thought “that the fall of the tower was a judgment for his sins.”

     “Early in the Twelfth Century occurred the fall of the tower of
     this Cathedral, celebrated from the peculiar circumstances with
     which it was accompanied, which are thus described by William of
     Malmsbury, who was living at the time:--‘A few country men conveyed
     the body [of the King, William Rufus], placed on a cart, to the
     cathedral of Winchester, the blood dripping all the way. Here it
     was committed to the ground _within the tower_, attended by many of
     the nobility, but lamented by few. The next year (1097) the tower
     fell; though I forbear to mention the different opinions on this
     subject, lest I should seem to assent too readily to unsupported
     trifles; most especially that the building might have fallen
     _through imperfect construction_, even though he had never been
     buried there.’ That this was really the case, the building itself
     affords us abundant evidence, and proves that even the Normans at
     this period were still bad masons and very imperfectly acquainted
     with the principles of construction. The tower which was rebuilt
     soon after the fall is still standing, and the enormous masses of
     masonry which were piled together to support it, and prevent it
     from falling again, show such an amazing waste of labour and
     material as clearly to prove that it was the work of very unskilful
     builders.”--(J. H. P.)

The tower was originally intended to serve as a lantern; but was ceiled
over in the reign of Charles I. In the centre is a medallion of the Holy
Family, the date 1634, and medallions of Charles I. and Henrietta Maria.

The very narrow arches opening to the transepts should be noticed.

The =Choir Stalls= are magnificent.

     “The stalls which extend from the eastern tower-piers to the first
     pier of the nave, are of oak, as black as ebony, and probably
     exhibit the very finest woodwork of their date and style (which is
     the best) in the Kingdom. They are early Decorated (Geometrical)
     work and their canopies and gables bear considerable resemblance to
     those of the tomb of Edmund Crouchback in Westminster Abbey. This
     would place their date about 1296. The beauty and variety of the
     carvings are wonderful. There is no repetition; and the grace and
     elegance, as well as the fidelity, with which the foliage is
     represented, are nowhere to be surpassed. The human heads are full
     of expression; and the monkeys and other animals sporting among the
     branches have all the same exquisite finish. The mode in which the
     cusps of the circles in the canopies are terminated, is worthy of
     attention; and in short, at this period of the revival of
     wood-carving, no better examples could be found for study and
     imitation. The _misereres_ below are of early character and
     interesting. Their date is rather later than those (Early English)
     in Exeter Cathedral--the most ancient in the Kingdom. The desks and
     stools in front of the upper range bear the initials of Henry
     VIII., Bishop Stephen Gardiner, and Dean Kingsmill and the date
     1540. The rich pulpit on the north side bears the name of its donor
     ‘Thomas Silkstede, prior’ on different parts of it.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Presbytery= is Early English, the work of Bishop Lucy (1189-1204). It
has a central alley of three bays. The arcading is very graceful. The
presbytery is closed at the sides by screens of stone tracery, most of
them erected by Bishop Fox, and bear his motto, _Est Deo Gratia_. Upon
these screens stand six mortuary chests (also the work of Bishop Fox)
containing the bones of the West Saxon Kings and bishops removed from
the crypt of the old Saxon cathedral into Walkelyn’s church by Bishop
Henry de Blois and placed in leaden sarcophagi. The chests are of wood,
carved, painted and gilded in the Renaissance Style, which was being
introduced into England in Fox’s time.

     “The vaulting of the presbytery (of wood) is the work of Bishop Fox
     (1500-1520), and displays on its bosses, a mass of heraldry besides
     (at the east end) the various emblems of the Passion together with
     a number of faces representing Pilate and his wife, Herod, Annas
     and Caiaphas, Judas, Malchus with the sword of Peter dividing his
     ear, Peter himself and many others. All are curious and are best
     seen from the gallery below the east window.

     “The east window of the choir is filled with Perpendicular glass, a
     little earlier than 1525, the work of Bishop Fox, whose arms
     impaled with those of the sees he held (Exeter, Bath and Wells,
     Durham and Winchester) and his motto _Est Deo Gratia_ are
     introduced in it.”--(R. J. K.)

Winston thinks that the only part of the glass in its original position
consists of the two figures occupying the two southernmost of the lower
lights and all the tracery lights except the top central one and the
three immediately below it.

     “The top central light is filled principally with some glass of
     Wykeham’s time and all the rest of the window with glass of Fox’s
     time, removed from other windows. In point of execution it is as
     nearly as perfect as painted glass can be. In it the shadows have
     attained their proper limit. It was at this period that glass
     painting attained its highest perfection as an art.”--(C. W.)

Beyond the tower-piers in the presbytery a plain tomb of Purbeck marble
was once the resting-place of =William Rufus=, killed in the New Forest in
1100 and first buried, as we have seen, under the Tower. His bones were
removed in the Twelfth Century by his nephew Bishop Henry de Blois and
are now mingled with those of Canute, Queen Emma and two Saxon bishops
in one of the mortuary chests on the screen of the Presbytery.

The piers and arches of the Presbytery are Decorated, dating from 1320
and 1350.

At the High Altar of the Choir Queen Mary was married to Philip of Spain
in July, 1554, by Bishop Gardiner. In Philip’s train were Alva, the
future scourge of the Low Countries, and Egmont, his famous victim. The
chair in which the bride sat is preserved in the Chapel of the Guardian
Angels.

At the back of the altar rises the magnificent =Reredos=, dating from the
latter end of the Fifteenth Century. In 1899 the final restoration of
the screen was completed by filling a niche that had been vacant for
three centuries. The altar-rails are of the time of Charles I. A
representation of the _Incarnation_ hangs over the altar placed there in
1899, when Benjamin West’s _Raising of Lazarus_ was removed to the South
Transept.

     “The Reredos is said to have been commenced by Cardinal Beaufort
     and completed by Bishop Fox and Prior Silkstede. It is an excellent
     specimen of Perpendicular work, executed in a fine, white soft
     stone; its elaborately canopied niches, pierced and crocketted
     pinnacles, pilaster buttresses, and centre projecting canopy, are
     surmounted at a height reaching nearly to the corbels, with a
     triple frieze of running leaves, Tudor flowers and quatrefoils.
     This Reredos is of the same type as those at Christ Church Priory
     and St. Alban’s, but its dimensions are greater and better
     proportioned. Its restoration is carried out with remarkable
     fidelity to the original work. The back is closely panelled in the
     upper part, and the lower part is richly decorated. No description
     could do justice to the beauty and effect of the whole work. Milner
     describes its exquisite workmanship as being as magnificent as this
     or any other nation can exhibit. The central part was restored as a
     memorial to the late Archdeacon Jacob.”--(G. W. K.)

On either side of the altar a door opens to the space behind the
Reredos, which in early days was the =Feretory=, a place for the =feretra=,
or shrines of the patron saints.

     “The Feretory, or Capitular Chapel, is immediately behind the altar
     and communicates with the sanctuary. Here the magnificent shrine of
     St. Swithun, of solid silver gilt and garnished with precious
     stones, the gift of King Edgar, used to be kept except on the
     festivals of the saint, when it was exposed to view on the Altar,
     or before it.

     “Many portions of statuary formerly belonging to the Great Screen
     and other parts of the building are here carefully preserved. From
     the platform behind the reredos may be observed the admirable
     connection of Fox’s new with De Lucy’s earlier work.”--(G. W. K.)

The old statue of the bishop, taken from the west front, may also be
seen here.

Back of the Reredos again stands the famous Edwardian =Arcade=, with nine
canopies (or tabernacles). Beneath it is the ancient entrance, the “=Holy
Hole=,” leading into the Crypt.

The presbytery aisles are greatly admired. Here we find beautiful
examples of Early English work and many splendid monuments and
chantries. Beyond lies the =Lady-Chapel=, with the =Chapel of the Guardian
Angels= on the north side and the =Bishop de Langton’s Chantry= on the
south.

The Lady-Chapel (1470) was founded by Elizabeth of York, Queen of Henry
VII., after the birth of her son, Arthur, as a testimony of her
gratitude. The arms of Henry VII., Elizabeth and the Prince of
Wales--the feathers divided by roses--are among the ornaments.

A plain slab of grey marble in front of the Lady-Chapel is supposed to
mark the =Tomb of Bishop de Lucy=, the builder of all this part of the
Cathedral. At the back of the Lady-Chapel a Reredos was placed by Dean
Branston in 1876.

Ascending the steps from the transept, we reach the north aisle of the
presbytery, and gain a fine view beyond this of the eastern portion of
the church, with its splendid chantries and chapels.

With the exception of the extreme east end of the Lady-Chapel, it is
all the work of Bishop Godfrey de Lucy (1189-1204), and consequently a
very early example of Early English. The design and details are of great
beauty. The three aisles or alleys (called procession paths or the _via
processionum_) are separated from each other by three arches on each
side and terminate eastward in chapels. These aisles were formed in
order to facilitate the circulation of processions.

The north chapel (part of De Lucy’s work) is called that of the =Guardian
Angels=, from the figures of angels still remaining on the vaulting; the
south chapel (De Lucy’s work) was fitted up as a chantry by Bishop
Langton, who died in 1500. The woodwork is rich and beautiful and the
vault elaborate with carved rebuses on his name.

     “The north and south walls, as far as the east walls of the two
     side chapels, are De Lucy’s work, and retain his rich Early English
     arcade. The eastern compartment on each side, as well as the east
     wall, have respectively a large Perpendicular window of seven
     lights with transom and tracery of a peculiar kind of
     subordination, or rather interpretation of patterns well worth a
     careful study. The vault is a complex and beautiful specimen of
     lierne-work. The capitals and bases of the vaulting-shafts are
     unusual and very beautiful. The carved panelling of the western
     half of this chapel, the seats, desk and screen of separation, are
     all excellent, and should be noticed. All this Perpendicular work
     is due to Prior Hunton (1470-1498) and his successor, Prior
     Silkstede (1498-1524). On the vault round the two central keys--one
     representing the Almighty, the other the Blessed Virgin--are the
     rebuses of the two priors: the letter T, the syllable Hun, the
     figure of a ton for Thomas Hunton; the figure 1 and the letters Por
     for Prior: the letter T, the syllable silk, the word sted with a
     horse below it, the figure 1 with letters as before, for Thomas
     Silkstede, prior. The walls of this chapel are covered with the
     remains of some very curious paintings illustrating the legendary
     history of the Virgin.

     “These are all the work of Prior Silkstede, whose portrait, with an
     inscription, is still faintly visible over the piscina.”--(R. J.
     K.)

Between the pillars of the central aisle are the =Chantries= of =Waynflete=
and =Beaufort=. Both were much injured by Cromwell’s troops and have been
restored. The delicacy and beauty of Waynflete’s canopy should be noted.
The lily, his device, constantly appears. His effigy lies here.

Beaufort appears in his Cardinal’s robes. He was half-brother to Henry
IV. and was bishop, statesman, soldier and banker to the royal family.
He is said to have burst into tears at the burning of Joan of Arc at
Rouen and to have left the scene. However, he persecuted the Lollards.
Between these two chantries lies the effigy of a =Thirteenth Century
Knight= in chain-mail and cross-legged. It is the only ancient military
figure in the cathedral. He is either Sir W. de Foix or Sir Arnold de
Gavaston.

Beyond the pier which connects De Lucy’s work with the Presbytery on the
north side is the =Chantry of Bishop Gardiner= (1531-1555), the “hammer of
heretics,” secretary to Cardinal Wolsey and Henry VIII.’s ambassador to
the Pope regarding his marriage. Bishop Gardiner also married “Bloody
Mary” to the King of Spain.

Opposite is =Bishop Fox’s Chantry=, built by Fox himself. It is the most
elaborate chantry in the Cathedral. The arches were once filled with
stained glass. The Bishop’s emblem, the pelican, appears everywhere. Fox
was secretary and Lord Privy Seal to Henry VII. and founder of Corpus
Christi, Oxford. This college restored the Bishop’s chantry. Blind
several years before his death, Fox used to be led every day to the
small oratory attached to his Chantry.

The visitor should study these chantries, beginning with Edington’s in
the Nave and ending with Gardiner’s, for they form a continuous record
of the growth and development of Perpendicular and Tudor architecture
from 1366 to 1555.

     “In no English church except Westminster Abbey and St. Paul’s, lie
     so many men of name. For just as the features of the Cathedral
     represent all the successive phases and changes of the art of
     building, until it has been styled a ‘School of English
     Architecture,’ so it may be said to be the home and centre of our
     early history. Long is the roll of kings and statesmen who came
     hither and whose bones here lie at rest. Cynegils and Cenwalh, West
     Saxon Kings, founders of the church, are here; Egbert was buried
     here in 838; Ethelwulf also and Edward the Elder and Edred. The
     body of Alfred the Great lay a while in the church, then was
     transferred to the new minster he had built, and finally rested at
     Hyde Abbey. And, most splendid name of all, the great Cnut was
     buried here, as was also his son, Harthacnut, as bad and mean as
     his father was great. The roll of kings was closed when Red
     William’s blood-dripping corpse came jolting hither in the country
     cart from New Forest.”--(G. W. K.)

The two =Transepts= are similar. Both have east and west aisles and both
are of two periods. The earlier parts are plain rude Norman, massive and
grand in effect. The arches, both of triforium and clerestory, are
square-edged like the pier-arches below them. They should be compared
with Ely Cathedral, the work of Walkelyn’s brother, Simeon. It is
interesting to note that the central towers of both fell,--Walkelyn’s
in 1107 and Simeon’s in 1321.

The =North Transept= contains five altars. On the south side against the
organ screen is the =Chapel of the Holy Sepulchre=, the walls of which are
covered with rude wall-paintings illustrative of the passion of our
Saviour.

The =South Transept= is similar to the North transept. In its eastern
aisles are two chapels formed by screens of stone tracery work. The
south chapel is called =Silkstede’s Chapel=, from Prior Silkstede, whose
name, Thomas, is carved on the screen with the monogram M. A. of the
Virgin and a skein of silk, his rebus. The beautiful iron-work is of a
later period. A plain black marble slab in Prior Silkstede’s Chapel
marks the =Tomb of Izaak Walton=, “the prince of fishermen,” who died in
1683.

Entrances from both transepts lead to the crypt.

In the west aisle of the south transept is the =Chapter-House= (formerly
the sacristy), above which is the Library. The doorway in the south wall
led to the domestic buildings of the monastery.

The =Crypt= is entered from the north transept. It is Norman, dark and
massive, and suggestive of a remote age. It is frequently flooded; for
the level of the river seems to have risen since the Eleventh Century.
Like other crypts, it serves to show the original plan of the Norman
Church. It is in three parts: the western, consisting of the
substructure of the original choir; a long aisleless chapel of three
bays beneath the present retro-choir; and the substructure of
Courtenay’s Lady-Chapel built between 1486 and 1492. Beneath the

[Illustration: WINCHESTER: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: WINCHESTER: WEST FRONT]

high altar is the sacred well, the centre of Saxon worship before the
Cathedral had an existence.

The =Roofs= of this cathedral also deserve a visit.

     “In the roof of the nave may be seen the original Norman shafts
     running up above Wykeham’s vault, and in those of the aisles the
     Norman arches of the triforium, best developed at the east end of
     the nave aisle-roof. The transept roofs show to this day what
     Bishop Walkelyn did with Hempage-wood. From the leads of the tower
     there is a very striking view over the city and its environs.”--(R.
     J. K.)

The =Bells= hang in the great central tower: three are dated 1734, the
others 1737, 1742, 1772, 1804 and 1814. The tenor bell was recast in
1892.

Within the Precincts stood the Royal Castle at the time of the Norman
Conquest. This was pulled down by Henry de Blois in the Twelfth
Century.




CHICHESTER

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY TRINITY. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: FIVE AISLES; SPIRE; CAMPANILE.


Chichester (the camp of Cissa) stands at the head of an arm of the
English Channel. Its Cathedral is the only one in England that can be
seen from the sea.

In 1082 the South Saxon See was removed from Selsey to Chichester. The
church of the monastery, dedicated to St. Peter, seems to have been used
until Bishop Ralph Luffa (about whom little or nothing is known) founded
the existing Cathedral. This was completed in 1108, partly destroyed by
fire in 1114 and partly restored by the same Ralph, who died in 1123.

     “Chichester Cathedral, though one of the smallest, is to the
     student of Mediæval architecture one of the most interesting and
     important of our cathedrals. At Salisbury one or two styles of
     architecture are represented; at Canterbury two or three; at
     Chichester every single style is to be seen without a break from
     the Eleventh to the Sixteenth Century. It is an epitome of English
     architectural history for five hundred years. Early Norman, late
     Norman, late Transitional, early Lancet, late Lancet, early
     Geometrical, late Geometrical, Curvilinear, Perpendicular and Tudor
     work all appear in the structure side by side. We have many other
     heterogeneous and composite cathedrals, but nowhere, except perhaps
     at Hereford, can the whole sequence of Mediæval styles be read so
     well as at Chichester.”--(F. B.)

Chichester was consecrated in 1148, again suffered from fire in
1186-1187 and was restored and enlarged by Bishop Seffrid II.
(1180-1204).

     “The fire of 1186 was not as serious as that of Canterbury in 1182,
     so that there was no need of rebuilding. Bishop Seffrid, however,
     covered the Cathedral with a stone vault and added the necessary
     buttresses and flying-buttresses. He also built the Choir, making
     great use of Purbeck marble. He removed the Norman apse and built
     the aisled retro-choir of two bays.

     “This is the architectural gem of the Cathedral. The idea of it
     probably came from Hereford, where the retro-choir is a few years
     earlier. At Hereford, however, the retro-choir projects
     picturesquely and forms an eastern transept. The central piers of
     the Chichester retro-choir are remarkably beautiful. They consist
     of a central column surrounded by four shafts very widely detached;
     columns and shafts are of Purbeck marble. The capitals are
     Corinthianesque; their height is proportioned to the diameters of
     the column and shafts. This beautiful capital was reproduced a few
     years later by St. Hugh at Lincoln. The triforium is of quite
     exceptional beauty, as indeed is the whole design. Semicircular
     arches occur in the pier arcade and triforium, and some of the
     abaci are square; otherwise the design is pure Gothic. Here, as at
     Abbey Dore, St. Thomas’s, Portsmouth, Boxgrove and Wells, we see
     the transition to the ‘pure and undefiled Gothic’ of St. Hugh’s
     choir at Lincoln. In these beautiful churches the ancient
     Romanesque style breathed its last.

     “The aisles of the new retro-choir were continued on either side of
     the first bay of the Norman Lady-Chapel whose three bays had
     probably been remodelled before the fire in Transitional fashion.
     The capitals of the Lady-Chapel are of exceptional interest and
     importance, as showing experimental foliation which had not yet
     settled down into the conventional leafage of early Gothic. The
     apse also of the south transept was replaced by a square chapel,
     now used as a Library, in the vaulting of which the Norman zigzag
     occurs.

     “A little later in the Lancet period was built (1199-1245) the
     lovely south porch, with small exquisite mouldings, and the
     charming foliated capitals and corbels. The difference between
     early Transitional, late Transitional and Lancet foliation may be
     well seen by examining successively the capitals of the
     Lady-Chapel, the triforium of the retro-choir and the south porch.
     The north porch is almost equally fine. The vaulting ribs, square
     in section, show that the two porches both belong to the very first
     years of the Thirteenth Century. Rather later, the sacristy was
     built on to the south porch, with a massive vault supported by
     foliated corbels.”--(F. B.)

Chichester’s saint was one of its own bishops--Richard de la Wych--who
died in 1253. He was canonized in 1261. In 1276, his remains were
removed from their first resting-place to the shrine in the south
transept opposite the beautiful Early Decorated window (one of the
loveliest examples of this style in England). Edward I., his Queen and
the Court were present at the Translation. From that time the shrine
received many visits from pilgrims.

The central tower was built during the first half of the Fourteenth
Century, and the spire was completed at the end of the Fourteenth
Century. The campanile was built by Bishop John de Langton (1305-1336).
Bishop Sherborne (1507-1536) added the upper portion of the choir-stalls
and the decorations of the south transept. These are the ornamentations
referred to by Fuller, who quaintly says Bishop Seffrid “bestowed the
cloth and making on the church, while Bishop Sherborne gave the trimming
and best lace thereto, in the reign of Henry VII.”

In 1643, the Parliamentarian troops broke the organ, defaced the
monuments and hacked the seats and stalls, which, of course,
necessitated restorations and repairs. Repairs, restorations and
alterations were also made from 1843 to 1856, the most important of
which was the reconstruction of the central tower and spire under Sir
Gilbert Scott. In 1867 the floor of the Lady-Chapel was lowered to its
original level and the Gilbert Chapel restored; and during the last half
of the Nineteenth Century, the cloister was restored and the roof of the
Lady-Chapel, and a new north-western tower designed by Mr. J. L.
Pearson.

     “The Cathedral stands on the south of West Street, where a fine
     view may be had of the whole of the north side of the building and
     of the detached Campanile. The Close occupies entirely the
     south-west quadrant of the city, being bounded by South and West
     Streets and the City Wall. The central tower and spire, rising to a
     height of 277 feet, are conspicuous for many miles around, but the
     west front is much shut in. Perhaps the most pleasing view is that
     seen from the meadows on the south of the city, from which point
     the Campanile fits in admirably with the general mass of the
     building.”--(J. C.-B.)

This =Campanile=, in which eight bells hang, stands on the north side of
the Cathedral, and was built in the Fourteenth Century. It covers a
square of 50 feet and consists of two cubes with an octagonal lantern (8
feet).

The =Central Tower= and its delicate =Spire= have had a peculiar history.
Exposed to the south-west gales from the Channel, the authorities in the
Seventeenth Century had fears for its safety; and, consequently the
upper part was taken down and rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren, who
placed within it a pendulum-stage of wood and iron to steady it. This
ingenious invention lasted until 1861; and it is said that Wren’s
contrivance prevented the spire from toppling over when the collapse
occurred.

About 1859 this spire showed signs of weakness, and underpinning was of
no avail. On the 21st of February it inclined slightly to the
south-west, then seemed to right itself; and then, amid a great cloud of
dust, descended perpendicularly into the walls of the tower, doing no
harm to the roof of the church. The fall only lasted a few seconds. As
this happened in Queen Victoria’s reign, the old Sussex prophecy was
fulfiled:

    “If Chichester Church steeple fall
     In England there’s no King at all.”

The rebuilding was entrusted to Sir Gilbert Scott with a stipulation
that the new tower and spire should be exact reproductions of the
originals. Scott, however, added six feet to the height.

     “The central tower, which is battlemented, with octagonal turrets
     at the angles, also battlemented, has in its principal or second
     story, two couplets in each face, with a quatrefoil in the head,
     each under a pointed arch. The spire is of beautiful design,
     octagonal; in each face is a window of two lights, flanked by
     pinnacled turrets, crocketed and canopied. Its elegance has
     constantly led to its being compared with that of Salisbury, which,
     however, differs from it in age and many other particulars, as well
     as size. It forms not only the central but the principal feature of
     the church, all whose lines are designed to work in with it, a very
     perfect effect of unity, as at Salisbury, being attained. It is
     locally said that the master built Salisbury and the man,
     Chichester.”--(W. J. L.)

The =West Front= is composed of three stories, a gable, porch and two
towers. The northern tower is modern, copied from its twin, which is
Early English above the third story. The great =West Window= is modern,
copied from Fourteenth Century examples. The central porch (Early
English) is of the same date and character as the south porch, which
opens into the cloisters. The north porch (Early English) lies between
the aisle and the north-west tower.

The north wall of the nave has some curious buttresses. In the south
transept notice a richly traceried window (Decorated), of seven lights,
with a beautiful rose window above. A trefoiled string-course ornaments
the parapet in the transept and choir. The =East Window= consists of three
lancet windows, with a rose window of seven foliated circles of the
choir in the gable; it is flanked by arcaded pinnacles with small
spires.

The first view of the interior of Chichester is somewhat severe.

     “On entering the nave the eye is at once caught by the five aisles,
     a peculiarity shared by no other English cathedral but that of
     Manchester, although some parish churches have it on a smaller
     scale, as Taunton and Coventry. On the Continent the increased
     number of aisles is common, witness Beauvais, Cologne, Milan,
     Seville, and seven-aisled Antwerp. Grand effects of light and shade
     are produced by these five aisles: remark especially the view from
     the extreme north-east corner of the north aisle, looking across
     the cathedral. The great depth of the triforium shadows is owing to
     the unusual width of this wall passage. The breadth of the nave (91
     feet) is greater than that of any English cathedral except York
     (103 feet).

     “The first two stories of the south-west tower at the end of the
     nave deserve examination. The rude, long capitals, and plain
     circular arches, probably indicate that it formed a part of the
     first church completed by Bishop Ralph in 1108. The nave itself, as
     far as the top of the triforium, and the two aisles immediately
     adjoining, are the work of the same Bishop (died 1123),--or should
     perhaps be described as having formed part of the Norman cathedral
     completed in 1148. The clerestory above, and the shafts of Purbeck
     marble which lighten the piers, are Seffrid’s additions (died
     1204). The vaulting is perhaps somewhat later; and it was because
     it was determined, after the burning of 1187, to replace with a
     stone vault the wooden roofs to which the frequent fires had been
     owing that Seffrid carried up his vaulting-shafts along the face of
     the Norman piers, some of which he re-cased. The two exterior
     aisles, north and south, were probably added by Bishop Neville
     (died 1244), when it became necessary to provide additional room
     for chantries and relic shrines. The positions of the various
     altars are marked by piscinas and aumbries in the walls. The two,
     however, occur together in the south aisle alone; in the north are
     aumbries only, an arrangement possibly resulting from the feeling
     with which that quarter was always anciently regarded. A certainly
     triplicity pervades all this part of the cathedral, which was
     dedicated by Bishop Seffrid to the Holy Trinity. The side shafts
     are triple throughout. The bearing-shafts of the vaulting are
     clustered in threes, and branch out with three triple vaulting-ribs
     above. The transitional character of Bishop Seffrid’s work is
     especially marked in the clerestory, the inner arcade of which is
     pointed, whilst the windows themselves are round-headed.”--(R. J.
     K.)

The nave is full of monuments and tablets, some of which are by Flaxman.
The one in the =Chapel of the Four Virgins= (north side) is a memorial to
Collins the poet. Near it are the two figures of the =Earl of Arundel= and
=Maud=, his wife. Arundel was beheaded in 1297. He is represented in full
armour and at his feet is a lion.

     “The most beautiful monument now remaining in the church is that
     which is said to represent Maud, Countess of Arundel (1270). The
     modelling of the whole figure and the long flowing lines of her
     robes are worthy of careful study. The hands are clasped over the
     breast with the forearms bent upwards slightly towards the face. On
     each of the long sides of the base supporting the figure are six
     elongated quatrefoil panels, containing in all six female figures
     and six shields. Between the quatrefoils are winged heads of ten
     angelic figures. The blazoning of the shields is entirely gone, and
     the brilliant colouring that once covered the entire monument is
     only to be traced in a few places. The outer robe still shows

[Illustration: CHICHESTER.]

[Illustration: CHICHESTER: NAVE, EAST]

     some signs of the rich blue with which it used to be covered. The
     face of the figure appears to be badly mutilated, but the damage to
     the features has been done principally by an endeavour to preserve
     them.”--(H. C. C.)

In the =choir= we find stalls that have been in use since the Fourteenth
Century. On the backs of the =choir-stalls= pictures by Bernardi represent
Ceadwalla and Henry VIII. confirming privileges to the bishops of their
day.

In the =south transept= is a beautiful window, better seen from the
Cloisters because the bad glass spoils the effect of the tracery.

At the end of the south side in the =Chapel of St. Mary Magdalene= St.
Richard’s head was preserved in a silver reliquary in the aumbry in the
north wall.

The Chapel of St. Mary Magdalene is balanced by the =Chapel of St.
Katherine= at the end of the north-choir-aisle. In the =south-choir-aisle=,
two curiously carved =Slabs=, representing the _Raising of Lazarus_ and
_Martha and Mary meeting Jesus_, are supposed to have been brought from
the first Cathedral in Selsey when the See was transferred to Chichester
in 1082.

A doorway in the north-choir-aisle leads to the old =Chapel of St. John
the Baptist and St. Edmund the King=. The vaulting is unlike any other in
the Cathedral. The zigzag, or chevron, occurs upon the moulding of the
ribs. A finely carved head appears on the spring of the arch. This
chapel is now used as the =Library=.

     “At Chichester there were built, one after another, four sets of
     chapels--of St. George and St. Clement on the south of the south
     aisle, and of St. Thomas, St. Anne and St. Edmund on the north of
     the north aisle. The WINDOWS should be studied in the above order;
     they form quite an excellent object-lesson of the evolution of
     bar-tracery from plate-tracery, itself a derivative from such
     designs as that of the east window of the south transept chapel.
     When the chapels were completed, the Norman aisle-walls were
     pierced, and arches were inserted where Norman windows had been;
     and the Lancet buttresses, which had been added when the nave vault
     was erected, now found themselves inside the church, buttressing
     piers instead of walls. The new windows on the south side were
     built so high that the vaulting of the chapels had to be tilted up
     to allow room for their heads; externally they were originally
     crowned with gables, the weatherings of which may be seen outside.
     In St. Thomas’s chapel is a charming example of a simple Thirteenth
     Century reredos.”--(F. B.)

Above the south porch there is a small chamber popularly known as the
“=Lollards’ Prison=.”

Between the back of the reredos (modern) and the entrance to the
Lady-Chapel is the Retro-choir, or presbytery, which many critics
consider the chief glory of Chichester.

     “The design in detail of these two bays is very different in
     character from the three in the choir, which are like those in the
     nave. The two piers of Purbeck marble are circular, and about them
     are grouped four detached shafts of the same material. They are
     united only at the base and by the abacus above the capitals, which
     are beautifully carved. The main arches in the two bays are not
     pointed, but round, like those in the nave and choir; but, unlike
     the latter, they have deeply cut mouldings in three orders. The
     triforium arcade above, on the north and south sides, has moulded
     and carved details of a similar character. Some of the beautifully
     carved figure-work still remains in the spandrels between the
     subsidiary pointed arches. But the most beautiful piece of design
     in all this work is in the arches of the triforium passage across
     the east wall, above the entrance to the Lady-Chapel.”--(F. B.)

=St. Richard’s Shrine= stood on a platform in the bay in the presbytery
immediately behind the High Altar. This platform was removed at the
time of the general restoration in 1861-1867.

The =Lady-Chapel= was once decorated with designs in colour, remains of
which are still to be seen. The new =Reredos= is of alabaster. The glass
of the window is also modern. Here is the =Tomb of Bishop Ralph=, founder
of the original Norman church.

The visitor should walk around the =Cloisters= for the sake of the
exterior views of the Cathedral. The south transept window is well seen
here. Note the beautiful tracery of the circular window above it. The
position of the Cloisters, lying eastward under the Transept and Choir,
instead of westward along the Nave, is unusual.

     “The cloister which was added in the Fifteenth Century is of a
     peculiarly irregular shape, and encloses the south transept within
     the paradise. It has been much restored at different times. The
     present roof is of tiles and is carried on common rafters. Each has
     a cross tie, and the struts are shaped so as to give a pointed arch
     form to each one. The old Fifteenth Century wooden cornice still
     remains in some sections. The tracery is divided into four
     compartments by mullions, and each head is filled with cusped work.
     Round the cloister are placed the old houses of the Treasurer, the
     Royal Chaplains, and Wiccamical Prebendaries. Above the door
     leading to the house of the Royal Chaplains is an interesting
     monument of the Tudor Period. It is a panel divided into two
     compartments by a moulded stone fragment. Leading out of the south
     walk is a doorway, through which the deanery may be seen beyond the
     end of a long walled passage known as ST. RICHARD’S WALK. Looking
     back northwards, there is fine view of the spire and transept from
     the end of this walk.”--(H. C. C.)

In the south-east corner the Cloister passes under the west end of =St.
Faith’s Chapel=, founded in the Fourteenth Century.




SALISBURY

     DEDICATION: ST. MARY; A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: SPIRE; CHAPTER-HOUSE.


Salisbury, on the edge of the great Salisbury Plain, haunted by
Ingoldsby’s “Dead Drummer” and not far from weird Stonehenge, is famous
for its beautiful Early English Cathedral.

     “The visitor who sees it first on a bright day can never forget the
     impression it has made on his mind. Unlike the architects of the
     so-called ‘Great Gothic Revival,’ the builders of Salisbury put
     their trust in proportion. Incidentally they made their details as
     elaborate and as perfect as possible; but they were subordinated to
     the general effect, and when, during the frightful ravages of the
     ‘restorers,’ let loose upon the church in the past and present
     centuries, many of the best and most precious of these details and
     ornaments perished or were renewed, the main building survives,
     raising its exquisitely graceful spire into the blue sky, its
     thousand pinnacles all pointing upward and gleaming white against
     the deep green of the old trees and the emerald turf of the
     surrounding close. England can show no fairer sight. ‘How long,’
     asked an American visitor, ‘does it take to grow such turf?’ ‘Oh!
     not long,’ was the reply; ‘only a couple of centuries.’ One feels
     at Salisbury that whether the answer was given there or at Oxford,
     of no place could it be more true. Though, when we look near
     enough, we can see that fresh and white as is the general effect,
     the masonry of Salisbury is of great antiquity, except of course
     where it has been restored; and antiquity adds another charm, for
     Salisbury was the first complete cathedral built after the
     Romanesque tradition had died out, as St. Paul’s is the first built
     after it had been revived. In other cathedrals there are fragments
     of the same style, and they are always the most

[Illustration: CHICHESTER: SCREEN]

[Illustration: SALISBURY: NORTH]

     beautiful features of the whole building. We can recall the western
     porch at Ely, and the Angel Choir at Lincoln, and the chapter-house
     at Southwell; but, here, at Salisbury, we have the whole vast
     cathedral, all in the same supreme style, every part fitting into
     its place, and adding its contribution to the general effect, never
     in contrast but always in harmony until the effect is attained.
     What that is may be read in countless books of travel or criticism.
     Salisbury Cathedral, like the Parthenon and all other--there are
     not many--buildings which tempt one to call them poems in
     stone--produces a different feeling in the minds of all who see
     it.”--(W. J. L.)

Salisbury was built on a site unoccupied by a former church. The
“Bishop’s Stool” had long been at Old Sarum on Salisbury Plain, a
fortified castle and cathedral; but the castle became too important and
Bishop Poore and his canons removed the See in the early part of the
Thirteenth Century. An old legend says that the site of the new
Cathedral was determined by an arrow shot by an archer from the ramparts
into the green vale below.

The first stone was laid for the Pope, who had consented to the removal
of the church from Old Sarum; the second, for Stephen Langton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, then with young Henry III. in Wales; the
third, for Bishop Poore; the fourth was laid by William Longespée, Earl
of Salisbury; and the fifth, by the Countess Ela, his wife. When the
King returned from Wales many of his courtiers visited Salisbury, “and
each laid his stone, binding himself to some special contribution for a
period of seven years.”

The building was undertaken by Elias of Dereham, clerk of the works; and
his successors were Nicholas of Portland and Richard of Fairleigh. The
latter completed the spire in 1375.

The Cathedral was consecrated in 1258, by the Archbishop of Canterbury
in the presence of Henry III. and his Queen.

The Cloisters and Chapter-House were built in the Thirteenth Century and
the Spire (which seems, however, to have formed part of the original
plan) in the Fourteenth.

     “The history of no English cathedral is so clear and so readily
     traceable as that of Salisbury. It was the first great church built
     in England in what was then the new or pointed style (Early
     English); of which it still remains, as a whole, one of the finest
     and most complete examples. The Abbey Church of Westminster,
     commenced in 1245, and completed to the east end of the choir in
     1269, is the only great building of this age in England which can
     be considered finer than Salisbury; and it is probable that Henry
     III. was induced to undertake the rebuilding of Westminster from
     admiration of the rising glories of the new Wiltshire cathedral,
     which he had several times visited. On the Continent, the great
     rival of Salisbury is Amiens; commenced in the same year (1220) and
     completed, nearly as at present, in 1272.

     “The usual alterations took place in Salisbury Cathedral at the
     Reformation, when much of the painted glass is said to have been
     removed by Bishop Jewell. Although desolate and abandoned, it
     escaped material profanation during the Civil War, and workmen were
     even employed to keep it in repair. On the Restoration, a report of
     the general condition of the cathedral was supplied by Sir
     Christopher Wren, and certain additions for the strengthening of
     the spire were made at his recommendation. The great work of
     destruction was reserved for a later period and more competent
     hands. Under Bishop Barrington (1782-1791) the architect Wyatt was,
     unhappily, let loose upon Salisbury; and his untiring use of axe
     and hammer will stand a very fair comparison with the labours of an
     iconoclast emperor, or with the burning zeal of an early Mohammedan
     caliph. He swept away screens, chapels and porches; desecrated and
     destroyed the tombs of warriors and prelates; obliterated ancient
     paintings; flung stained glass by cartloads into the city ditch;
     and levelled with the ground the Campanile--of the same date as the
     Cathedral itself--which stood on the north side of the churchyard.
     His operations at the time were pronounced ‘tasteful, effective and
     judicious.’ The best point of view is from the north-east, which
     Rickman has pronounced ‘the best general view of a cathedral to be
     had in England, displaying the various portions of this interesting
     building to the greatest advantage.’ The Cathedral is built (and
     roofed) throughout with freestone obtained from the Chilmark
     quarries, situated about twelve miles from Salisbury towards
     Hendon, and still worked. The stone belongs to the Portland beds of
     the oölite. The pillars and pilasters of the interior are of
     Purbeck marble. The local rhyme in which the cathedral is
     celebrated may here be quoted; it is attributed by Godwin, who
     gives a Latin version of it, to a certain Daniel Rogers:

    “‘As many days as in one year there be,
     So many windows in this church you see.
     As many marble pillars here appear
     As there are hours through the fleeting year.
     As many gates as moons one here does view,
     Strange tale to tell, yet not more strange than true.’

     The great point to which the attention of the stranger is at once
     drawn is, of course, the grand peculiarity of Salisbury, the
     ‘silent finger’ of its _spire_. This is the loftiest in England,
     rising 400 feet above the pavement (Chichester said, but very
     doubtfully, to have been built in imitation of it, is 271 feet in
     height; Norwich 313 feet) and its summit is 30 feet above the top
     of St. Paul’s.”--(R. J. K.)

Dean Stanley said that Westminster is all-glorious within and Salisbury,
all-glorious without.

     “Much has been written on the beauty of the Cathedral church of
     Salisbury, the chastity of its style and the purity of its detail.
     The east end may be said to display the utmost refinement of the
     Early English era. Every subordinate feature is so perfectly
     disposed, so admirably carried out and adapted to its purpose, so
     necessary to the full effect of the whole, so simple and yet so
     rich, that nothing, even by the most critical, can be found wanting
     there or considered _de trop_. The northern side is scarcely less
     perfect; the simple lancet openings of its eastern transept, the
     more fully developed quatrefoils of the central gable and the still
     more advanced northern porch beyond these, all mark the progress of
     construction. At the intersection rises the still later tower and
     spire, the final limb of the whole, on an embattled lower stage of
     earlier date. It is rich to the utmost limit. Every ballflower,
     every projecting shaft and moulding sparkles for itself and casts
     its own diminutive shadow upon its fellow, entirely relieving the
     wall-surface of that flatness which is and must be the fault in
     every view purporting to suggest its elegance. The church stands
     alone; like a model of itself; in its entirety perhaps the most
     stately of which we can boast.”--(A. A.)

In the close, which is about half a square mile, there are three gates:
the South, or =Harnham=; the East, or =St. Anne’s=; and the North, or =Close
Gate=, built about 1327.

     “The first thing to be noticed in Salisbury is the ample breadth of
     the space in which its cathedral stands, the beauty of which space
     is enhanced by rows and avenues of magnificent trees; so that it is
     difficult to conceive a more appropriate enclosure in which to find
     ‘the most chaste of English’ churches. Salisbury covers no less
     than eight acres of ground.

     “Entering from the High Street, the visitor finds himself almost in
     another township. A street lined with houses conducts to the
     Cathedral lawn, where from the north-eastern extremity the full
     proportions of the church may be comprehended. The whole north side
     of the close is thus open. On the east we find another gateway and
     the entrance to the Palace; on the other side the Choristers’
     Green, in itself another little close. The west is occupied by a
     group of interesting and extremely handsome houses of various
     dates. Here are the Deanery, standing in its own grounds opposite
     the Cathedral façade; the King’s House, a long, many-gabled mansion
     of the early Fifteenth Century, with mullioned windows and a
     vaulted porch, the occasional resting-place of the English monarchs
     on their passage through Salisbury; and the Wardrobe, distinguished
     by its heavy roof, its projecting double gables, and the immense
     square windows, back and front, through which the evening sun
     penetrates with a curious half-ghostly gleam. These form the most
     effective line of buildings of the enclosure, which at this least
     trim but not the less picturesque side, terminates at the Harnham
     Gate.”--(A. A.)

Raising our eyes to the =Tower= and =Spire=, we note:

     “The Early English portion, however, terminates with the first
     story, about eight feet above the roof; the two additional stories
     and the spire above them date from the reign of Edward III. The
     walls of the upper stories of the tower are covered with a blind
     arcade, richly canopied, and pierced for light with double windows
     on all four sides. Above each story is a parapet with
     lozenge-shaped traceries, which are repeated in the three bands
     encircling the spire. At each angle of the tower is an octagonal
     stair-turret, crowned with a small crocketed spire. The great
     spire, itself octagonal, rises from between four small
     richly-decorated pinnacles. Its walls are two feet in thickness
     from the bottom to a height of twenty feet; from thence to the
     summit their thickness is only nine inches. The spire is filled
     with a remarkable frame of timber-work, which served as a scaffold
     during its erection. While making some repairs in 1762, the workmen
     found a cavity on the south side of the capstone in which was a
     leaden box, enclosing a second of wood which contained a piece of
     much decayed silk or fine linen, no doubt a relic (possibly of the
     Virgin, to whom the cathedral is dedicated) placed there in order
     to avert lightning and tempest.”--(R. J. K.)

Entering by the west door we look down the =Nave=.

     “The interior is indeed very fine. It could hardly help being fine;
     a nave so spacious and so proportioned could under no circumstances
     be a failure. It is immensely high and as long in proportion. The
     proportion of height to span (2½ to 1) is better than in most
     English churches. The harmony of the design--practically the same
     from east to west and from north to south--is unique in England,
     and is most impressive. The charming way, too, in which the
     architect has contrived that we should have a vista of another
     miniature church in the Lady-Chapel--a cathedral within a
     cathedral--is worthy of all commendation. But, as in Lincoln nave,
     to the eye every support is alarmingly insufficient for the work it
     has to do; the piers are too tall and slender, the walls too thin
     and pierced with too many openings. The triforium is a most
     unfortunate design: in harmony neither with the arcade below, nor
     with the clerestory above; its outer arches ugly in themselves and
     discordant with every other arch in the church; nor could it be
     expected that its dark marble shafts would tell against a dark
     background--black on black. Add to this the dreadfully new look of
     everything--partly due to the very perfection of the masonry,
     partly because Scott has been here--and the overpowering glare: one
     almost feels as if one were in the Crystal Palace.”--(F. B.)

The most interesting tomb in the nave is that of =William Longespée=, the
first Earl of Salisbury, son of Henry II. and Fair Rosamond, who died at
his castle of Old Sarum in 1226.

     “The effigy is entirely in chain-mail, covering the mouth as well
     as the chin in an unusual manner. Over the mail is the short
     cyclas, or surcoat. On the earl’s shield are the six golden
     lioncels also borne by his grandfather Geoffrey, Count of Anjou.
     Longespée acquired the earldom of Salisbury through marriage with
     its heiress, the Countess Ela. He took an active part in public
     affairs throughout the reign of John; joined the Earl of Chester in
     an expedition to the Holy Land, and was present at the battle of
     Damietta in 1221, where the Christians were defeated. He fought
     much in Flanders and in France; was present on the King’s side at
     Runnymede; and was one of the witnesses to the Great Charter.”--(R.
     J. K.)

The curious monument of the =Boy Bishop= was removed to its present
position about 1680, when it was found buried under the seating of the
choir. It is Early English and represents an effigy of the boy in
bishop’s robes and mitre, holding a crozier in his left hand. The
boy-bishop was elected by the choir-boys in many of the English
cathedrals on St. Nicholas’s Day (Dec. 6) and he held office until Holy
Innocents’ Day (Dec. 28), during which time he was practically bishop.
Law provided that if a boy-bishop died during his term of power, he was
to be buried in his vestments and with all the pomp of an episcopal
funeral; and, therefore, we must conclude that this boy died during his
short rule.

From the nave we enter the =North Transept=,

     “passing under the wide Perpendicular arch, which (as at Canterbury
     and Wells) was inserted early in the Fifteenth Century by way of
     counter-thrust against the weight of the central tower, under which
     the central piers had already given away to some extent, as will be
     at once perceived. It is owing to this settlement of the piers that
     the spire is out of the perpendicular. The triforium and clerestory
     of the nave are carried round the transept; the triforium on the
     north side, being replaced by two-light window of very elegant
     character. The clerestory window above, with its slender pilasters,
     and graceful flow of lines, deserves especial notice. Each transept
     has an eastern aisle divided by clustered piers into three bays.
     The screens which formerly enclosed the chapel in each of these
     bays were swept away by Wyatt. A staircase in the angle of the
     transept leads upward to the tower, which may be ascended by
     staircases in each of its flanking turrets. The top of the tower is
     called the Eight Doors, from the double doors on each side, through
     which the visitor will obtain magnificent views over the town and
     surrounding country. The first story of the tower is of Early
     English date, and originally formed a lantern, open to the nave. It
     is surrounded by an arcade of slender pilasters. The ascent of the
     spire--which is a formidable undertaking--is made internally by a
     series of slender ladders as far as a little door about forty feet
     below the vane, and from that point the adventurous climber has to
     scale the outside by means of hooks attached to the walls. The
     interior is filled with a timber frame consisting of a central
     piece with arms and braces.”--(R. J. K.)

The =South Transept= is a counterpart of the north transept. The windows
at the south end are filled with stained-glass. The glass in the upper
lights is Early English.

The lierne vault above the central tower arches is Perpendicular. From
here we enter the =Choir=, passing under a screen of wrought metal
(modern). In the second arcade on each side of the =choir= is placed the
new and divided organ built by Willis.

     “The Choir and Presbytery are very similar to the nave in the main
     features of their design. The piers show a different plan, which
     provides for eight shafts of Purbeck marble to each. The inner
     mouldings of the arches exhibit the dog-tooth ornamentation of
     their period. The triforium and clerestory differ slightly from the
     corresponding parts of the nave. In each of the last two bays of
     the presbytery the triforium has five small cinquefoil arches. At
     the east wall of the choir above the reredos is an arcade of five
     simply-pointed arches, below a triplet window in the gable, which
     is filled with stained glass, given by the Earl of Radnor in 1781,
     and representing _The Brazen Serpent_, after a design by Mortimer.

     “The choir still bears traces of Wyatt’s destruction. He removed
     the original reredos behind the high altar and the screen before
     the Lady-Chapel, so that both, with the low eastern aisle, were
     thrown into the choir. He shifted the high altar from the choir to
     the extreme east end of the Lady-Chapel, sacrificing several
     chantries and tombs to do so. Views of the cathedral after his
     reign of terror fail to show any gain to compensate for so much
     loss; the extreme length is not apparently an advantage, while the
     bare look of the interior seems decidedly intensified by the
     increased vista that he was so delighted to obtain, and for which,
     with a light heart, he effaced the silent records of dead
     centuries. The decorations of the roof of the choir and presbytery
     are reproductions of the original series of paintings, dating, it
     is thought, from the Thirteenth Century. The subjects are the
     prophets and saints, Christ and the four Evangelists and the twelve
     months.”--(G. W.)

On the north side of the choir is =Bishop Audley’s Chantry=, built by the
bishop in 1520, four years before his death. It is late Perpendicular
and resembles the chantry of Bishop Fox at Winchester. The fan-tracery
of the roof was originally coloured. In the corresponding bay on the
south side is the chantry founded by =Walter, Lord Hungerford=, in 1429.
It was removed from the nave in 1778.

The =Choir-Stalls= are composed of pieces of various dates with some
additions by Sir Christopher Wren and canopies by Wyatt. The =Reredos= is
modern, the gift of Earl Beauchamp in memory of his ancestor, whose
chantry Wyatt destroyed. It was designed by Sir Gilbert Scott.

Many of the Earls of Pembroke and their wives are buried near the choir.

In the =South-choir-aisle= an interesting monument to =Bishop Davenport=,
probably one of the translators of the Bible, is of white marble with
black Corinthian pillars. Near it is the tomb of =Sir Richard Mompesson=
and his wife. He is in armour and Katherine in a black robe with gold
flowers. The black Corinthian columns with vine leaves and grapes in
green and gold twisted around them are striking. Near the south
transept, still in the choir-aisle, is the altar-tomb of =Bishop Mitford=
(1407), with carved shields. On the cornice with the lilies, birds are
holding in their beaks scrolls with the words _Honor Deo et gloria_.

In the floor of the north-east-choir-aisle is the =brass= to =Bishop
Wyvill=, generally regarded as one of the most wonderful existing
examples. Bishop Wyvill (1329-1375) recovered for this See the castle of
Sherborne and the chase of Bere. The brass, therefore, represents the
contested castle with keep and portcullis. At the door of the first ward
the bishop appears, bestowing his benediction on his champion, who
stands at the gate of the outer ward with battle-axe and shield. The
rabbits and hares before the castle refer to the chase of Bere, within
Windsor Forest.

=Bishop Giles de Bridport= (died 1262) lies opposite William of York’s
tomb, between the choir-aisle and the eastern-aisle of the transept. His
monument is one of the most important and interesting in the Cathedral.

     “All the details of this remarkable monument deserve the most
     careful examination. The effigy, at the head of which are small
     figures of censing angels, lies beneath a canopy, supported north
     and south by two open arches with quatrefoils in the heads. Each
     arch is subdivided by a central pilaster, and springs from
     clustered shafts, detached. A triangular hood-moulding, with
     crockets and finials of leafage, projects above each arch; and
     between and beyond the arches pilasters rise to the top of the
     canopy, supporting finials of very excellent design. The whole
     character of the tomb is most graceful, but an especial interest is
     given to it by the reliefs with which the spandrels of the arches
     are filled, and by the small sculptured figures on various parts of
     the monument. The subjects, beginning on the south side, have been
     thus interpreted. The first, a female figure with an infant and
     attendants, represents the birth of the future bishop: in the three
     next spandrels are his confirmation; either his own education or
     his instruction of others; and, possibly, his first preferment. The
     shield hung from a tree in this compartment, bears Az., a cross,
     or, between 4 bezants, no doubt his own arms. On the north side of
     the monument are the bishop doing homage for his see--a procession
     with a cross-bearer, perhaps referring to the dedication of
     Salisbury Cathedral--the bishop’s death and the presentation of his
     soul for judgment. Little or nothing is known of the life of Bishop
     Bridport.”--(R. J. K.)

At the end of the north aisle of the Lady-Chapel and at the end of the
south aisle, directly opposite, are two monuments that will interest the
visitor. The first is a medley of obelisks, globes, spheres and the Four
Cardinal Virtues and effigies of =Sir Thomas Gorges= and his widow,
maid-of-honour to Queen Elizabeth. The second is a gorgeous tribute to
=Edward, Earl of Hertford=, son of the Protector Somerset and of his wife,
Catherine, Lady Jane Grey’s sister. The effigies are praying; the Earl
is in armour. The whole piece is gilded and coloured.

Very little ancient glass remains in Salisbury.

     “The fragments that survived were collected some fifty years since,
     and placed in the nave windows, and in parts of some of the others.
     The most important are in the great west triple lancet, wherein the
     glass ranges in date from the Twelfth to the Fifteenth Century. Mr.
     Winston, in his Paper read in 1849 before the Archæological
     Institute and printed in the Salisbury volume for that year,
     considered that the earliest fragments are from a Stem of Jesse
     about 1240 and some medallions about 1270. He describes two of the
     ovals that are on each side of the throned bishop, a prominent
     figure in the lower half of the central light, one of the Christ
     enthroned, the other of the Virgin. The two medallions below them
     he believes represent Zacharias in the Temple and the Adoration of
     the Magi. The later glass now in the same window may be either
     Flemish work brought hither from Dijon, or possibly partly from
     Rouen, and partly from a church near Exeter. It has been
     conjectured that in the south lancet the figures represent SS.
     Peter and Francis, in the central one the Crucifixion, the
     Coronation of the Virgin and the Invention of the Cross, and in the
     north light the Betrayal of Christ and St. Catherine. In two of
     the side windows of the nave are the arms of John Aprice
     (1555-1558) and Bishop Jewell (1562).”--(G. W.)

In the south-choir-aisle is =Jacob’s Dream= in memory of the Duke of
Albany and there are also two of the proposed six angel-windows--=Angeli
Ministrantes= and the =Angeli Laudantes=--designed by Sir Edward
Burne-Jones and made by William Morris. These are considered among the
best examples of glass-painting since the Middle Ages.

The =Chapter-House= is a very fine type of an English chapter-house of the
Thirteenth Century, when geometrical tracery was in vogue. It probably
dates from the reign of Edward the First.

     “The architecture is somewhat later in style than that of the
     cloisters, and if it be not, as its admirers claim, the most
     beautiful in England, it has few rivals. Like Westminster, Wells
     and other English examples, except York and Southwell, it has a
     central pillar, from which the groining of the roof springs
     gracefully in harmonious lines. A raised bench of stone runs round
     the interior. At its back forty-nine niches of a canopied arcade
     borne on slight Purbeck marble shafts marked out as many seats.
     They are apportioned as follows: those at each side of the entrance
     to the Chancellor and Treasurer respectively, the rest to the
     Bishop, Dean, Archdeacons and other members of the chapter.

     “The plan of the building is octagonal, about fifty-eight feet in
     diameter and fifty-two feet in height. Each side has a large
     fan-light window with traceried head. Below these windows and above
     the canopies of the seats is a very remarkable series of
     bas-reliefs. The bosses of the roof are somewhat elaborately
     carved: one north of the west doorway has groups of figures on it,
     apparently intended to represent armourers, musicians, and
     apothecaries, possibly commemorating guilds who were benefactors to
     the building; the others have foliage chiefly with grotesque
     monsters. On the base of the central

[Illustration: SALISBURY: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: EXETER: SOUTH-WEST]

     pillar is a series of carvings taken probably from one of the many
     books of fables so popular in the Middle Ages. These were
     reproduced from the originals, which are preserved in the
     cloisters.”--(G. W.)

The vaulted roof is re-painted in accordance with the original.

The =Cloisters= are on the south-west side of the Cathedral, their western
wall being on a line with the west front. These fine covered walks, the
largest in England (181 feet long), surround a great sward (140 feet
square), where a group of dark cedars contrasts beautifully with the
grey walls. The style is late Thirteenth Century. The windows formed of
double arches with quatrefoils united at the main head with a large
six-foiled circle are much admired.




EXETER

     DEDICATION: ST. PETER. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: SCREEN ON WEST FRONT; MISERERES; BISHOP’S THRONE;
     MINSTRELS’ GALLERY; LADY-CHAPEL; EAST WINDOW.


     “As the last cathedral church we visited, namely Salisbury, may be
     taken as the most complete example of Early English work, so Exeter
     in its present state is the best specimen of the Decorated style
     that is to be met with in England. For though, unlike Salisbury, it
     was not built afresh from the ground, yet under Bishops Quivil,
     Bitton, Stapledon and Grandisson, between the years 1280 and 1369,
     the fabric was so entirely remodelled that it may be regarded as
     practically a new building; and since the work of remodelling began
     about the time that the Early English style was passing into the
     Decorated, and was completed before the time when the Perpendicular
     had superseded the Decorated, it naturally is characterised by the
     features of that style which flourished during the first half of
     the Fourteenth Century. Much indeed of the work found at Exeter is
     the very finest that the Fourteenth Century produced.”--(T. P.)

As early as the reign of Athelstan a Benedictine monastery, dedicated to
St. Peter, existed at Crediton and was much injured by the Northmen in
the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries. When the Sees for Devon and Cornwall
were removed from Crediton to Exeter in 1050, the old church of St.
Peter was chosen for the new Cathedral. Of the Saxon church, however,
nothing remains. William Warelwast (1107-1136), the third bishop after
the Conquest, began the new church about 1112, in the “marvellous and
sumptuous” architecture of the Normans. During its erection it suffered
from fire when Stephen besieged Exeter in 1136. Of this building the two
transept towers remain. Bishop Peter Quivil built the greater part of
the present Cathedral before 1291; Bishop Stapledon, who was murdered by
the Londoners at the “great cross in Chepe” in 1326, the eastern part of
the Choir, the sedilia and the choir-screen; Bishop Grandisson finished
the Nave about 1350 and the west front, in all probability, a little
later; and Bishop Brantingham, the Cloisters. The Lady-Chapel was built
during the episcopates of Bronescomb and Quivil, and the chapels of St.
Mary Magdalene and of St. Gabriel the Archangel, north and south of the
Lady-Chapel, are the work of Bishop Bronescomb.

Many of the ancient decorations and arrangements were either removed, or
defaced, by Queen Elizabeth’s “visitors,” who, in 1559, were appointed
to compel the general observance of the Protestant formularies. During
the Commonwealth the Cathedral was divided into two portions by a brick
wall so that an Independent preacher named Stuckeley, one of Cromwell’s
chaplains, could preach in “West Peter’s,” and a Presbyterian, named
Ford, in the Choir, or “East Peter’s,” as the Puritans now named these
portions of the Cathedral.

The finest view is perhaps from Waddlesdown, about four miles from
Exeter. Taking a view of the exterior,

     “The visitor should especially remark the Norman towers, the
     cresting of the roof, the flying-buttresses and the north porch.
     The Norman towers, in connection with the long unbroken roof,
     should perhaps be regarded as constituting the specialty of Exeter.
     At all events, the peculiarity of their present position is so
     great and so striking as at once to attract attention; and the
     question of their place in the original Norman church is one of
     very considerable interest. Each tower consists of six stages, the
     two lowest of which are plain: the other four have blind arcades
     and circular window openings, the details and arrangements of which
     vary in the two towers. At the angles are square buttresses, which
     rise above the uppermost story. The south tower is Norman
     throughout; that on the north was altered by Bishop Courtenay for
     the reception of the great bell from Llandaff, and its final stage
     is Perpendicular. The _fleur-de-lis_ cresting of the roof is of
     lead (with which the whole of the roof is covered), and its form is
     very graceful and effective. The flying-buttresses derive a very
     grand effect from the fact that the aisle-roofs slope outwards, and
     not, as usual, inwards. Resulting also from this peculiarity are,
     the great height of the aisles on the exterior, and an unusual
     development of the clerestory, without any intervening space
     between it and the aisle-roofs; and within the nave, the absence of
     the triforium; the place of which is, however, indicated by the
     blind arcade above the piers. The north porch with its triple
     canopy is part of Grandisson’s work, and very beautiful.”--(R. J.
     K.)

Many people are at first disappointed with their first view of the =West
Front= and more particularly of the =Screen= with its noble array of
statues. The impression that it produces has been well described by W.
D. Howells, who writes on his visit to Exeter:

     “To the first glance it is all a soft gray blur of age-worn
     carving, in which no point or angle seems to have failed of the
     touch which has blent all archaic sanctities and royalties of the
     glorious screen in a dim sumptuous harmony of figures and faces.”

Now let us examine it more in detail.

     “The west front, usually regarded as the latest work of Bishop
     Grandisson, who died in 1369, is of very high interest; and
     although it cannot compete with those of Wells or Lincoln (both of
     earlier date), may justly claim great beauty as an architectural
     composition. It recedes in three stories, the lowest of which is
     formed by the sculptured screen; the second contains the great west
     window, on each side of which is a graduated arcade; and in the
     third, or gable, is a triangular window surmounted by a niche,
     containing a figure of St. Peter, the patron saint of the
     cathedral. The SCREEN deserves the most careful examination. It is
     pierced by three doorways, and surrounded by a series of niches, in
     which are the statues of kings, warriors, saints and apostles,
     guardians, as it were, of the entrance to the sanctuary. These
     figures are arranged in three rows. From pedestals crowned with
     battlements spring angels, each of whom supports a triple pilaster,
     with capitals. The statues on these capitals, forming the second
     row, are for the most part those of kings and knights; above the
     canopies which surmount them appears the third row, chiefly saints
     and apostles. The positions of the angels are admirably varied.

     “The two statues with shields of arms in niches above the upper row
     are certainly those of Athelstan and Edward the Confessor, the
     Saxon king who expelled the Britons from Exeter, and the founder of
     the existing bishopric. In all these figures the general
     arrangement of the hair as well as the fashion of the crowns and of
     the armour, are those of the reign of Edward III., in which the
     work was probably completed.

     “The platform above the screen no doubt served, as in many foreign
     cathedrals, as a station from which the church minstrels and
     choristers might duly welcome distinguished persons on their
     arrival; and from which the bishop might bestow his benediction on
     the people. The three doorways are much enriched. Round that in the
     centre, within the porch, is a moulding of carved foliage which
     deserves notice. On the central boss of the groining is a
     representation of the Crucifixion. The recess within the south
     doorway contains two sculptures, The Appearance of the Angel to
     Joseph in a Dream and The Adoration of the Shepherds. Both, like
     the figures on the screen, have suffered not a little from time,
     and the assaults of Cromwell’s Puritans.”--(R. J. K.)

Exeter is distinguished among English cathedrals in not having a central
tower. This gives the exterior a unique appearance and the interior
gains by the absence of tower piers to block the view. Exeter has,
therefore, the most open and impressive vista of any English cathedral.
The screen being low, the whole design is immediately comprehended. It
has been compared to the Cathedral of Bourges.

In our walks through Exeter it may be well to remember that Quivil’s
architect determined to see what he could do with lowness and breadth.

     “Everything should be broad and low, outside as well as inside.
     Look at the east end of the choir--its two arches broad and low;
     above it the great window--broad and low. Nowhere but at Exeter do
     you find these squat windows with their truncated jambs; here they
     are everywhere--in the aisles, in the clerestory, in choir,
     chapels, transepts and nave; even in the great window of the
     western front: broad and low windows everywhere. Still more
     original is the external realisation of the design; central tower
     and spire, western towers and spires, alike are absent. Long and
     low, massive and stable stretches out uninterruptedly the long
     horizontal line of nave and choir. Breadth gives in itself the
     satisfactory feeling of massiveness, steadfastness and solidity;
     and this is just what is wanting in the all-too aërial work of
     Salisbury and Beauvais; vaulted roofs at a dizzy height resting on
     unsubstantial supports and sheets of glass. But the Exeter
     architect has emphasised this satisfactory feeling of stability
     still further. The window tracery is heavy and strong; the vault is
     barred all over with massive ribs; in the piers there are no
     pretty, fragile, detached shafts; the massive clustered columns
     look as if they were designed, as they were, to carry the weight of
     a Norman wall.”--(F. B.)

The heaviness was counteracted by transparency: the arrangement of the
windows flood the Cathedral with light; for the aisle and clerestory
are almost a continuous sheet of glass.

     “Another distinctive feature in Exeter as in Salisbury, is that the
     architect produces his effect mainly by architectural means--is not
     driven to rely on sculpture. All the principal capitals have
     mouldings not foliage. Only in the great corbels of the vaulting
     shafts and in the bosses of the vault does he permit himself
     foliage and sculpture. Wonderful carving it is; the finest work of
     the best period, when the naturalistic treatment of foliage was
     fresh and young. Very remarkable these corbels are, with their
     life-like treatment of vine and grape, oak and acorn, hazel leaf
     and nut. Unfortunately the corbels, and still more the bosses, are
     so high up that their lovely detail is thrown away; and they are
     out of scale.

     “And the patterns of the window tracery are wonderfully diverse. It
     is not, as in Lichfield nave or King’s College Chapel, where every
     window is like its neighbour; when you have seen one, you have seen
     all. Here, all down each side of the church every window differs.
     In dimensions, in general character, they agree; in details they
     differ; each window is a fresh delight; we have, what even in
     Gothic architecture we rarely get--diversity within
     simplicity.”--(F. B.)

First we examine the splendid =Nave=.

     “The first view of the NAVE is rich and striking. Its present
     length is 140 feet. The view looking east is intercepted by the
     organ, which is placed above the screen at the entrance to the
     choir; but the general impression, notwithstanding a want of
     height, is that of great richness and beauty. The roof especially,
     springing from slender vaulting shafts, studded with delicately
     carved and varied bosses, and extending unbroken to the east end of
     the choir, is exceeded in grace and lightness by no other of the
     same date in the kingdom and by few on the Continent. The carved
     bosses, all of which retain traces of colour, represent foliage,
     animals (near the centre of the nave is a sow with a litter of
     pigs), grotesque figures, heraldic shields, subjects from early
     ‘bestiaries’ and romances, such as the centaur with a sword, and
     the knight riding on a lion toward the eastern end, heads of the
     Virgin and Saviour, the Passion and Crucifixion, and in the centre
     of the second bay, the murder of Becket. Grandisson wrote a life of
     the great Archbishop, which remains in MS., but was very popular in
     its day. The episcopal figure on the adjoining boss may either
     represent Becket or Grandisson himself. Clustered pillars of
     Purbeck marble (contrasting well with the lighter stone from
     Silverton and Bere) of which the walls and roof are constructed,
     separate the nave from the aisles and divide it into seven
     compartments or ‘bays.’

     “The corbels between the arches, which support the vaulting shafts
     of the roof, are, perhaps, peculiar to this cathedral, and should
     be especially noticed. They are wrought into figures, twisted
     branches and long sprays of foliage, and afford excellent examples
     of the very best period of naturalism. Every leaf is varied and the
     character of the different kinds (here for the most part oak and
     vine) is admirably retained. The second corbel on the south side of
     the nave exhibits the Virgin treading on an evil spirit, and
     carrying the Divine Infant. Above is her coronation. The
     easternmost nave-corbels display on the north side Moses with his
     hands supported by Aaron and Hur; and on the south the risen
     Saviour, with cross and banner. The brackets at the foot of these
     corbels are crowned heads; and possibly represent Edward I. and
     Edward II., the first beardless as usual, the other more defaced.
     The second corbel on the north side represents St. Cecilia, with a
     somewhat grotesque angel listening to her music.

     “A blind arcade, taking the place of the triforium, deeply recessed
     and arranged in groups of four arches under each bay, runs above
     the nave arches; and in the central bay on the north side projects
     the Minstrels’ Gallery, an arrangement for the accommodation of
     musicians on high festivals, which occur in this perfection nowhere
     else in England. There are, indeed, other examples at Wells and at
     Winchester, but of far less interest and importance. Each of the
     twelve niches into which its front is divided contains the figure
     of a winged angel playing on a musical instrument and surmounted by
     a rich canopy. The instruments beginning from the west are, a
     cittern, bagpipes, flageolet, crowth or violin, harp, an unknown or
     unseen instrument (the fingers are put close to the mouth),
     trumpet, organ, guitar, wind instrument, tambour and cymbals. The
     two corbelled heads below, supporting niches, are possibly those of
     Edward III. and Philippa. The manner in which the hands and arms
     are raised above the heads is unusual. Above the arcade and
     minstrels’ gallery is the clerestory, along which a gallery is
     pierced in the thickness of the wall.

     “The windows of the nave, all of the best and purest (geometrical)
     Decorated, are said to exhibit a greater variety of tracery than
     can be found in any other building in the kingdom. They are
     arranged in pairs, on opposite sides of the cathedral; so that no
     two side by side will be found to resemble each other. The varied
     and graceful patterns of the lead-work should also be noticed. The
     stained glass in the great west window is, for the most part,
     modern and worthless (it dates from 1766) injuring the beauty of
     the window itself by its entire want of harmony and meaning. The
     ruby glass in this window is said to be some of the latest that was
     manufactured in England before M. Bontemps revived the art.”--(R.
     J. K.)

Walking back to the west end, we stop to examine the =Chantry of St.
Radegunde=,

     “constructed in the thickness of the screen by Bishop Grandisson
     for the place of his own sepulture. His tomb formerly existed here,
     but it was destroyed by Elizabeth’s visitors and the high-born
     prelate’s ashes scattered ‘no man knoweth where.’”--(R. J. K.)

Opening from the first bay of the Nave is the small =Chapel of St.
Edmund=, of earlier date than the Nave. In the fifth bay, on the same
side, is the =North Porch=. In the last bay on the south side is an Early
English doorway that formerly opened into the cloisters; and between the
first two buttresses on the south side a finely carved consecration
cross attracts our notice.

The Pulpit dates from 1684.

The =Transepts=, one bay each, occupy the space under the towers. East of
the =North transept= is the =Chapel of St. Paul=, built by Quivil and now
used as a vestry. In the corner we find the tomb and chantry of =Sylke=, a
sub-chanter, who founded this chantry in 1485 and was buried in it in
1508. His effigy lies here. Against the east wall are memorials to the
soldiers of the 20th, or East Devon Regiment who fell in the Crimean
War. Here is also the famous clock which has two dials. It is supposed
to date from the reign of Edward III.

A door below the clock opens to the stairs into the =North tower=, in
which is hung the =Great=, or =Peter Bell=, the second largest bell in
England. It weighs 12,500 pounds.

     “The Peter bell was crazed on Nov. 5, 1611, most probably from a
     too violent ringing in commemoration of the Gunpower Plot, and was
     recast in 1676. Its diameter at the mouth is 6 feet 3 inches; its
     height nearly 4 feet 8 inches. It is, of course, never rung, but
     the hours are struck on it by an enormous hammer. The visitor who
     happens to be in the tower at the time of striking will experience
     a new sensation,--the humming of the great mass of metal lingers
     for many minutes among the huge beams and rafters. A superb view of
     the city surrounded by trees and gardens, of the river and of its
     junction with the sea at Exmouth, is obtained from the top of the
     tower, the upper part of which (of Perpendicular character) was
     raised and adapted by Bishop Courtenay for the reception of Great
     Peter, which he brought from Llandaff.”--(R. J. K.)

The =South Transept= is a counterpart of the north, and the =Chapel of St.
John the Baptist=

[Illustration: EXETER: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: EXETER: CHOIR, EAST]

(also Quivil’s work) corresponds with St. Paul’s opposite. In the Tower
are eleven bells, ten of which are rung in peal. They date from the
Seventeenth Century. Between this Transept and the Chapter-House lies
the =Chapel of the Holy Ghost=, formerly used as a baptistery. It is
Norman. The Chapter-House, opening from what is still called the
=Cloisters= (although the cloisters were demolished during Cromwell’s
rule), was begun in the Thirteenth Century and finished in the
Fifteenth.

When Bishop Grandisson dedicated the =High Altar=, Dec. 18, 1328, he wrote
to the Pope that the Cathedral, then half finished, would be superior in
its kind to any church in France or England.

     “High as this praise was, the beauty of the vaulted roof and the
     extreme grace of the details are proofs that it was scarcely
     exaggerated. The roof bosses and corbels are of the same character
     as those in the nave; but the latter are even more admirable in
     design, and far more varied in foliage. Maple, oak, ash, the
     filbert with its clusters of nuts, and the vine with fruit and
     tendrils, could hardly be reproduced more faithfully. On the corbel
     above the organ-screen, on the north side, is a Coronation of the
     Virgin and on that beyond it a Virgin and Child with censing
     angels.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Choir=, Decorated, is very fine:

     “We approach the choir, entered by a door in the beautiful screen
     supporting the organ. This was the old rood-screen, on which
     formerly stood the rood, or figure of our Lord on the Cross. It was
     erected in the Fourteenth Century.

     “The bosses of the vaulted roof are worthy of especial examination,
     so remarkable are they for the delicacy of the carved foliage. The
     choir has been carefully restored in recent years, and the stalls,
     pulpit and reredos are modern and were designed by Sir Gilbert
     Scott. Notice the old misereres, which are very remarkable and
     probably the oldest and most curious in England. The foliage
     denotes the Early English period and they were probably designed by
     Bishop Bruere (1224-1244). Notice the mermaid and merman on the
     south side, the elephant, knight slaying a leopard, a minstrel,
     etc. The lofty bishop’s throne was erected by Stapledon, and is
     said to have been taken down and hidden away during the Civil War
     period. The painted figures represent the four great
     bishops--Warelwast, Quivil, Stapledon and Grandisson. The sedilia
     by Stapledon are very fine. Notice the carved lions’ heads and the
     heads of Leofric, Edward the Confessor and his wife Editha. The
     east window is Early Perpendicular, inserted by Bishop Brantingham
     in 1390, and contains much old glass.”--(P. H. D.)

The =miserere seats= (Thirteenth Century) are curious and beautiful. They
are probably the earliest in England.

     “They are fifty in number and their subjects are of the usual
     character,--foliage, grotesques, animals (among which is an
     elephant) and knights in combat, whose heater shields, flat helmets
     and early armour are especially noticeable. Remark, on the _south_
     side of the choir a mermaid and a merman holding some circular
     instrument between them, the elephant mentioned above and a knight
     sitting in a boat drawn by a swan, an illustration of the romance
     of the _Chevalier au Cygne_. On the north side a knight attacking a
     leopard, a monster on whose back is a saddle with stirrups, a
     minstrel with tabor and pipe, a knight thrusting his sword into a
     grotesque bird and a mermaid holding a fish. The Early English
     character of the foliage, as well as its graceful arrangement,
     should be noticed throughout.”

     “On the south side, the superb BISHOP’S THRONE towering almost to
     the roof. This was the gift of Bishop Bothe (1465-1478). It is said
     to have been taken down and hidden during Monmouth’s
     Rebellion.”--(R. J. K.)

     “The Bishop’s Throne (A.D. 1316), intended for his Lordship with a
     chaplain on either side; ‘a magnificent sheaf of carved oak, put
     together without a single nail, and rising to a height of 57 feet.
     The lightness of its ascending stages almost rival the famous
     _sheaf of fountains_ of the Nuremberg tabernacle. The cost of this
     vast and exquisitely carved canopy (about twelve guineas) is
     surprisingly small, even for those days. The carved work consists
     chiefly of foliage, with finials of great beauty, surmounting
     tabernacled niches, with a sadly untenanted look, however, for lack
     of their statuettes. The pinnacle corners are enriched with heads
     of oxen, sheep, dogs, pigs and monkeys.’ Next came what is perhaps
     the most exquisite work in stone in England, as the throne is
     unparalleled in woodwork--the SEDILIA; the seats of the priest to
     the east and to the west of him, those of the Gospeller and
     Epistoler. The sedilia have been preferred even to the shrine of
     Beverley and the Lady-Chapel of Ely. ‘The canopy of the seat
     nearest the altar,’ says Mr. Garland, ‘deserves particular
     attention. It is adorned with a wreath of vine leaves on each side,
     which meet at the point and there form a finial; and never did
     Greek sculptor of the best age trace a more exact portrait of the
     leaf of the vine, nor design a more graceful wreath, nor execute
     his design with a more masterly finish.’ It is regrettable that the
     carving of the sedilia is attributed to a Frenchman.”--(F. B.)

Of the high altar and reredos, perhaps the most magnificent in Europe,
carved at the same period, not a fragment remains.

The two most important tombs in the choir are those of =Bishop Lacey=, who
died in 1455, and =Walter de Stapledon=, who was murdered in London in
1326. Lacey has but a plain slab at which many miracles are said to have
been done. Bishop Stapledon lies under a Perpendicular canopy, a fine
figure holding a crozier with his left hand and a book with his right.
Under the canopy is a figure of the Saviour, and at its side the small
figure of a king crowned and wearing a scarlet robe, supposed to be
Edward II. Bishop Stapledon’s body was removed from London to Exeter
Cathedral by the Queen’s command and interred with great magnificence.

From the choir two chapels open. On the north, =St. Andrew’s=, very early
Decorated, is exactly like the opposite one, =St. James’s=. Beneath the
latter is the ancient =Crypt=. Both chapels have chambers above them.

Beyond the Choir, the ambulatory, or procession-path (Early Decorated),
with =Speke’s Chantry= on the left or north and =Bishop Oldham’s= on the
right or south, leads to the =Lady Chapel=. This was built by Quivil, and
is remarkable for its beautiful foliage carvings, old reredos, graceful
openings to the chantries on either side and magnificent east window.

     “Quivil first transformed the Lady-Chapel; to him are due the
     shafts, sedilia, double piscina, and the vaulting, the
     rib-mouldings of which are of earlier character than those of the
     choir; and the windows, which closely resemble those of Merton
     College, Oxford, which we know was commenced in 1277. In the centre
     of the Lady-Chapel Bishop Quivil is buried; he died in 1291. The
     chapels on either side may have been remodelled or partly
     remodelled by Bronescombe; but the east windows are later in style,
     and are Quivil’s. The piers hereabout are very interesting. Those
     of the Lady-Chapel looking into the side chapels are composed of
     four columns. The north-east and south-east piers of the choir have
     clusters of eight shafts instead of four; while in the pier between
     them the cluster of eight is developed into a cluster of sixteen
     columns. Finally notice that these piers are set diamond-wise, with
     four flat faces, and the angles to the north, west, south and
     east.”--(F. B.)

In the centre of the pavement is the tombstone of =Bishop Peter Quivil=
(died 1291), author of the present plan of the cathedral. Other effigies
of bishops are interesting works of art, but those of =Sir John= and =Lady
Doddridge= are very curious. Sir John (died 1628), one of James I’s
judges of the King’s Bench, was called “the sleepy judge,” because he
always sat on the bench with closed eyes; but more interesting is Lady
Doddridge, who wears a rich dress brocaded with roses and carnations and
also a remarkable ruff and headdress.

Under the arches opening from the Lady-Chapel to the side chapels are
tombs of =Bishops Bronescomb= and =Stafford=. Bishop Bronescomb’s effigy
(1280), on the south side, is a fine piece of carving. Stafford’s
opposite (1419) is of alabaster, and it is famous for the rich
tabernacle-work above the head.

We have been long attracted by the lovely =East window=. Now we can see
the details.

     “The east window is early Perpendicular and was inserted by Bishop
     Brantingham about 1390. The stained glass with which it is filled
     is for the most part ancient and very fine. Much of it dates
     apparently from the first half of the Fourteenth Century (temp.
     Edward I. and II.) and was removed from the earlier window; the
     shields below are those of early bishops and benefactors; the
     figures of saints above, most of which are to be recognised by
     their emblems, deserve careful notice. Beginning with the lowest
     row, and at the left hand, are St. Margaret, St. Catherine, St.
     Mary Magdalene, St. Barbara, the Virgin and Child, St. Martin, St.
     Peter, St. Paul and St. Andrew. All these figures are under very
     rich and varied canopies. The first three and the last three are of
     the first period; the others of Brantingham’s time. In the _middle
     row_ are St. Sidwell, or Sativola, believed to have been a British
     lady of noble birth, and contemporary with St. Winifred of Crediton
     (first half of the Eighth Century). Her legend asserts that she was
     beheaded by a mower at the instigation of her stepmother, who
     coveted her possessions, near a well outside the walls of Exeter.
     In the window St. Sativola appears with a scythe in her left hand,
     whilst at her right is a well with a stream of water flowing from
     it. These emblems may either form a rebus of her name (scythe-well)
     or refer to her martyrdom. Beyond St. Sidwell are St. Helena, St.
     Michael, St. Margaret, St. Catherine, Edward the Confessor and St.
     Edmund. All the figures in this row are of Brantingham’s period.
     The three figures in the uppermost row are Abraham, Moses and
     Isaiah. These are of the first period. The tone of colour
     throughout this window is very fine and solemn. The heraldry in the
     upper part of the window is modern. In the north clerestory windows
     of the central bay are four headless figures of early Decorated
     character. The beautiful running pattern forming the ground on
     which they are placed should be noticed.”--(R. J. K.)

In the =north-choir-aisle= is a curious tomb with a cross-legged effigy of
a Fourteenth Century knight in armour with one esquire at his head and
another holding a horse at his feet. This is supposed to be a memorial
to Sir Richard de Stapledon, a brother of the Bishop.

Returning as we came, we pass the =Chantry of St. George=, founded by Sir
Thomas Speke in 1518. It is a mass of rich carving. The effigy of the
founder lies within.

Opposite is =Bishop Oldham’s Chantry=, also a mass of carving, where the
owl in the panels refers to his name (the word _old_ is pronounced
_owld_ in Lancashire, where the Bishop was born). The Bishop’s effigy
lies in a niche in the south wall.

     “The Tudor work (1485-1519) is exceptional in importance. It
     includes the north entrance and other late portions of the western
     screen, two exquisite chapels both built by Bishop Oldham--his own
     chantry (St. Saviour’s) on the south side of the retro-choir, the
     Speke chantry (St. George’s) on the north--and in addition, Prior
     Sylke’s chantry on the north transept. All this work is admirable
     in design and execution. In Oldham’s chantry is a charming series
     of owls with the scroll _Dam_, a rebus on his name, proceeding from
     the beak of each little owl. To Bishop Oldham also (1504-1519) is
     due the grand set of stone screens--one of the glories of the
     cathedral--no less than ten, which veil all the nine chapels and
     Prior Sylke’s chantry, and add fresh beauty to the beautiful
     choir.”--(F. B.)

At the extreme end of the east aisle is the =Chapel of St. Mary
Magdalene=, probably the work of Bishop Bronescomb, who died in 1280. The
east window, which resembles that of the opposite chapel of St. Gabriel,
contains some stained glass of the Fifteenth Century. In this chapel a
fine Elizabethan monument to Sir Gawain Carew, his wife and their nephew
Sir Peter should be noticed. It dates from 1589. A staircase here leads
to the roofs of the north-choir-aisle and of the ambulatory. The views
of the Cathedral obtained here are very fine, especially of the
flying-buttresses.

=St. Gabriel’s Chapel= is similar to that of St. Mary Magdalene. Bishop
Bronescomb’s patron saint was St. Gabriel the Archangel, whose feast
was, in consequence, celebrated in Exeter Cathedral with the same
solemnity as those of Christmas and Easter. A monument by Flaxman to
=General Simcoe=, who died in 1806, having distinguished himself at the
head of the Queen’s Rangers during the American war, and a splendid
statue of =Northcote=, the painter, by Chantrey claim attention.

Finally summing up the characteristics of this glorious fane:

     “Whatever else the student and lover of Gothic architecture omits,
     he must not omit to visit Exeter. He will find it fresh and
     different from anything he has seen before. Its unique plan,
     without central or western towers, the absence of obstructive
     piers at the crossing, the consequently uninterrupted vista, the
     singleness and unity of the whole design, the remarkable system of
     proportions, based on breadth rather than height, the satisfying
     massiveness and solidity of the building, inside and outside, and
     at the same time the airiness and lightness of the interior, the
     magnificence of its piers of marble, the delightful colour-contrast
     of marble column and sandstone arch, the amazing diversity of the
     window tracery, the exquisite carving of the corbels and bosses,
     the abundant and admirable Tudor work, the wealth of chantries and
     monuments, the superb sedilia, screen and throne, the _misereres_,
     the vaults, the extraordinary engineering feats from which its
     present form results, the originality of the west front and of the
     whole interior and exterior, place Exeter in the very forefront of
     the triumphs of the Mediæval architecture of our country.”--(F. B.)




WELLS

     DEDICATION: ST. ANDREW.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: WEST FRONT; EAST END; INVERTED ARCHES IN NAVE;
     CHAPTER-HOUSE; CARVINGS OF CAPITALS; CHAIN-GATE.


The site of this beautiful cathedral had long been sacred to the Britons
on account of its wells, or springs, when the early Christians on coming
to Glastonbury placed these waters under the protection of St. Andrew.
King Ina’s house of secular canons was established here in 704, not far
from the older Glastonbury, which, according to legend, was established
by Joseph of Arimathea. At the beginning of the Tenth Century, a new
bishopric was founded by Edward the Elder for the province of Somerset;
and the Abbot of Glastonbury was made Bishop of Wells.

     “Seen from a distance, the picturesque group of towers and
     pinnacles derives increased effect from the beauty and variety of
     the surrounding landscape. On one side rises the long ridge of the
     Mendips, with its rocky outliers; whilst in the southern distance
     the lofty peak of Glastonbury Tor lifts itself above the marches,
     marking the site of what was generally believed, throughout the
     Middle Ages, to have been the earliest Christian church in Britain,
     if not the first in Christendom. The Cathedral itself seems to
     nestle under its protecting hills; and the waters of the Bishop’s
     moat, sparkling in the sunshine, indicate the spring or great well
     which led King Ina to establish his church here, and which had
     perhaps rendered the site a sacred one as well in the days of the
     Druids as in those of that primitive British Christianity which
     disappeared before the heathendom of the advancing Saxons.

     “From whatever direction the visitor enters the Close, he must pass
     under one of the three gatehouses built by Bishop Beckington
     (1443-1464), all of which display his shield of arms and his
     rebus,--a beacon inflamed issuing from a tun or barrel. Over the
     Chain-Gate passes the gallery which connects the Vicars’ College
     with the Cathedral. The gate, called the Penniless Porch, opens to
     the Market-place; but the Cathedral will be best approached for the
     first time through Browne’s gate, at the end of Sadler-street. From
     this point an excellent view of the west front is obtained, rising
     at the end of a broad lawn of greensward, bordered with trees. The
     Cathedral close of Wells is scarcely so picturesque as those of
     Salisbury or of Winchester. It is more open, however, and its
     short, bright turf contrasts very effectively with the grey stone
     of the buildings which encircle it and with the grand old church
     itself. This, with the exception of its pilasters of Purbeck, is
     built throughout with stone from the Doulting quarries, about nine
     miles from Wells.”--(R. J. K.)

During the rule of Robert (1135-1166) discord and jealousy between the
men of Bath and Wells rose to such a pitch that it was determined the
bishops should in future be styled “of Bath and Wells” and elected by an
equal number of monks and canons from the abbey and collegiate church.
Bishop Robert rebuilt and repaired the Saxon cathedral which had fallen
into decay. Robert’s work has entirely perished. The next builders were
Bishop Reginald Fitz-Jocelyn (1171-1191) and Bishop Jocelin of Wells
(1206-1242), who rebuilt the Cathedral as we see it to-day. Jocelin was
able to consecrate parts of it in 1239.

Jocelin, the great “maker of Wells,” bishop from 1206 to 1242, and his
brother, Hugh (afterwards Bishop of Lincoln), were natives of Wells;
here Jocelin served as canon and Hugh as archdeacon. Both were rich.
Hugh, who lavished money upon Lincoln, also gave much to Jocelin for
Wells. Jocelin spent his entire fortune upon his beloved Cathedral. This
Jocelin must not be confused with the earlier Reginald Fitz-Jocelyn,
bishop from 1171 to 1191.

     “The part which he built, there can be little doubt, included the
     three western bays of the choir (which then formed the presbytery),
     the transepts, north porch and the eastern bays of the nave. That
     is to say, on entering the church, one is looking upon Reginald’s
     work, and not Jocelin’s; for, although the rest of the nave was
     completed by Jocelin, it was done in accordance with Reginald’s
     original plan. It is of great importance to remember this fact,
     since until recently the nave, with the other parts just mentioned,
     was attributed by Professor Willis, Professor Freeman, and most
     authorities to Jocelin.”--(P. D.)

Jocelin also built the famous west front and began the Bishop’s Palace.

In 1248 an earthquake did some damage to the central tower, and repairs
were at once undertaken. The canons generously contributed funds which
were augmented by the help of a local saint. Bishop William Bytton,
nephew of the bishop of the same name (who lies in St. Catherine’s
Chapel), died in 1274; and his remains soon began to cure the toothache.
His tomb in the south-choir-aisle was visited by sufferers, and the
famous western capitals in the transept doubtless refer to their cures.

For the next fifty years and more, much was done to the Cathedral by the
energetic John de Godelee, dean from 1306 to 1333, who finished the Lady
Chapel in 1326.

In 1318 the canons voluntarily offered a fifth of their salaries to
raise the central tower, which was carried up three more stages and
finished in 1321; and in 1325 they began new stalls, each canon having
agreed to pay for his own stall. In 1337 and 1338 the whole church was
thrown into dismay on account of fractures in the tower; for the tower
appears to have sunk deeply into the earth, owing to pressure on the
arches. All the masonry was disturbed; and in order to remedy this
trouble, the curious double arches were inserted, to help support the
strain. The original arches were also patched up and filled in with
great blocks of stone and strengthened in various ways.

Much was due to Bishop Ralph of Shrewsbury (1329-1363), who was buried
before the High Altar in the Choir he had founded. He also finished the
Palace begun by Jocelin. Bishop Harewell, who died in 1386, gave
two-thirds of the cost of the south-west tower called by his name; and
the executors of Bishop Bubwith finished the northwest tower that bears
his name.

Bishop Beckington built the lovely gateways, and Dean Gunthorpe (died
1498), the Deanery.

The eastern walk of the Cloister and the Library above date from between
1407 and 1424; and the western and southern Cloister walks, between 1443
and 1464.

     “Late researches have shown that Bishop Reginald began the present
     church and that the Early English work should be divided into four
     periods: (1) The three western arches of the choir, with the four
     western bays of its aisles, the transepts and the four eastern bays
     of the nave, which are Reginald’s work (1174-1191), and so early as
     to be still in a state of transition from the Norman. It is a
     unique example of transitional building, and Willis calls it ‘an
     improved Norman, worked with considerable lightness and richness,
     but distinguished from the Early English by greater massiveness and
     severity.’ The characteristics of this late Twelfth Century work
     are bold round mouldings, square abaci, capitals, some with traces
     of the classical volute, others interwoven with fanciful imagery
     that reminds us of the Norman work of Glastonbury; while in the
     north porch, which must be the earliest of all, we even find the
     zigzag Norman moulding. (2) The rest of the nave, which was
     finished in Jocelin’s time--that is to say, in the first half of
     the Thirteenth Century--preserves the main characteristics of the
     earlier work, though the flowing sculptured foliage becomes more
     naturalistic, and lacks the quaint intermingling of figure
     subjects. (3) The west front, which is Jocelin’s work, and alone
     can claim to be of pure Early English style. (4) The chapter-house
     crypt, which is so late as to be almost Transitional, though,
     curiously enough, it contains the characteristic Early English
     dog-tooth moulding which is found nowhere else except in the west
     window. From this, we reach the Early Decorated of the staircase,
     the full Decorated of the chapter-house itself, the later Decorated
     of the Lady-Chapel, the transitional Decorated of the presbytery,
     and the full Perpendicular of the western towers. Much of the
     masonry in the transepts, choir, choir aisles, and even in the
     eastern transepts, bears the peculiar diagonal lines which are the
     marks of Norman tooling. This does not, of course, prove that any
     part of Bishop Robert’s church is standing, for mediæval builders
     were notoriously economical in using up old masonry, but it does
     show that there are more remains of his work in the building than
     was generally supposed.”--(P. D.)

The Cathedral was much damaged during the Reformation and also during
Monmouth’s rebellion in 1685, when the Duke’s followers stabled their
horses in it and enjoyed a barrel of beer on the high altar.

There is a nave of nine bays, a space under the tower, a choir opening
eastward of it and two transepts (each of four bays) with aisles opening
north and south. The choir from the screen to the high altar occupies
six bays; a retro-choir of two bays lies behind the altar; and beyond it
again is an apsidal Lady-Chapel. The west front has been much admired,
but some critics consider it too heavy for the short towers that abut on
it. The windows of the nave and transepts are Decorated. The windows of
the choir are more ornate, although in the same style, and those of the
Lady-Chapel are still more so. The central tower (Perpendicular) is
entirely covered with panelling. There is no spire. On the south side
large cloisters open from the south-western tower and from the western
aisle of the south transept; but there are only three walks, there being
none on the north side. The Chapter-House is approached from the north
side of the choir by a short passage and a flight of steps: a crypt lies
under it. A beautiful porch, with parvise, opens into the sixth bay of
the north aisle. From the eastern aisle of the north transept the
Chain-Gate passes to the Vicars’ College, a double row of picturesque
houses, dating from 1360.

     “The Chain-Gate, in its association with the Chapter-House and the
     Vicars’ Close, is unique. The incline of the steps, easily to be
     distinguished from without, gives the corner a character quite its
     own. And the entrance to the Green by this gate, with the Cathedral
     on one side, balanced by the varied gables and roofs of the houses
     opposite, is particularly striking. The exterior of the
     Chapter-House comes into full view; the great central tower stands
     boldly up against the sky; the eastern gable presents its curious
     apex, and the Lady-Chapel below stands like a thing separate from
     the rest. Beyond, and under the Chain-Gateway, an arch admits to
     the Vicars’ Close--a charming street, lined on either side with
     diminutive dwelling-houses, once the separate residences of the
     vicars choral. At the top of the close is a small Perpendicular
     chapel with a library above. The interior is profusely--almost
     grotesquely--decorated in a manner to remind one to some extent of
     those strange little oratories so frequently met with in other
     parts of Europe. But to many it will possess a certain charm,
     despite its florid adornments, not often realised in this country.
     The Vicars’ Hall, a considerable portion of which is of the
     Fourteenth Century, with additions of a tower and other features,
     probably by Bishop Beckington, stands at the bottom of the street
     and communicates through the gallery of the Chain-Gate with the
     Chapter-House staircase, and thus with the cathedral. By this
     gallery the choristers passed into the church.”--(A. A.)

The celebrated =West Front=

     “consists of a centre, in which are the three lancets of the
     western window and above them a gable receding in stages, with
     small pinnacles at the angles; and of two wings or western towers,
     projecting beyond the nave, as at Salisbury. The upper part of
     these towers is of Perpendicular character. That to the north-west
     was completed by Bishop Bubwith (1407-1424), whose statue remains
     in one of the niches: that to the south-west was the work of Bishop
     Harewell (1366-1386). Both these towers, fine as are their details,
     have a somewhat truncated appearance; and it is probable that the
     original Early English design terminated at the uppermost band of
     sculpture. The three western doors are of unusually small
     dimensions, perhaps in order to leave ample room for the tiers of
     figures which rise above them. Six narrow buttresses at the angles
     of which are slender shafts of Purbeck marble, supporting canopies,
     divide the entire front into five portions. The whole of the
     statues which fill the niches are of Doulting stone.”--(R. J. K.)

Many visitors are at the first sight disappointed at the mutilated and
archaic expression of the figures; but they have commanded the greatest
admiration ever since old Fuller wrote: “The west front of Wells is a
masterpiece of art indeed, made of imagery in just proportion, so that
we may call them _vera et spirantis signa_. England affordeth not the
like.”

The =West Front= should be considered as a great screen intended for the
display of statuary rather than as the west termination of the nave. The
stone population, numbering about three hundred life-size or colossal
figures, is only equalled by that of Rheims and that of Chartres. All
critics agree that these statues, so notable for their graceful
draperies and spiritual expressions, rank with the contemporary
masterpieces of Italy and France. They are thought to have been made by
Italian sculptors at the time when Niccola Pisano was reviving sculpture
in Italy under the inspiration of classical models. The kings, queens,
princes, knights and nobles wear the costume of the Thirteenth Century.
The other figures are prophets, angels, martyrs and “the holy church
throughout the world.”

Unlike the monumental west fronts of France, with their splendid porches
and doors, the doors of Wells have been compared to “rabbit-holes on a
mountain-side.”

The western towers projecting beyond the aisles of the nave give
additional breadth to the west front. The arrangement resembles that of
Rouen. The two towers are very similar. Both have two belfry windows on
each side and a stair turret on the outer western angle. The spires were
never added.

The =Central Tower= is Early English to the level of the roof, and the two
upper stages are Decorated. From its summit a beautiful view is to be
enjoyed.

The =North Porch= (Norman) is the oldest part

[Illustration: WELLS: WEST FRONT]

[Illustration: WELLS: NORTH PORCH]

of the church. Some architects consider it the finest piece of
architecture at Wells.

     “The entrance is doubly recessed and has the zigzag ornament among
     its mouldings, an indication, if not of its early construction, at
     least of lingering Norman traditions among its builders. These
     mouldings deserve the most careful attention. The outer or
     dripstone, is formed of a very beautiful combination of Early
     English foliage. Square panels on either side of the arch contain
     figures of mystic animals, one of which is a cockatrice. The gable
     above has a blind arcade, in the centre of which a small triplet
     gives light to a parvise chamber. From the buttress at the angles
     rise slender spire-capped pinnacles. The buttresses themselves are
     flat and narrow.

     “The interior of the porch is divided into two bays, and its walls
     are lined with a double arcade, the upper row of arches being more
     deeply recessed than the tower. The vault springs from a central
     group of triple shafts. The sculptures of the capitals on the east
     side possibly represent the death of King Edmund the Martyr (A.D.
     870),--bound to a tree as a mark for the Danish arrows and
     afterwards beheaded. The figures are well designed, and full of
     life and character. The double doorway leading into the nave
     displays, like the exterior arch, the Norman zigzag.”--(R. J. K.)

On entering the =Nave= the visitor is at once struck by the noble
proportions, the impression of great length, the broad horizontal band
of the triforium, and the wealth of spirited and varied carving of the
capitals and corbels; but the most striking feature of all is the great
inverted, or double, arch that struts across the central piers forming a
St. Andrew’s Cross, by which name it is generally known, and giving a
grotesque (we are almost tempted to say Chinese) appearance.

     “Undoubtedly the first thing that the stranger notices in Wells
     Cathedral, and the last that he is likely to forget, is the
     curious contrivance by which the central tower is supported. Of the
     three pairs of arches (the upper arch resting inverted upon the
     lower) which stretch across the nave and each of the transepts,
     that in the nave is seen at once, and lends a unique character to
     the whole church. At first these arches give one something of a
     shock, so unnecessarily frank are they, so excessively sturdy, so
     very English, we may think. They carry their burden as a
     great-limbed labourer will carry a child in a crowd, to the great
     advantage of the burden and the natural dissatisfaction of the
     crowd. In fact, they seem to block up the view, and to deform what
     they do not hide.

     “That is the first impression, but it does not last for long.
     Familiarity breeds respect for this simple, strong device, which
     arrested the fall of the tower in the Fourteenth Century, and has
     kept its walls ever since in perfect security, so that the great
     structure has stood like a rock upon the watery soil of Wells for
     nearly seven centuries, with its rents and breaks just as they were
     when the damage was first repaired. The ingenuity, too, of these
     strange flying-buttresses becomes more and more evident; the
     ‘ungainly props’ are seen to be so worked into the tower they
     support, that they almost seem like part of the original design of
     the first builders. One discovers that it is the organ, and not the
     arches, that really blocks the view, and one marvels that so huge a
     mass of masonry can look so light as to present, with the great
     circles in the spandrels where the arches meet, a kind of pattern
     of gigantic geometrical tracery. Indeed I think no one who has been
     in Wells a week could wish to see the inverted arches removed.

     “To appreciate the work fully, it should be looked at from some
     spot, such as the north-east corner of the north transept, whence
     the three great pairs of arches can be seen together. The effect
     from here is very fine, especially when the nave is lighted up and
     strong shadows are cast. The extreme boldness of the mouldings, the
     absence of shafts and capitals and of all ornament, give them a
     primitive vigour, and their great intermingling curves, which
     contrast so magnificently with the little shafts of the piers
     beyond, seem more like a part of some great mountain cavern than a
     mere device of architectural utility.”--(P. D.)

The general effect of the Nave is that of length rather than height,
largely due to the continuous arcade of the triforium which leads the
eye irresistibly eastwards, and the comparatively restricted height of
the Cathedral has been increased by bold vaulting, and by the way the
lantern arches fit into the vault. A little study will show the visitor
the separation between the late Twelfth Century work of Reginald de
Bohun, or Fitz-Jocelyn, and the Thirteenth Century work of Jocelin.
These differences lie in the masonry and the carved heads and the
capitals.

The heads of a king and bishop, projecting from the south side between
the fourth and fifth piers, mark the point of change eastward: the
masonry of piers, walls and aisle walls is in small courses of stone;
westward, the blocks are larger, eastward, small human heads project at
the angles of the pier-arches and westward there are none; eastward, the
tympana of the triforium arcade are filled with carvings of grotesque
animals and small heads at the corners, and westward, the tympana are
filled with foliage and ornamented with larger heads. There are also
other differences.

     “Certainly it is an unusual instance of an architect deliberately
     setting himself to complete the works of an earlier period in
     faithful accordance with the original plan; and we may well be
     grateful to him for his modesty.

     “All the carving is most interesting and beautiful: the caps and
     corbels of the vaulting shafts; the little heads at the angles of
     the arches, which are vivid sketches of every type of contemporary
     character; and the carvings in the tympana, which are best in the
     seventh, eighth and ninth bays (counting from the west end), those
     on the north excelling in design and execution, while those on the
     south are more grotesque. But the capitals of the piers are the
     best of all, and the most hurried visitor should spare some time
     for the study of these remarkable specimens of sculpture, vigorous
     and lifelike, yet always subordinated to their architectural
     purpose. Those in the transepts[4] are perhaps the best, but the
     following in the nave should not be missed:--

     North side, Sixth Pier (by north porch): Birds pluming their wings:
     Beast licking himself: Ram: Bird with human head, holding knife
     (?).

     “Eighth Pier. Fox stealing goose, peasant following with stick:
     Birds pruning their feathers. (Within Bubwith’s Chapel) Human
     monster with fish’s tail, holding a fish: Bird holding frog in his
     beak, which is extremely long and delicate.

     “Ninth Pier. Pedlar carrying his pack on his shoulders, a string of
     large beads in one hand. Toothless monster with hands on knees.

     “South side, Seventh Pier. Birds with human heads, one wearing a
     mitre.

     “Eighth Pier. Peasant with club, seized by lion: Bird with curious
     foliated tail (within St. Edmund’s chapel). Owl: Peasant with
     mallet (?).”

If we look back towards the west end of the Nave we note an arcade of
five arches, the middle one widest of all to accommodate the two small
arches of the doorway. The three lancet windows are Perpendicular,
remodelled, and some of their dogtooth moulding, medallions in the
spandrels and little corbel heads of Early English work remain. There is
a gallery below the sill of the window.

The two western towers form two small transepts that project beyond the
aisles. Each is connected with the aisle by an arch. The Chapel of the
Holy Cross under Bubwith’s Tower (north) is the choir-boys’ vestry. The
chapel under Harewell’s Tower (south) is used by the bell-ringers. An
Early English doorway leads from it into the Cloister.

     “The nave, as far as the piers of the central tower, consists of
     ten bays, divided by octangular piers, with clustered shafts in
     groups of three. The capitals are enriched with Early English
     foliage, much of which is of unusually classical character,--one of
     the many indications of a lingering local school, with its Norman
     traditions. Birds, animals and monsters of various forms--among
     which is the bird with a man’s face, said to feed on human
     flesh--twine and perch among the foliage. Above the pier arches
     runs the triforium, very deeply set, and extending backward over
     the whole of the side aisles. The roof retains its original
     position. (The whole arrangement should be compared with the Norman
     triforia of Norwich and Ely, both of which extend over the
     side-aisles; but their exterior walls have been raised and
     Perpendicular windows inserted). The narrow lancet openings toward
     the nave are arranged in groups of three, with thick wall-plates
     between them. The head with each lancet is filled with a solid
     tympanum, displaying foliage and grotesques, of which those toward
     the upper end of the south side are especially curious. At the
     angles of the lancets are bosses of foliage and human heads, full
     of character. In the upper spaces between each arch are medallions
     with leafage. Triple shafts, with enriched capitals, form the
     vaulting-shafts, the corbels supporting which deserve examination.
     A clerestory window (the tracery is Perpendicular, and was inserted
     by Bishop Beckington (1443-1464)) opens between each bay of the
     vaulting, which is groined, with moulded ribs and bosses of foliage
     at the intersections.”--(R. J. K.)

In the clerestory of the sixth bay on the south side there is a =Music
Gallery=, early Perpendicular, the front of which consists of three
panels with large quartrefoils containing shields. It is very fine, but
not equal to the Minstrels’ Gallery in Exeter. It is finished with an
embattled cornice.

The aisles of the Nave are of the same architectural character as the
Nave itself. Among the striking capitals are:

Fifth shaft. Peasants carrying sheep, with a dog.

Ninth shaft. Man in a rough coat carrying foliage on his back.

Tenth shaft. Mason carrying a hod of mortar and a mallet; opposite side
of arch: Peasant in hood with staff and opposite this two heads,
evidently with toothache.

The greater part of the glass of the =West Window= was collected by Bishop
Creyghton in 1660-1670, excellent Sixteenth Century representations of
the history of _John the Baptist_. Possibly Creyghton added the figures
of _King Ina_ and _Bishop Ralph_ in the other lights, for the southern
one also bears his arms. The top and bottom of the middle light are said
to have come from Rouen in 1813.

Now we will examine the =transepts=.

     “The transepts seem to have been built before the nave, but some of
     the carved work of the capitals and corbels is of later date than
     the nave. The capitals on the west side of both transepts are among
     the finest in England. Many refer to the toothache.

     “North Transept: first Pier.--(Inside the Priest Vicars’ vestry) A
     prophet(?) with scroll on which there is no name: Man carrying
     goose. (Outside) Head with tongue on teeth.

     “Second Pier.--Aaron writing his name on a scroll: Moses with the
     tables of stone.

     “Third Pier.--Woman with a bandage across her face. Above this cap
     the corbel consists of a seated figure, naked, with distorted mouth
     and an agonised expression.

     “South Transept, second pier (from the south end). Two men are
     stealing grapes, one holds the basket full, the other plucks
     grapes, holding a knife in his other hand: The farmers in pursuit,
     one carries a spade and

the other a pitchfork: The man with the fork, a vigorous figure, catches
one thief: The man with the spade hits the other (whose face is most
woe-begone) on the head.

“Third pier.--Woman pulling thorn out of her foot: Man with one eye,
finger in his mouth: Baboon head: Cobbler; this figure shows very
plainly the method of shoemaking at this time; the cobbler in his apron,
sits with the shoe on one knee, his strap passes over the knee and round
the other foot, his foot is turned over so as to present the side and
not the sole to the strap: Woman’s head with long hair.

“Fourth pier.--Head perfectly hairless: Elias P. (the prophet) with hand
on cheek as if he, too, has the toothache: Head in hood, with tongue on
the one remaining tooth.

“It may be well here to say a word about the general classification of
these earlier capitals, since their date is a matter of great
architectural interest. I would venture to divide them into five
groups--

“(1) Those of the three western bays of the choir: simple carved foliage
of distinctly Norman character, as in the north porch: these belong to
the time of Reginald (1174-1191).

“(2) The four eastern bays of the nave and its aisles. Some of these may
belong to the first period, though later than the choir: they are more
advanced in the foliage, and teem with grotesque birds and beasts. Some,
however, of the caps in these bays are of quite different character;
they contain _genre_ subjects of perfectly naturalistic treatment, very
different to the St. Edmund of the north porch capital; but exactly
similar to the figure caps of the transepts. They must therefore have
been carved later than the death of Saint William Bytton.

“(3) The western bays of the nave. These, which are of much less
interest, belong to the period of Jocelin’s reconstruction (1220-1242).
They are characteristic examples of rich stiff-leaf foliage, freer than
that of the earlier work, but much less varied and without either human
figures or grotesques.

“(4) On the eastern range of transept piers. These would seem also to
come within Jocelin’s period, with the exception of the third pier of
the south transept.

     “(5) On the western range of transept piers, with which must be
     classed those later caps already referred to in the nave under
     group 2. Their date is settled by the fact that they abound in
     unmistakable representations of the toothache. Now Saint William
     Bytton died in 1274, and his tomb became immediately famous for
     cures of this malady. In 1286, the chapter decided to repair the
     old work, no doubt because the offerings at his tomb had brought
     money to the church.”--(P. D.)

In studying these fascinating grotesques, however, we have neglected to
examine the two chantries in the nave--=Bishop Bubwith’s= and =Dean
Sugar’s=. They are opposite one another and are alike in general
characteristics. The screen work and cornices of Bubwith’s composed of
light and elaborate tracery are very much admired. Light doorways permit
entrance. The altar here was dedicated to St. Saviour. Bishop Bubwith
(who built the north-west tower) died in 1424. His arms, containing
holly-leaves, are beautifully carved.

Sugar’s Chantry, about sixty years later in date, is even more
elaborate. Like Bubwith’s, it is hexagonal and the canopy over the altar
is vaulted with delicate fan-tracery. Critics now consider it the finer
of the two.

Adjoining Sugar’s Chantry the stone =Pulpit=, built in the reign of Henry
VIII., calls for attention. In front are the arms of Bishop Knight, who
built it and who is buried near it (he died in 1547). Beside it, is a
brass lectern presented in 1660; upon this rests a Bible of the same
date.

In the =South transept=, we find the =Font=, interesting because it is the
one relic of Bishop Robert’s Norman church. It may have stood in the
earlier Saxon cathedral. The cover is Jacobean.

In the south end of the south transept is the =Tomb of Bishop de Marchia=
(died 1302). The effigy of the bishop, lying in a recess under a canopy
bristling with crockets and finials and brilliant with scarlet and
crimson, green and gold, is very striking. Some of the angels
surrounding the figure are charming. It is interesting to compare this
with the =Tomb of Lady Lisle=, also adorned with crockets and brightly
coloured.

Perpendicular stone screens divide the transepts from their small
chapels. The chapels of the south transept are =St. Martin’s= (now the
canon’s vestry) and that of =St. Calixtus=, enclosed on the side of the
choir-aisle by some beautiful ironwork from Beckington’s tomb. On the
south side of St. Calixtus’s chapel we must pause to examine =Dean
Husse’s tomb=, of alabaster, and noted for its carved panels even in this
cathedral of splendid carvings.

=St. David’s Chapel= in the =north transept= compels us to pause again to
look at the capital of the second transept pier--a handsome head with
curls and a smile on his face--and a fine corbel carved into the form of
a lizard eating leaves of a plant with berries. In this chapel lies an
interesting effigy of =Bishop Still= (1543-1607) in a red robe lined with
white fur. Next comes the =Chapel of the Holy Cross= in which is the =tomb
of Bishop Cornish= (died 1513), thought also to have been used as the
Easter Sepulchre, where the Host was laid during Holy Week.

The north transept contains a relic of the past that delights every one
who happens to be there at the striking of the hour. The famous clock
that once belonged to Glastonbury Abbey is still in working order. A
little figure known locally as “Jack Blandiver” kicks the quarters with
his heels on two little bells and at the hour four figures on horseback
above the clock rush around and charge each other. The curious clock was
made by Peter Lightfoot, a monk of the abbey. It was said to have been
in constant use at Glastonbury for 250 years before it was removed to
Wells at the Dissolution of the monasteries.

From the east aisle of the north transept a door opens to the =Staircase=
that leads to the Chapter-House and also to the celebrated Chain-Gate,
or carved bridge that connects the Vicars’ College with the Cathedral.
Through this gallery the Vicars could pass from their own Close into the
Cathedral. The common hall of their college (1340) opens from it.

     “There are few things in English architecture that can be compared
     with it for strange impressive beauty; the staircase goes upward
     for eighteen steps and then part of it sweeps off to the
     Chapter-house on the right, while the other part goes on and up
     till it reaches the chain-bridge; thus the steps lie, worn here and
     there by the tread of many feet, like fallen leaves, the last of
     them lost in the brighter light of the bridge. Here one is still
     almost within the cathedral, and yet the carts are passing
     underneath, and their rattle mixes with the sound of the organ
     within.

     “The main gallery of the Chain-Gate is shut off by a door, which,
     if it were kept open, would make the prospect even more beautiful
     than it is. Two corbels which support the vaulting-shafts of the
     lower staircase should be noticed; they both represent figures
     thrusting their staves into the mouth of a dragon, but that on the
     east (wearing a hood and a leathern girdle round his surcoat) is as
     vigorous in action as the figure on the west side is feeble. A
     small barred opening in the top of the east wall lights a curious
     little chamber, which is reached from the staircase that leads to
     the roof.”--(P. D.)

The =Chapter-House= is famous among these beautiful adjuncts to English
cathedrals. It has been called “a glorious development of window and
vault.” It was built in the latter half of the Geometrical period
(1280-1315). Note the profusion of ball-flower ornament round the
windows and the ogee dripstones outside.

     “Of octagonal plan, its vaulting ribs branch out from sixteen
     Purbeck shafts which cluster round the central pillar, typifying
     the diocesan church with all its members gathered round its common
     father, the bishop. Each of the eight sides of the room is occupied
     by a window of four lights, with graceful tracery of an advanced
     geometrical type. These windows, which are among the finest
     examples of the period, have no shafts, but their arch mouldings
     are enriched with a continuous series of the ball-flower ornament.
     Most of the old glass in which ruby and white are the predominant
     colours, remains in the upper lights. Under the windows runs an
     arcade which forms fifty-one stalls, separated into groups of seven
     by the blue lias vaulting-shafts at the angles, but in the side
     which is occupied by the doorway there are only two stalls, one on
     either side of the entrance. Two rows of stone benches are under
     the stalls, and there is a bench of Purbeck round the base of the
     central pier.”--(P. D.)

Another authority says:

     “At the springs of the arches are sculptured heads full of
     expression, kings, bishops, monks, ladies, jesters; and at the
     angles, grotesques of various kinds. A line of the ball-flower
     ornament is carried round above the canopies.

     “The double arches at the entrance show traces of a door on the
     exterior. Remark the curious boss in the vaulting, composed of four
     bearded faces. The diameter of the chapter-house is fifty feet, its
     height forty-one feet. Its unusual, and indeed unique, features
     are--its separation from the cloisters from which the chapter-house
     generally opens; and its crypt, or lower story, which rendered
     necessary the staircase by which it is approached.

     “A most striking view of the chapter-house is obtained from the
     fourth angle of the staircase, close to the doorway of the Vicars’
     College. The effect of the double-door arches with their tracery,
     of the central pier, the branched ribs of the vaulting, and the
     fine windows is magnificent; and when the latter were filled with
     stained glass, must have been quite unrivalled. The chapter-house
     is by no means the least important of the many architectural
     masterpieces which combine to place Wells so high in the ranks of
     English cathedrals.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Crypt=, finished by 1286, represents the last development of the
Early English style. It was used as the treasury where valuables were
kept. It is reached by a dark passage from the north-choir-aisle. The
odd corbels should be noted. The walls are very thick, the windows
narrow with wide splays and the vaulting-ribs spring from round and
massive pillars with much effect. This Crypt is unusually high, because
the many springs at Wells would not permit of a subterranean chamber.

But again we have been led astray from the main body of the Cathedral.
Returning the same way, we again enter the north transept and stand
beneath the splendid fan-tracery vault of the tower, a vault, beautiful
as it is, that hides the lantern with its arcades. These, however, can
be seen during the ascent of the tower.

The =Screen= dates from the Fourteenth Century.

     “The first impression on entering the choir will not readily be
     forgotten. Owing to the peculiar and most beautiful arrangement of
     the Lady-chapel and the retro-choir, to the manner in which the
     varied groups of arches and pilasters are seen beyond the low altar
     screen, to the rich splendours of the stained glass, to the
     beautiful architectural details of the choir itself, and to the
     grace and finish of the late restorations, it may safely be said
     that the choir of no English cathedral affords a view more
     impressive or more picturesque. It is difficult to determine
     whether the effect is more striking at early morning, when the
     blaze of many-coloured light from all the eastern windows is
     reflected upon the slender shafts of Purbeck and upon the vaulted
     roof, or at the late winter services, when the darkened figures of
     saints and prophets in the clerestory combine with the few lights
     burning at the choristers’ stalls to add something of mystery and
     solemn gloom to the maze of half-seen aisles and chapels.

     “The first three piers and arches of the choir are Early English,
     of the same character as those of the nave and transepts, and are
     probably the work of Bishop Jocelin. The remaining portion,
     including the whole of the vaulting as well as the clerestory above
     the first three bays, is very rich early Decorated (geometrical)
     and deserves the most careful study.

     “The tabernacle work and the window tracery of the first three
     bays, although of the same date, are less rich than those of the
     eastern half of the choir. In this latter portion remark the triple
     banded shafts of Purbeck, carried quite to the roof as
     vaulting-shafts, and the tabernacle-work occupying the place of the
     triforium, deeper and wider than in the lower bays. Under each arch
     is a short triple shaft, supporting a bracket richly carved in
     foliage. The sculpture of the capitals and of these brackets is
     very good and should be noticed. The foliage has become
     unconventional, and has evidently been studied from nature. Its
     diminutive character, as compared with the Early English work in
     the nave, is very striking.

     “The east end of the choir is formed of three arches divided by
     slender piers above which is some very rich tabernacle-work,
     surmounted by an east window of unusual design. At the back of the
     altar, and between the piers, is a low diapered screen, beyond
     which are seen the arches and stained windows of the retro-choir
     and Lady-chapel.”--(R. J. K.)

The stone vault is unusual, a sort of “coved roof,” Freeman calls it,
“with cells cut in it for the clerestory windows.”

The three western bays are Bishop Reginald’s of the Twelfth Century.
Here we are in the very oldest part of the Cathedral. Triple
vaulting-shafts of Purbeck marble are carried down to the floor.

     “The clerestory windows contain flowing tracery of an advanced and
     not very good type. In some the plain mullions are carried on
     through the head of the window and intersect each other. Above the
     tabernacle-work of the east end is the EAST WINDOW of seven lights,
     the last bit of the Fourteenth Century reconstruction, the last
     flicker of Decorated freedom. Its curious tracery is still
     beautiful, doubly so for the glass it enshrines, but the rule and
     square of Perpendicular domination have already set their mark upon
     it; the two principal mullions run straight up to the window head,
     and part of the tracery between them is rectangular.”--(P. D.)

The Cathedral possesses sixty-four =Misericords=, from the old
choir-stalls, regarded as among the best examples of mediæval
wood-carving in England. The skilful hand of the carver has wonderfully
represented griffins fighting, mermaids, apes, goats, dragons, wyverns,
popinjays, cats, foxes, peacocks, monsters, angels, eagles, hawks,
rabbits, kings, peasants--and many other birds, animals and grotesques.

The soft yet brilliant light sifts in from the =Jesse Window= above the
high altar. We lift our eyes and with some pains discern the twining
branches of the vine with the recumbent figure of Jesse at the base,
resting his head on his hand. From him rises the leading shoot of the
tree, with the figures of the Virgin and the Child each with radiant
nimbus and beneath a golden canopy. The tendrils of the vine enwreath
prophets, priests and kings,--the ancestors of the Babe of Bethlehem.
Above is a representation of the _Crucifixion_; and at the very

[Illustration: WELLS: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: WELLS: SOUTH-WEST]

top of the window, the outstretched wings of the Holy Spirit.

The choir-aisles are of the same character as the choir itself and are
entered from the transepts through ogee arches, ornamented with crockets
and finials.

The south-choir-aisle contains the =Tomb of Saint William Bytton=, at
which (the oldest incised slab in England) offerings were made by those
suffering from toothache, as we have already seen. Further away is the
=Tomb of Beckington=, surrounded by a beautiful iron-screen of the same
date as the tomb (1452). The carving is very fine, especially the wings
of the angels. A little colour is left here and there. His effigy rests
upon it, with old and wrinkled face. This bishop said mass for his own
soul here in January, 1452, thirteen years before he died.

In the south-east transept, we find the =Chapel of St. John Baptist=,
where a Decorated piscina with canopy deserves attention.

At the extreme end of the north-choir-aisle is =Saint Stephen’s Chapel=
and at the extreme end of the south-choir-aisle is the corresponding
=Saint Catherine’s Chapel=. Both contain effigies of bishops, tombs and
monuments. Between and back of these is the Lady-Chapel.

We now return to the =Retro-choir=. Four slender piers of Purbeck marble
bear up the vault. The arrangement of the columns should be particularly
noticed here. It is hard to realise that this =Retro-choir= was merely a
device for connecting the Lady-Chapel with the Choir, it seems so
entirely a part of the scheme.

     “The beauty of the retro-choir, or ‘procession aisles,’ the
     arrangement of its piers and clustered columns, and the admirable
     manner in which it unites the Lady-chapel with the choir should be
     here remarked. It is throughout Early Decorated. The foliage of the
     capitals and the bosses of the vaulting will repay careful
     examination. Many of the vaulting ribs appear to spring from two
     grotesque heads--one on either side of the low choir-screen--which
     hold them between their teeth. The four supporting pillars and
     shafts are placed _within_ the line of the choir-piers, thus
     producing the unusual intricacy and variety of the eastward view
     from the choir. At Salisbury, and in all other English cathedrals,
     the piers of the procession-aisles are placed in a line with those
     of the choir.”--(R. J. K.)

Mr. Bond thinks the Wells architect got his idea for the octagonal
Lady-Chapel by tacking on the elongated octagonal of the Lichfield
Chapter-House to the rectangular retro-choir of Salisbury.

     “The Lady-chapel is an early work of the Curvilinear period; for it
     seems to have been complete in 1324. The windows have beautiful
     reticulated tracery of early type. There is lovely carving in the
     capitals, bosses, reredos, sedilia and piscina. The Curvilinear
     foliated capitals here and in the choir should be compared with the
     somewhat earlier capitals of the chapter-house, with the early
     Geometrical capitals of the staircase, the Lancet capitals of the
     west front and the late Transitional ones of porch, nave and
     transepts. The ancient glass here and in the Jesse window of the
     choir is superb in colour.

     “As every one knows, it is the most beautiful east end we have in
     England. It may be worth while to see how this design was arrived
     at--a design as exceptional as it is effective. The simplest form
     of an east end in English Gothic is seen at York and Lincoln: it
     consists merely of a low wall with a big window above it. The next
     improvement is to build an aisle or processional path behind the
     east end; at the same time piercing the east wall with one, two or
     three arches. This was done at Hereford about 1180; and on a
     magnificent scale in the Chapels of Nine Altars at Durham and at
     Fountains early in the Thirteenth Century. But the French apsidal
     cathedrals--of which we have an example in Westminster--have not
     only an encircling processional aisle, but also a chevet of chapels
     radiating out from it; thus providing ever-changing vistas of
     entrancing beauty. The next step in England also was to provide our
     rectangular choirs with a chevet as well as with a processional
     aisle. An early example of this plan is to be seen at Abbey Dore,
     in Herefordshire, about 1190. It occurs early in the Thirteenth
     Century on a still grander scale at Salisbury, where one finds not
     one but two processional aisles, as well as chapels to the east of
     them; and, in addition, a Lady-chapel projecting still farther to
     the east, thus producing a design of great complexity and beauty.
     Nevertheless, at Salisbury, since the chief supporting piers of the
     retro-choir and the chevet are in a line with those of the choir,
     there is by no means the same changeful intricacy of vista that
     affords one ever fresh delight in an apsidal church. At Wells,
     however, the architect attained all the success of the Continental
     builder simply because he built his Lady-chapel not rectangular but
     octagonal. For to get this octagon, of which only five sides were
     supported by walls, he had to plant in the retro-choir two piers to
     support the remaining three sides; and these piers are necessarily
     out of line with the piers of the choir. He had got the Continental
     vista. He saw it; but he saw also that it could be improved upon.
     And he did improve it, by putting up an outer ring of four more
     piers round the western part of the octagon of the Lady-chapel. It
     was an intuition of genius: it makes the vistas into the
     retro-choir and the Lady-chapel a veritable glimpse into fairyland;
     and provides here alone in England a rival to the glorious eastern
     terminations of Amiens and Le Mans. And that is not all. We saw in
     the chapter-house the grand effect of the central stalk branching
     upward and outward in all directions, like some palm tree
     transmuted into stone. This beautiful effect he transfers to the
     retro-choir, but multiplied--four palm trees in place of one; for
     each of the four external piers of the octagon emulates the
     chapter-house’s central stalk.”--(F. B.)

The large windows are filled with fine specimens of Fourteenth Century
glass unfortunately now jumbled together. The =East Window= is composed
of odd pieces put together by Willement. David and other patriarchs
occupy the upper tier, and the Virgin, Eve and the Serpent and Moses and
the Brazen Serpent, the lower tier. The upper lights display angels with
the instruments of the Passion, emblems of the Evangelists and busts of
bishops and patriarchs.

     “From the south-west transept we pass into the CLOISTERS, which
     occupy an unusual amount of space, but have only three walks
     instead of the usual four.

     “The difference between a true monastic cloister and this of Wells
     should be remarked. The canons of Wells were not monks and did not
     require a cloister in the ordinary sense. This is merely an
     ornamental walk around the cemetery. It did not lead to either
     dormitory, refectory or chapter-house. It served as a passage to
     the Bishop’s Palace; and the wall of the east walk is Early English
     of the same date as the palace itself. The lavatory in the east
     walk should be remarked, as well as the grotesque bosses of the
     roof in the portion built by Bishop Beckington. Over the western
     cloister is the Chapter Grammar School. The central space is known
     as the ‘Palm Churchyard,’ from the yew-tree in its centre, the
     branches of which were formerly carried in procession as palms.
     From the south-east angle of the cloisters we descend into the open
     ground within the gateway adjoining the marketplace, and opposite
     the episcopal palace. This is surrounded by a moat, as well as by
     strong external walls and bastions, and would have been capable of
     sustaining a long siege according to the mediæval system of
     warfare. The moat is fed by springs from St. Andrew’s, or the
     ‘bottomless well’--the original ‘great well’ of King Ina,--which
     rise close to the palace and fall into the moat in a cascade at the
     north-east corner. Both walls and moat were the work of Bishop
     Ralph of Shrewsbury (1329-1365).”--(R. J. K.)

Wells is famous for its ancient houses. The old Palace and the Deanery
are still occupied by the bishop and the dean; the canons and vicars
also live in the individual houses built for these ecclesiastics. Wells
was never a monastery with a common refectory and dormitory: there were
always secular priests here and each man lived in his own house. Of all
the domestic buildings the Bishop’s Palace is the most beautiful. It is
considered the most perfect specimen of an Early English house that
exists.




BATH ABBEY

     DEDICATION: ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR
     CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURE: WEST FRONT.


Standing before the =West Front=, we notice, first of all, that upon the
angles of the nave on either side of the great window are two turrets,
on the face of each of which is carved a ladder with angels ascending or
descending. The space above the window is also carved with angels; and,
under a canopy above the group, stands a figure of God the Father. Of
this strange decoration the following story is told:

Oliver King, Bishop of Exeter, was translated to the See of Bath and
Wells in 1495. He went at once to Bath, and found the church in a
dilapidated condition. While there, he had a repetition of Jacob’s
famous dream of a ladder reaching from heaven to earth with angels
ascending and descending. Above them stood the Lord, who said: “Let an
Olive establish the crown and a King restore the church.” Taking the
hint, Bishop Oliver King immediately set to work to rebuild the church
and had his dream recorded upon the west front. He also had an
olive-tree and crown carved on each of the corner buttresses.

Bishop King’s new church was smaller than the old one. It only occupied
the site of the former nave. He died before it was finished. Prior
William Birde continued the work, not forgetting a chantry for himself,
which is regarded as the best thing in the church. Birde died in 1525;
and the work was still unfinished when it was seized by the king’s
commissioners. The roofless and neglected church soon fell into decay;
but in 1572 it was patched up a little in order that services might be
held in it. The east window was glazed and the choir was roofed. The
nave, however, was not roofed until Bishop Montague’s rule (1608-1616).

At the beginning of the Nineteenth Century, many mean houses that had
clustered around Bath Abbey were removed, and buttresses and pinnacles
were added to strengthen the walls. Repeated restorations have made it
exceedingly trim in appearance.

About 775, Offa, the Mercian king, founded here a college of secular
canons, who were expelled by Dunstan in the Tenth Century and superseded
by monks.

One great event in the abbey church was the coronation of King Edgar on
the Feast of Pentecost, 973; and for centuries afterwards it was the
custom to select on Whitsunday a “King of Bath” from among its citizens,
in honour of this circumstance.

John de Villula, a Frenchman from Tours, who was Bishop of Somerset in
the reign of William Rufus, greatly preferred Bath to Wells. He was able
to merge Bath Abbey into the bishopric; and then he began to rebuild the
church dedicated to St. Peter. When it was finished, he transferred the
bishop’s seat from Wells to Bath. This did not satisfy Wells, however,
and when Robert of Lewes became bishop of Bath and Wells, he seems to
have arranged matters by allowing the Bishop of Somerset to have a
throne at St. Andrew’s in Wells and at St. Peter’s in Bath, the bishop
to be chosen by the monks of Bath and the canons of Wells (See page
108).

The church built by John of Tours having suffered from fire, Robert was
compelled to rebuild it; but subsequent bishops neglected Bath; and at
the end of the Fifteenth Century, when Oliver King was removed here from
Exeter, he found the church was in a ruinous condition and began to
rebuild it, as we have seen.

Bath Abbey is a very interesting example of late Perpendicular. It was
nearing completion when it surrendered to Henry VIII. in 1539, and is,
therefore, the last expression of Gothic Art. The most interesting part
of the church is the =West Front=, with its large window flanked by the
turrets with the ladders, already described. Each turret contains a
staircase; rises far above the parapet of the nave; and terminates in an
embattled parapet surmounted by an eight-sided and crocketed pyramid.

     “The great west window is one of seven lights, divided horizontally
     into four parts. Below it is a battlemented parapet with a niche in
     the centre, in which, no doubt, a statue formerly stood, and in
     which a new statue has recently been placed. At the base of it are
     the arms and supporters of Henry VII. Below it is the west door,
     beneath a rectangular label. The spandrels contain emblems of the
     Passion. On either side stand statues of St. Peter and St. Paul, to
     whom the church was jointly dedicated; these seem to be of
     Elizabethan date. The doors themselves were the gift to the church
     of the Lord Chief Justice, Sir Henry Montague, brother of the
     bishop who completed the church. On them may be seen shields
     bearing the arms of the Montagues and of the Bishop of Bath and
     Wells.”--(T. P.)

The =Central Tower= is oblong and rises two stages above the roof. It
contains two pairs of windows

[Illustration: BATH ABBEY: WEST FRONT]

[Illustration: BATH ABBEY: CHOIR, WEST]

with rectangular heads and each corner is ornamented by a heavy
octagonal turret also terminating in octagonal pyramids decorated with
crockets. Similar pyramids terminate the turrets that flank the sides of
the east window of the choir.

There is no Lady-Chapel.

Let us survey the exterior:

     “The nave consists of five bays. The clerestory windows are
     unusually lofty, and are divided by transoms; they are of five
     lights. Along the top of the clerestory wall is a battlemented,
     pierced parapet; but the pattern of the pierced openings differs
     from that of the parapet which runs along the top of the aisle
     walls. The aisles have five light windows without transoms; their
     heads are four centred arches; between each bay are projecting
     buttresses of three stages with gabled offsets, finished with
     crocketed pinnacles; against them rest flying-buttresses formed of
     a lower semi-arch, with a straight rectilinear truss. From the
     points where the arched flying-buttresses abut against the
     clerestory walls, vertical, slightly projecting buttresses are
     built upwards against the wall and rising above the parapet, are
     finished by crocketed pinnacles. The same design is carried right
     round the church. The clerestory of the transepts resembles those
     of the nave and the choir.”--(T. P.)

Entering, our first and general view is impressive, because of the
fan-vaulting and height of the =Nave=. Owing to the absence of horizontal
lines, the vault seems higher than it really is. There is no triforium.
A string-course runs above the arches of the main arcade beneath the
clerestory windows, which are unusually tall. On account of the enormous
windows and the absence of painted glass, Bath Abbey received the name
of the “Lantern of the West”; but now that the windows of the nave and
choir-aisles have been supplied with painted lights, the name is less
appropriate. The tracery of these windows is, of course, Perpendicular.
The one in the south-transept is a thanksgiving for the recovery of the
Prince of Wales in 1872. The lower lights depict the recovery of
Hezekiah and the royal arms of the Prince and Princess of Wales and also
those of the city of Bath. The upper part represents the Tree of Jesse.
The great east and west windows have seven lights. The west window
contains subjects from Old Testament history, and the east-window,
representations of the life of Christ.

     “There is little variety in the arches and shafts throughout the
     church. This repetition is a well-known feature in Perpendicular
     work. The piers have no general capital. The shaft which carries
     the inner order of the arch has a capital, and so, at the same
     level, have the vaulting-shafts of the high vault and that of the
     aisles. These shafts spring from the bases of the main pillars. The
     capitals at this level are plain, and so are the capitals of the
     vaulting-shafts of the nave from which the vaulting-ribs spring.
     But in the choir the place of these plain bands is taken by carved
     angels. Carved angels also form the termination of the
     hood-moulding of the lower windows of the south transept, and
     probably those of the north transept also, though these windows are
     hidden by the wooden pipes of the organ.

     “Over the heads of the clerestory windows of the nave are small
     shields, and shields may also be seen in the centre of the
     fan-tracery in the nave, choir and transept. In the aisles the
     fan-tracery is somewhat different, as in the centre of each bay
     there is a pendant. The vaulting of the nave and its aisles and
     that of the south transept are modern, put up, under the direction
     of Sir Gilbert Scott, to match the roof of the choir and its aisles
     and north transept respectively. The reredos was designed by the
     same architect. The oak screen across the eastern part of the south
     choir aisle is due to his son. The font is also modern. In fact,
     beyond the walls and the roofing of the eastern part of the church,
     there is little old about it. In the clerestory windows are a few
     fragments of Seventeenth-Century glass--heraldic shields.”--(T. P.)

Although Bath Abbey is full of monuments (there are over six hundred
memorial tablets besides statues), the only tombs that deserve attention
are those of =Bishop Montague=, in the fourth arch of the nave on the
north side, and =Lady Waller’s Monument= under the southern window of the
transept. The figure of her husband, Sir William Waller, who commanded
the Parliamentary army in the Battle of Landsdown, near Bath, clad in
mail, gazes down upon his dead wife. Two weeping children kneel at her
feet.

Between the choir and the south-aisle =Prior Birde’s Chantry= occupies two
bays. It is a most elaborate piece of carving. The rebus of the founder
(a bird and a W) appears frequently. Fan-tracery decorates the vault.

The very fine organ is placed in the transept. The bells of Bath are
famous.




BRISTOL

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY TRINITY. A CHURCH SERVED BY AUGUSTINIAN
     CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: EAST WINDOW (TRACERY AND GLASS); CHAPTER-HOUSE;
     GREAT GATEWAY.


The =West Front= of Bristol gives us a slight suggestion of a French
cathedral, for here we find a rose window and a large doorway, at the
side of which rise two square towers. The balustrade above the crocketed
gable of the doorway partly hides the rose-window.

The towers were built in 1887 and 1888: the north-west is Bishop
Butler’s Tower and the south-west, the Colston Tower. The Butler tower
is enriched with statues of St. Michael, St. Gabriel and the Angel of
Praise; the Colston, with the Angel of the Gospel, St. Raphael and the
Angel of the Sun. On our right is the Great Gateway.

The exterior of Bristol is not very striking. The buttresses of the
Elder-Lady-Chapel are Decorated and of the same date as the east window
of the same chapel. We should also view the great east window of the
Lady-Chapel from without and the =Central Tower=.

     “Early in the Fifteenth Century a central tower was added. Here
     again one is struck by the originality of the British people: it is
     as beautiful as it is original. The designer had noticed how
     beautiful is the effect of a close-packed range of tall clerestory
     windows, such as those of Leighton Buzzard Church. So instead of
     restricting himself on each side of the tower to one or two
     windows, he inserts no less than five. The range of clerestory
     windows, which the Fourteenth Century builder refused to the
     choir, becomes the special ornament and glory of the tower.”--(F.
     B.)

As we enter through the =North Porch=, which occupies the space between
two buttresses and is adorned with statues of the Four Evangelists, we
may remember that when Henry VIII. created the diocese of Bristol there
had been a church and monastery of Augustine canons on this site for
four hundred years. This monastery was founded in 1142 by Robert
Fitzhardinge, Lord of Berkeley Castle. Of his Norman church little
remains but portions of the walls in both transepts, a staircase in the
north-aisle leading to the tower, and some fragments in the choir. The
Norman nave was removed in 1542, because it was thought unsafe. The new
nave and western towers were completed in 1888 by Mr. Street, who copied
from the old, repeating the vaulting and the recesses of the eastern
end.

The ground plan consists of a nave with an aisle on either side; a
central tower and transepts; then the choir with north and south aisles;
and finally, the Lady-Chapel at the end. On the north of the
north-choir-aisle is the first Lady-Chapel--built in the Early English
style, and called Elder-Lady-Chapel to distinguish it from the later
Lady-Chapel at the east end.

At the south-east end of the south-choir-aisle we find the Berkeley
Chapel; and at the end of the south transept, the Newton Chapel. Beyond
it is the Chapter-House with its Vestibule, and on the south and west
the remains of the Cloisters.

Our best position for viewing the =Nave= is from the north or between the
two big towers. It is 120 feet long, 60 feet high and 69 broad
including the aisles. One peculiarity of Bristol is that the aisles are
of the same height as the Nave; and another, that this Cathedral has
neither clerestory, nor triforium. The windows of the Nave are very
large and are strengthened by transoms.

The =West Window= has for its subject the _Adoration of the Lamb_. The
=Choir= consists of four bays. It is in the Decorated style and dates from
1306 to 1332.

     “The piers of the choir carry triple shafts which support the
     vaulting of the choir, and others for the aisles, which are here of
     the same height as the choir. Capitals of great delicacy and
     beauty, modelled from real foliage, serve to break the line of the
     mouldings and accentuate the springing of the vault. Graceful
     though the span of the roof is admitted to be, the lines of the
     arcade of the choir are finer, and the effect of the contrast of
     their soft mouldings carried up and around without a break is
     excellent. The iron screen-work that separates the choir from its
     aisles is uninteresting and too small in scale.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

On either side of the high altar are canopied recesses containing
monuments. The reredos is a memorial to Bishop Ellicott and is rather
too high, therefore interfering with a good view of the splendid east
window in the Lady-Chapel. The mosaic pavement is new, and the stalls
are also modern. Some of the old =Misereres= have been preserved, however,
and consist of grotesques. Some of them illustrate _Reynard the Fox_.

In both aisles of the Choir we are struck by the very peculiar vaulting
designed by Abbot Knowle to strengthen the building and help carry the
lateral thrust occasioned by the heavy central vaulting. These bridges,
or transoms, therefore, do the work of flying-buttresses as faithfully
to-day as when they were erected six hundred years ago.

     “The transoms, features which were repeated in the windows of the
     aisles of the choir, and in a much heavier form in the windows of
     the nave, are additionally strengthened by the graceful arches
     below which spring from capitals almost similar to those on the
     choir side of the piers. From the centre of each transom rises a
     cluster of groining ribs. It has been customary to speak rather
     disparagingly of this clever piece of work of Abbot Knowle and to
     term it carpentry work in stone. It may be so, but the student of
     to-day may thank the Fourteenth Century Abbot for a most
     instructive lesson. The transoms have crowned heads at either end
     and in the centre, and they, unlike the transoms in the aisles of
     the nave, are ornamented with little flowers. Beneath the windows,
     which are Decorated in character, is a string-course, with
     ball-flower ornament, a feature which is found all round this
     eastern part. In the south aisle the vaulting was intended to be
     the same as in the north aisle, having been planned by the same
     architect, but a difference in the westernmost bay shows it was
     superintended by a different mind. In all probability it was
     Knowle’s successor, Abbot Snow, who, from 1332-1341, went on with
     his predecessor’s work, adding that part called the Newton
     Chapel.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

There is not a great deal of old glass in Bristol, but some of the
=Windows= in this east end are worthy of careful study.

     “The east windows of the choir aisles are filled with glass
     coloured with enamels in accordance with the practice of the
     Seventeenth Century instead of glass coloured in its manufacture.
     They date from the reign of Charles II.; and although it is
     traditionally said that they were presented by Nell Gwynne, it is
     more probable that they were the offerings of Henry Glenham, Dean
     of Bristol from 1661 to 1667, and afterwards Bishop of St. Asaph.
     The arms of Glemham (Or, a chevron gules between three torteaux)
     are repeated three times in the window of the south aisle and once
     in that of the north. The subjects (arranged as type and antitype)
     in the north aisle are--in the centre, the Resurrection; below
     Jonah delivered from the whale. On the right, above, the Ascension;
     below, Elijah taken up to heaven. On the left, above, the Agony in
     the garden; below, Abraham about to offer up his son.”--(R. J. K.)

In the third bay of the north wall of this north-choir-aisle a doorway
opens into a peculiar passage designed by Abbot Knowle to take the place
of a triforium. The passage leads to a staircase communicating with the
central tower and the belfry.

North of the north-choir-aisle we come to the greatly admired Early
English Chapel, the Elder Lady-Chapel.

     “The Lady-Chapel (generally called the Elder Lady-Chapel because
     the altar of the Virgin was removed to the east end of the church
     after Abbot Knowle had rebuilt the choir) is entered from the
     north-east corner of the transept. The chapel is Early English, and
     dates, according to Mr. Godwin, from the time of Abbot John
     (1196-1215). The chapel is of four bays, the windows in which are
     triplets with inner arches, of which those at the side are
     gracefully foliated. The detached vaulting-shafts are of Purbeck
     marble. The sculpture of the capitals and string-courses is
     unusually good; and the spandrels of the wall-arcade are filled
     with grotesque designs which are full of spirit and character,
     greatly resembling the sculpture in Wells Cathedral, much of which
     is of the same date. Remember especially--a goat blowing a horn and
     carrying a hare slung over his back; a ram and an ape playing on
     musical instruments; and St. Michael with the dragon(?); below is a
     fox carrying off a foliage. The vaulting of the roof would seem to
     stamp the English character.”--(R. J. K.)

This chapel was originally detached from the rest of the Cathedral.
Beneath the two arches

[Illustration: BRISTOL: NORTH]

[Illustration: BRISTOL: NAVE, EAST]

between it and the north-choir-aisle stands the =Tomb of Maurice=, ninth
Lord Berkeley (died 1368). Here he lies with =Elizabeth=, his wife. The
knight is in armour and his head lies on a mitre. A good groined canopy
overshadows these figures.

Retracing our steps into the choir and passing into the
=South-choir-aisle=, we examine the Glenham window, which is of the same
date as the corresponding one in the north-choir-aisle.

The subjects are--in the centre, above, _Our Lord Driving the Money
Changers from the Temple_; below, _Jacob’s Dream_; on the right, above,
the _Tribute Money_; below, _Melchisedec_ and _Abraham_; the subject on
the left, above, is uncertain; below, the _Sacrifice of Gideon_.

From the western bay of the south-choir-aisle we enter the =Newton
Chapel=, where members of the Newton family lie. This dates from
1332-1341. The style is late Decorated. The south wall divides it from
the Chapter-House, with which it is parallel.

On the right, after passing out of the Newton Chapel, we come to one of
Abbot Knowle’s recesses. The foliage consists of oak leaves and acorns
interspersed here and there with tiny sprays of mistletoe, an unusual
ornament, in church decoration.

We next pass the =Tomb of Thomas, Lord Berkeley=, who died in 1243. He is
represented in armour. His crossed legs show that he was a
knight-templar. This is the oldest monument in the cathedral. The next
recess contains the effigy of =Maurice, Lord Berkeley=, who died in 1281.
He is also in armour. In the next bay we pass up one step to the
entrance of a =Vestibule= (once a sacristy, now a music-room for the
choristers), a fine specimen of Decorated work. Through this we pass
into =Berkeley Chapel=.

     “Opposite the entrance door on the south side are three ogee arches
     with niches between. In one of these, the third from the west, was
     a hearth upon which the sacramental bread was baked. The
     ornamentation in the spandrels and the finials is curiously
     interesting work in foliage. The vaulting of the roof would seem to
     stamp the work as that of Abbot Knowle. It consists of curved ribs,
     quite detached, large in section, springing from small capitals.
     The bosses are particularly fine, the foliage being very flowing
     and free. It is difficult to realise that the mason has here done
     in stone what many wood-carvers would fail to do in their softer
     material. The door into the Berkeley Chapel is enriched with a
     niche overhead, and a moulding below consisting of medlers.”--(H.
     J. L. J. M.)

The Berkeley Chapel was dedicated to the Virgin Mary. It is thought that
an altar also stood here to St. Keyne, who turned to stone all the
snakes in the vicinity. The ammonites were probably suggested by finding
one or two in a piece of stone.

     “There are two windows toward the east, the soffetes of which are
     ornamented with a gigantic ball-flower; and the peculiar foliage on
     some of the capitals should be remarked. Under each of the windows
     was an altar, the steps and piscinæ of which remain. The altars
     were separated by a screen, the marks of which were visible in the
     old pavement. Between the chapel and the aisle the wall is pierced
     by the peculiar arch of Abbot Knowle; and under it, in the
     thickness of the wall, is an altar-tomb much ornamented and
     containing five shields charged with the coats of the Berkeley,
     Ferrers and De Quincey families. The tomb in its present state is
     no doubt that of Thomas, Lord Berkeley (died 1321), whose wives
     were of those families; but the lower part, with its very fine
     foliage, is of Early English date, and may possibly have been
     removed from another part of the church.”--(R. J. K.)

The =Lady-Chapel= is of the same date as the Choir. The east end was
rebuilt about 1280 and a window with geometrical tracery, consisting of
foliated circles, was inserted. Until 1895 it was used as a chancel. It
is 42 feet long and 32 feet broad and consists of two bays. It is
lighted by five windows. The central one is a Jesse window, and each of
the four side windows has a transom with rich tracery below. This rich
tracery we noticed from the street. In a good light relics of the
ancient painting on the walls, representing angels, each with a golden
nimbus, can be seen.

The =Reredos= of the Lady-Chapel is partly Abbot Knowle’s work and partly
Perpendicular. On the first bay of the south side are the =Sedilia=,
restorations of the original cut away to make room for an Elizabethan
tomb of =Sir John Young= and his family. They are in four divisions with
rich canopies of leafage supported by shafts of red serpentine.

The various recesses contain tombs and effigies of dignitaries of the
Cathedral, and, while the general lines of these recesses are similar,
there is much variety in the treatment of details.

The splendid =East Window= is pure Decorated and of great beauty in
tracery and design. Most of the glass is old, which adds another charm
to the lovely effect of the tracery. There is much beautiful silvery
white glass from which the brilliant colours sparkle with great effect,
and we have no difficulty in tracing the _Tree of Jesse_:

     “The lower lights are separated by vine tendrils into oval panels,
     twenty-one in all. In the lowest tier in the centre is Jesse with
     David on the right and Solomon on the left hand. To the left of the
     latter are the prophets Micah, Haggai, Malachi; to the right of
     David are Jeremiah, Daniel and Amos. In the next tier the central
     figure is the Virgin and Child with Hezekiah on the left and Ahaz
     on the right, the four kings, David, Solomon, Hezekiah and Ahaz,
     representing the descent of the promise. To the left of Hezekiah
     are the prophets Jonah, Habakkuk, Zechariah; and to the right of
     Ahaz are Isaiah, Ezekiel and Hosea. Above these two rows of regular
     panels are three panels, containing four subjects--the central one
     giving us the Crucifixion, with our Lord in glory in the upper part
     of the light. In the right hand light is the Virgin Mary, in that
     on the left is St. John.

     “In the head of this window there are now seventeen blazons of
     arms. In the quatrefoil at the top--the arms of England as used
     before the time of Edward III., viz., the three lions; in the two
     trefoils immediately below are Berkeley of Stoke Gifford (L),
     Berkeley of Berkeley Castle (R).

     “Most of the glass in this upper part is original and is supposed
     by Mr. Winston to date between 1312-1322, as the arms of Gaveston,
     who was murdered in 1312, are not in the window, while the arms of
     De Bohun, who was slain in open rebellion in 1322, are clearly
     here. The glass, then, is of Knowle’s time, and being contemporary
     with the masonry, affords a rich example of the harmony of form and
     colour about which one hears so much but which one so seldom sees.
     It is probable that the tracery of the window may have been
     designed for Abbot Knowle by the builder of the window at Carlisle,
     also an Augustinian house. There is a strong resemblance in the two
     windows, both of which are excellent work.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

The four side windows contain rich and interesting glass of the same
date. The one bearing the arms of Mortimer, Earl of March, has a picture
of the _Martyrdom of St. Edmund_, the last of the native kings of East
Anglia, who taken prisoner by the Danes in 870 refused to abjure his
faith. He was put to death. Here we find, according to legend, the grey
wolf watching over the severed head. The costume of the soldiers gives
us 1320 as the date of this magnificent window. Beneath St. Edmund are
an archbishop and two knights, bearing the arms of the Berkeleys.

The tracery of the large north window was inserted in 1704.

The =South Transept= contains the tomb of Bishop Butler, more famed as the
author of the _Analogy of Religion_ than as Bishop of Bristol
(1738-1750). The epitaph is by Southey.

The =Cloisters=, on the south side of the cathedral, are entered from the
south transept. From them the =Chapter-House= is entered.

The entrance, or vestibule, of the Chapter-House shows a very early
example of what may be called a pointed arch. The mouldings and members
are quite of the circular style and character. From north to south the
arches are round-headed, but east and west they are pointed. This
Transitional Norman work--dating from Fitzhardinge’s time--is of special
interest.

     “The chapter-house is one of the oldest parts of the earlier fabric
     of the cathedral, and as Britton truly says, ‘in its original state
     must have been one of the most interesting of the kind in the
     kingdom and perhaps in Europe.’ In spite of what it has undergone
     at the hands of architects, restorers and rioters, it is most
     interesting still, a regular parallelogram in shape, measuring 42
     feet in length by 25 in breadth and 25 feet in height, divided into
     two bays.

     “The eastern wall, which dates from 1831, has three windows, and
     the west wall has also three round-headed arches, the central one
     being the main door, while the side ones serve as windows, each
     being subdivided by a small pier. Each of these main openings has a
     label of cable-moulding. Above this cable-moulding is an arcade of
     interlacing arches, borne by thirteen tall piers, alternately
     plain and twisted; and above this is a semicircular space, also
     filled with rounded-headed intersecting arches, so arranged as to
     fill the semicircular space. The north and south walls have a plain
     round-headed arcading below, with a bold round moulding, while
     above is an elaborate arcading, similar to the lower tier on the
     west wall, but with much richer capitals. Above this is interlaced
     lattice-work, and above this in one bay a space covered with zigzag
     mouldings. The shafts of the arcading on the walls are alternately
     richly carved or almost plain. The clustered shafts, from which the
     main arch of the vaulting springs, are peculiarly rich in
     ornamentation.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

In the Chapter-House there is preserved a fine piece of archaic
sculpture, which was found under the floor in 1831 after the destructive
fire of that date, in use as a slab covering an ancient coffin. It
represents the descent of the Saviour into Hell and the delivery of
Adam, and is probably of the same date as the slabs in Chichester.

The famous =Great Gateway=, the arcading of which is much in the style of
the Chapter-House, is supposed to stand on the site of the principal
entrance to Fitzhardinge’s monastery. Though Norman in style and
probably containing a lot of Norman masonry, critics believe that it is
a Perpendicular restoration of the old work.

This archway is composed of four recessed orders enriched with chevron
and other mouldings and ornaments. This must not be confused with the
less elaborate =Gateway in Lower College Green=, probably of
Fitzhardinge’s time and strengthened by Abbot Newland. The latter was
the gateway to the abbot’s dwelling and afterwards to the Bishop’s
Palace.




GLOUCESTER

     DEDICATION: ST. PETER: FORMERLY THE CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE ABBEY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CENTRAL TOWER; CHOIR; LADY-CHAPEL; EAST WINDOW;
     CLOISTERS.


Gloucester presents a fine view from all points of approach.

     “As a rule, visitors see it first from the south side, and the
     south-west general view is one of the best, equalled, but not
     surpassed, by that from the north-west. The north view from the
     Great Western Railway, with the school playing-fields in the
     foreground, makes a striking picture, but it is more sombre than
     the picture formed by the south front. Viewed from the north-west
     corner of the cloister-garth, the pile is seen perhaps at its best.
     From this point it is easy to study so much the varied architecture
     of the whole, and with little effort to transport the mind back for
     a space of four hundred years. The eye first rests upon the turf of
     the garth now tastefully laid out after many years of comparative
     neglect. Flanking the garth on every side are the exquisite windows
     of the Cloister--a cloister which no other can surpass. Above the
     Cloister will be seen on the eastern side the sober, impressive
     Norman work of the Chapter-house in which so much of our English
     history has been made. To the south of this is the Library, built
     close against the walls of the north transept, which tower above,
     and lead the eye upward to the great tower which, ‘in the middest
     of the church,’ crowns the whole.

     “Placed where it is, almost in the centre of the long line of the
     nave, continued in the choir and Lady-chapel, at the point where
     the transept line intersects it, it is the chief feature of the
     massive pile. All else seems to be grouped with a view to the
     enhancing of the effect of the central position of the tower. The
     other members of the building seem merely to be steps, by means of
     which approach can be made to it. It is the grandest and most
     impressive feature of the outside. No matter from whence one looks
     at it, the charm is there. Seen from the gardens in the side
     streets close by when the pear-trees are in bloom, or in the full
     blaze of a hot summer day, or again later in the autumn when the
     leaves are beginning to turn, or, better still, in snow time, it is
     always full of beauty. On a bright hot day the pinnacles seem so
     far off in the haze as to suggest a dream fairyland. On a wet day,
     after a shower, the tower has the appearance of being so close at
     hand that it almost seems to speak. Viewed by moonlight, the tower
     has an unearthly look, which cannot well be described. The tower is
     225 feet high to the top of the pinnacles, and the effect of it is
     extremely fine. From the main cornice upwards, the whole of the
     stone-work is open, and composed of what at a distance appears to
     be delicate tracery, and mullions and crocketed pinnacles.”--(H. J.
     L. J. M.)

In it hang the venerable _bells_ that escaped the king’s commissioners
at the Dissolution of the monasteries in 1553.

Gloucester is notable for its examples of the Transition from Decorated
to Perpendicular, which probably originated in this Cathedral.

The abbey of Gloucester was founded by Osric, viceroy of King Edward, in
681. It was dedicated to St. Peter. Osric’s sister, Kyneburga, who died
in 710, was the first Abbess of this double foundation for monks and
nuns. Osric and Kyneburga were buried in the Abbey church in front of
the altar of St. Petronilla. In 823, secular priests were placed here by
the King of Mercia; and in 1022 they were expelled by Canute for
Benedictine monks. When the monastery was burned to the ground, Aldred,
Bishop of Worcester, re-established the monks in 1058, and began the
building of a new church also to St. Peter,--“a little further from the
place where it had first stood, and nearer to the side of the city.”

The monastery failed to flourish; Aldred was translated to York in 1060;
and when Serlo, who had been William the Conqueror’s chaplain, succeeded
to Wilstan, or Wulstan, Aldred’s successor, he had under him only two
monks and eight novices. After fifteen years of energetic rule
(1072-1103), Serlo rebuilt the Cathedral.

In August, 1089, an earthquake damaged the then existing building.
Eleven years later (1100), in the last year of the reign of William
Rufus, “the church,” as Florence of Worcester wrote, “which Abbot Serlo,
of revered memory, had built from the foundations at Gloucester, was
dedicated (on Sunday, July 15th) with great pomp by Samson, Bishop of
Worcester; Gundulf, Bishop of Rochester; Gerard, Bishop of Hereford; and
Herveas, Bishop of Bangor.” It is thought that part of the church was
finished for the dedication, such as the presbytery, choir, the
transepts, the Abbot’s cloister, the chapter-house, and the greater part
of the nave.

The Saxon Chronicle tells us that in 1122, while the monks were singing
mass, fire burst out from the upper part of the steeple, and burnt the
whole monastery. Between 1164 and 1179 one of the western towers fell
down.

Repairs were consequently necessary.

Offerings at the Tomb of Edward II. were a great aid in providing funds.

     “Instead of going on with Abbot Morwent’s rebuilding of the nave,
     the monks now turned their attention to the central tower. The
     tower was of no use as a lantern, for the lierne vault of the choir
     had been carried beneath it. So it long remained unaltered. But in
     the days of Abbot Seabroke (1460-1482), it was rebuilt under the
     superintendence of a monk named Tully, to be in character with the
     new exterior of choir and transepts. A very imposing tower it is;
     fully able, from its massiveness as well as from its height, to
     gather together the masses of the building--all the more so because
     the transepts are so short. It succeeds where the central towers of
     Worcester and Hereford fail; in fact, it is as effective in its way
     as Salisbury spire. The pinnacles, again, bear witness to the love
     of these later artists for harmony and unity; each pinnacle, with
     its two ranges of windows, is a repeat of the two stages of the
     tower below.

     “Then--after the tower had been erected--it was decided to rebuild
     the Lady-chapel. So an immense detached building was constructed to
     the east of the great window of the presbytery; without aisles, but
     with little transepts; almost one continuous sheet of glass, and
     with a superb vault. This Lady-chapel had to be joined up to the
     presbytery, but the great east window was in the way. However, the
     difficulty was got over by a series of ingenious shifts and dodges,
     which must be seen to be appreciated (1457-1499).

     “And so ended this great building-period at Gloucester (1330-1499),
     which turned the course of English architecture; so that the
     Curvilinear style of 1315 to 1360 did not find its natural
     development in Flamboyant, as on the Continent, but was switched
     off to Perpendicular and Tudor design.”--(F. B.)

Let us see what the “shifts and dodges” referred to above consisted of.

     “The method of joining the Lady-chapel to the choir is best noticed
     from the outside. It is a piece of exceedingly clever and graceful
     construction, and there is the minimum of obstruction to the light
     passing through to the east window, and the maximum of support to
     the elliptical east window. Viewing the Lady-chapel from the north
     side, the play of light through the windows on the south side has a
     very grand effect. Under the east end of the Lady-chapel is a
     passage which has given rise to much speculation in bygone times.
     The Lady-chapel, at

[Illustration: GLOUCESTER: EAST]

[Illustration: GLOUCESTER: TOMB OF EDWARD II.]

     the time of its erection, was carried out to the farthest limit of
     the land possessed by the Abbey. As the east wall of the chapel was
     actually on the western boundary wall the passage was made to give
     access from the north to the south of the grounds, without the need
     of going right round the precincts by the west front.”--(H. J. L.
     J. M.)

During the reign of Henry VIII., the Abbey which had

     “existed for more than eight centuries under different forms, in
     poverty and in wealth, in meanness and in magnificence, in
     misfortune and success, finally succumbed to the royal will. The
     day came, and that a drear winter day, when its last Mass was sung,
     its last censer waved, its last congregation bent in rapt and lowly
     adoration before the altar there; and, doubtless, as the last tones
     of that day’s evensong died away in the vaulted roof, there were
     not wanting those who lingered in the solemn stillness of the old
     massive pile, and who, as the lights disappeared one by one, felt
     that there was a void which could never be filled, because their
     old abbey, with its beautiful services, its frequent means of
     grace, its hospitality to strangers, and its loving care for God’s
     poor, had passed away like a morning dream, and was gone for
     ever.”--(W. H. H.)

Gloucester has suffered from the hands of restorers. In 1847, Mr. F. S.
Waller made extensive repairs. At this time the gardens were added.

The exterior presents a great variety of battlements and pinnacles and
another interesting feature in the exterior is the construction of the
two passages which make up the greater part of the so-called Whispering
Gallery. This connects the north and south triforium of the choir.

The =West Front= of Gloucester, restored in 1874, is comparatively
uninteresting. The buttresses of the great window are pieced, as are
also the parapets. Plain transoms cross the lights of the great west
window, the tracery of which is very elaborate when looked at from
within. The old towers have disappeared.

The =South Porch= is the principal entrance. It is the work of Morwent
(1421-1437). Over the doorway stand St. Peter and St. Paul and the four
Evangelists, and below them are King Osric and Abbot Serlo, the founders
of the Abbey church. In the niches of the buttress stand St. Jerome, St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine and St. Gregory. The windows of this porch have
been formed by piercing the tracery of the inside. Over the porch is an
unfinished parvis. The doors date from the Fifteenth Century.

We now enter the =Nave=.

     “The first impression of the nave changes all earlier thoughts of
     the age of the building. It is unmistakably Norman, grand beyond
     expression, but cold, severe and deathly white. The stained glass
     (mostly modern) of the Norman and Decorated windows fails to supply
     the evident lack of colour.

     “There was a time when lines of blue and scarlet and gold relieved
     the white vaulted roof, when altars agleam with colour and pale
     flickering lights gave light and brightness to the chill whiteness
     of this vast and mighty colonnade. On Sunday evenings, when the
     nave is filled with worshippers and the bright searching daylight
     is replaced by the yellow gleam of the little tongues of fire above
     the great and massive arches, the want of colour is little felt,
     and the noble and severe beauty of the matchless Norman work in the
     great nave strikes the beholder. The nave of Gloucester, to be
     loved and admired as it deserves, and as it appeared to men in the
     days of the Plantagenet Kings, must be seen in one of the many
     crowded evening services.

     “Save that the altars with their wealth of colour and light are
     gone, and the lines of colouring and the glint of gold of the
     Norman wooden ceiling no longer are visible on the stone-vaulted
     roof above and the south aisle Norman windows are replaced with
     exquisite Decorated work of the time of the second Edward, there is
     no great structural change since the day at the close of the
     Eleventh Century when Abbot Fulda from Shrewsbury preached his
     famous sermon to the Gloucester folk, the sermon in which he
     foretold the death of the imperious and cruel Rufus in words so
     plain, so unmistakable, that Abbot Serlo of Gloucester, who loved
     the great wicked King, in spite of his many sins, was alarmed and
     at once sent to warn his master, but in vain. Rufus disregarded the
     Gloucester note of alarm, and a few hours later the news of the
     King of England’s bloody death, in the leafy glades of the New
     Forest, rang through Normandy and England.

     “Yes, it is the same nave, only colder and whiter, on which Anselm,
     the saintly archbishop, and Rufus gazed; the same avenue of massy
     pillars--then scarcely finished--through which Maud the Empress
     often went to her prayers with her chivalrous half-brother, Earl
     Robert. Beauclerc, her father, too, and some grey-haired survivors
     of Hastings must have looked on these huge columns crowned with
     their round arches which excite our wonder to-day. They were a
     curious fancy of the architect of Serlo; or was it not probably a
     design of a yet older artist of Edward the Confessor? These
     enormous round shafts, which are the peculiar feature of the nave
     of our storied abbey, have only once been repeated, probably by the
     same architect, in the neighbouring abbey of Tewkesbury, a few
     years later. There is nothing like them on either side of the
     silver streak of sea. The Tewkesbury copies are slightly smaller;
     otherwise they are exact reproductions of Gloucester.”--(S.)

The Nave differs from other Norman naves like those of Peterborough, Ely
and Norwich.

     “The unique features here are the great height of the massive
     circular columns, fourteen in number, and the consequently dwarfed
     triforium or gallery running over the main arches. There are traces
     to be seen of the original Norman clerestory under the
     Perpendicular windows, and, judging from this, the height of the
     clerestory, as originally constructed, must have been but little
     less than that of the piers in the nave.

     “This Norman clerestory was altered at the same time that the roof
     of the nave was vaulted--viz. in 1242, in the time of Henry Foliot.
     This work was done by the monks themselves, who thought, as
     Professor Willis suggests, that they could do it better than common
     workmen. Their work is made of a light and porous kind of stone,
     treated with plaster on the under-side, and it was rendered
     necessary by the previous roof, which was of wood, having been
     destroyed by fire in 1190. Of this fire the piers certainly show
     the traces to this day, all having become reddened and slightly
     calcined. To make the new clerestory the whole of the original
     Norman work over the arcade of the triforium was removed, with the
     exception of the jambs of the side-lights (which extended beyond
     the arches of the triforium) and the wall between them.”--(H. J. L.
     J. M.)

All the stone-work was originally painted.

     “The painting may be thus generally described. The hollow of the
     abacus of the capitals was red, the lower member of the same,
     green; the whole of the bell red, the leaves alternately green and
     yellow, with the stalks, running down, of the same colours, into
     the red bell of the capital. The vertical mouldings between the
     marble shafts were red and blue alternately; the lower shafts green
     and blue, with red in the hollows, and the foliage on these also is
     green and yellow. Some of the horizontal mouldings are partly
     coloured also. The bosses in the groining are yellow and green, as
     in the capitals. All the colouring, which was very rich, was
     effected with water colours; in one instance only has any gold been
     discerned, and that was upon one of the bosses in the roof.”--(F.
     S. W.)

Abbot Morwent pulled down the west end of the Nave in 1421-1437 and
reconstructed it in the Perpendicular style. It is supposed that the
original =west front= was like that of the Abbey at Tewkesbury.

The west window contains nine lights, filled with modern glass.

The =South aisle=, originally Norman, was remodelled about 1318. The
tracery of the windows is unusual. The ball-flower is seen in great
profusion in this part of the Cathedral.

In this aisle there is a monument to Dr. Jenner of vaccination fame, to
whom the five-light west window here is also a memorial.

The tracery of the windows of the clerestory is attributed to Abbot
Morwent.

The =North aisle= retains its original Norman vaulting, and the Norman
piers, which correspond to the piers in the Nave, are divided into
several members. Some of their capitals are richly carved. In each bay
there is some Perpendicular tracing. A stone bench along the wall is
also Perpendicular.

The door into the Cloister at the west end of the aisle is very fine,
and the side niches and canopy work over it deserve study.

The door at the eastern end of the aisle leading to the Cloisters is
also Perpendicular. Both doors have fan-vaulted recesses, like the great
west door of the Nave.

The west end of the aisle is the work of Abbot Morwent (1421-1437).

A heavy stone screen, dating from 1820, closes the east end of the nave.
We pass through a small arch in this screen, and beneath the broad
platform on which the great organ stands.

This was originally built in 1663-1665 by Thomas Harris, and was painted
and gilded in 1666. The oak case is in the Renaissance Style.

Little idea of the beauty of the =Choir= can be obtained from the Nave. We
enter from the north aisle. It is 140 feet long; 33 feet 7 inches broad;
and 86 feet high.

     “Looking upwards, the visitor will note the beauty of the vaulting
     and the bosses placed at the intersection of the ribs. These bosses
     at the east end of the choir chiefly represent a choir of angels
     playing on various kinds of musical instruments, and a figure of
     Our Lord in the attitude of blessing. All the roof was originally
     probably painted and decorated, but the existing colour and gilding
     is recent work, having been done by Clayton & Bell. At first sight
     the groining of the roof looks most complicated, but, if analysed
     and dotted down on paper, it will be seen to be in reality a simple
     geometrical pattern. The bosses will repay careful examination with
     a glass.

     “Viewed from the door in the screen, the choir looks in very truth
     a piece of Perpendicular work, as the Norman substructure is then
     for the most part concealed. A closer examination, however, will
     prove that the Norman work is all there--that it has been veiled
     over with tracery from the floor level to the vaulting with open
     screen-work, fixed on to the Norman masonry, which was pared down
     to receive it.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

The general impression is striking:

     “The choir on which you are now looking is very long--not too long,
     however, for its great height--for the fretted roof, a delicate
     mosaic of tender colours set in pale gold, soars high above the
     vaulting of the nave. The proportions are simply admirable. From
     the lofty traceried roof down to the elaborately tiled floor, the
     walls are covered with richly carved panelled work, broken here and
     there with delicate screens of stone. The eastern end, hard by the
     high altar, is the home of several shrines. There is happily no
     lack of colour in this part of our cathedral. The western end is
     furnished with sixty richly-carved canopied stalls of dark oak,
     mostly the handiwork of the Fourteenth Century. The curiously and
     elaborately fretted work of the roof we have already spoken of as
     a rich mosaic of gold and colours. The floor, if one dare breathe
     a criticism in this charmed building, is too bright and glistening,
     but it is in its way varied and beautiful. The carving of the
     reredos, a work of our own day, is, to the writer’s mind, open to
     criticism, but is still very fair, telling in every detail of
     loving work and true reverence.”--(S.)

The =High Altar= occupies the same site as the ancient one. The sixty
=Choir-stalls= have been restored in part; the sub-stalls date from Sir
Gilbert Scott’s restoration (1873). On the south side of the High Altar
there are four =Sedilia= also restored. Redfern’s figures in the niches
are Abbot Edric, Bishop Wulstan, and Abbots Aldred, Serlo, Foliot,
Thokey, Wygmore, Horton, Froucester, Morwent, Seabroke and Hanley. The
three angels over the canopies, playing on a tambour and trumpets,
deserve notice.

On the north side of the =Presbytery= we pause to look at the chantry =Tomb
of Abbot Parker=, where the carving of vine and grapes on the stone
screen is fine. The curious cross in the form of a growing tree at the
foot of the tomb is also striking. Parker, who died in 1539, was buried
elsewhere. Then we pass to the more famous =Tomb of Edward II.=, erected
by Edward III. The alabaster figure is probably the earliest of its kind
in England. The tomb was opened in 1855 to satisfy curiosity as to
whether the king was really buried there after his murder in Berkeley
Castle nearby.

     “Though it awakens our recollection of a feeble-minded king, and
     his barbarously brutal murder, it also compels our admiration at
     the beauty of the work. It has been restored, renovated or
     re-edified, but in spite of that, appeals to us from the wealth of
     very highly ornate tabernacle work, the richness, and at the same
     time the lightness and elegance of the whole. The details too are
     well worth careful examination. It may be, judging from the
     expression of the face, that there has been some attempt at
     portraiture, but repair and restoration have practically made it
     impossible to settle what would otherwise be an interesting
     question. The superb canopy has suffered much at the hands of
     restorers--e.g. in 1737, 1789, 1798 and in 1876.”--(H. J. L. J. M.)

The next monument is to =King Osric=, erected in “late dayes,” _i.e._ in
the time of Abbot Parker, whose arms are in the spandrels of the canopy
(1514-1539).

The Norman piers, cut away to receive the tomb, are decorated on their
capitals with the white hart chained and gorged, with a ducal coronet,
the device of Richard II. Osric is represented as clad in tunic, laced
mantle and a fur hood or collar, bearing the model of a church in his
left hand.

The next tomb westwards is, as Leland says, that of “=King Edward of
Caernarvon= (who) lyeth under a fayre tombe, in an arch at the head of
King Osric tombe.”

The transepts and ambulatory of the choir are usually entered through
the iron gateway in the south aisle of the nave.

These =Ambulatories=, or aisles, have nothing uncommon in their form or
arrangement below, but above occurs the great peculiarity of this
church. The upper range of chapels surrounding the Choir is perhaps not
to be met with in any other church in Europe.

Another peculiarity of the Choir is its six-light west window. This was
rendered necessary by the difference in height of the Nave and Choir;
for the vaulting of the choir is about twenty feet higher than that of
the Nave. The glass consists chiefly of patchwork from other windows in
the Cathedral. It represents a figure of our Lord, with angels on either
side. Below angels play musical instruments.

The =Triforium= of the Choir is considered by some critics the finest in
existence.

     “It occupies the space over the ground floors of the aisles or
     ambulatory of the choir, and originally extended of a like width
     round the east end of the Norman Church, but at the time when the
     Fourteenth-Century work of the present choir was executed, the
     whole of the east end of the old Norman choir, with the
     corresponding part of the triforium, was removed in order to make
     room for the existing large window, the small east chapel being
     allowed to remain.”--(F. S. W.)

The =Triforium= is reached by the staircases in the western turrets of the
two transepts and by arcaded passages passing under the great windows of
the transepts.

     “The first chapel in the triforium contains two brackets with rich
     canopies, and there is a very well preserved double piscina.
     Ball-flowers in two rows will be found in the mouldings of the east
     window. Remains of two canopies in the jambs of the windows are
     also to be traced.

     “The massive Norman piers should be carefully studied, as the way
     in which the later casing work has been applied can be more easily
     seen in the triforium than elsewhere.

     “The picture on the west side of this part of the triforium was
     discovered in 1718, against the then eastern end of the nave,
     underneath the panelled wainscot at the back of the seats occupied
     by the clergy when the nave was used for service.”--(H. J. L. J.
     M.)

This painting of _The Last Judgment_ is supposed to date from the reign
of Henry VIII., or Edward VI. It was suggested by the great altar-piece
at Dantzig (1467).

As an entrance to the east chapel of the triforium, the narrow gallery,
called the =Whispering Gallery=, was made. It is a passage of Norman work,
very much altered and re-used. It is 74 feet long, 3 feet wide, 6⅛
feet high, and is carried on segmental arches from the east end of the
south triforium to the west wall of the Lady Chapel, and thence in the
same way to the north triforium.

On the way towards the Whispering Gallery, the flying-buttresses
inserted in 1347-1350 to support the walls of the clerestory, which were
weakened by the insertion of the great east window of the Choir, should
be noticed.

Visitors are always interested in the Whispering Gallery, where the
lightest whisper can be easily and distinctly heard at the other end of
the gallery. It inspired the following lines, by Maurice Wheeler
(head-master of the King’s School, 1684-1712):

    “Doubt not but God, who sits on high,
      Thy secret prayers can hear,
     When a dead wall thus cunningly
      Conveys soft whispers to the ear.”

The =East Window= is larger than the East Window of York Minster. It
measures 78 × 38 feet; that at York is 78 × 33.

Though it has suffered much mutilation, restorers have done little harm,
and it is possible to get some idea of its original splendour.

     “It is worthy of remark that the tracery, heads and cusps, as seen
     from the inside of this window, are not repeated on the outside, a
     plain transom only crossing the lights. This peculiarity is
     repeated in the great west

[Illustration: GLOUCESTER: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: GLOUCESTER: CLOISTERS]

     window and in many other windows in the cathedral.”--(F. S. W.)

The stone-work of the window was restored in 1862 and the glass cleaned
and re-leaded. The window consists of fourteen lights--six on the centre
with four on either side. The subjects are the Coronation of the Virgin
Mary with Christ and the Apostles, saints and kings. The heraldic
shields fix the date of the glass between 1347 and 1350. The canopies
and nearly all the figures are of white glass enriched with yellow. The
tones of red and blue are particularly rich. The drawing of the figures
has been much criticised.

     “The whole of this, the loveliest choir in England, is lit by a
     mighty wall of jewelled glass behind the great golden reredos.

     “This vast east window which floods the choir of Gloucester,
     beautiful as a dream with its soft, silvery light faintly coloured
     with jewelled shafts of the richest blue and red, and here and
     there a vein of pale gold--this vast window could not have been
     seen out of England, or, at least, one of the grey and misty
     northern countries, where gleams of light or shafts of sunshine are
     exceedingly precious. In south or central Europe the effect of such
     a mighty window would be simply dazzling to the eye, would be
     painful from its excess of light.

     “This great east window is the largest painted window in
     England--the largest, the writer believes, in Europe. Its stonework
     exceeds in size the magnificent east window of York, which stands
     next to it. The respective measurements are Gloucester, seventy-two
     feet high by thirty-eight wide; York, seventy-eight by thirty-three
     feet. The lower parts of the centre compartments at Gloucester are
     not completely glazed, owing to the opening into the Lady-chapel.
     The glass of Gloucester is, on the whole, light-coloured, the
     designers being evidently anxious that the beautiful stone panels
     and screen-work should be seen in all their exquisite details. The
     glass has suffered marvellously little from the ravages of weather
     and the fanaticism of revolutionary times; the busy restorer, too,
     has dealt gently with it. There are forty-nine figures, and of
     these thirty-seven are pronounced by our lynx-eyed experts to be
     absolutely genuine. Of the eighteen armorial shields in the lower
     lights thirteen are certainly the identical shields inserted by the
     survivors of Cressy. The whole of the gorgeous canopy-work has been
     untouched. The subject of the paintings is the _Coronation of the
     Virgin_ and the figures consist of winged angels, apostles, saints,
     kings and abbots. The coats-of-arms are those borne by King Edward
     III., the Black Prince, and their knightly companions, such as the
     Lords of Berkeley, Arundel, Pembroke, Warwick, Northampton, Talbot
     and others who took part in the famous campaign in which occurred
     the battle of Cressy, and who in some degree were connected with
     Gloucestershire. The window was, in fact, a memorial of the great
     English victory, and may fairly be termed the Cressy window.”--(S.)

The =Vestibule= to the Lady-Chapel is a beautiful work. The lower portions
of the west wall, parts of the old Norman apsidal chapel, are pierced by
the opening for the door and by two perpendicular windows.

The lierne vaulting is very delicate (the ribs are run differently in
the four quarters of the roof), and the pendants form a cross. Over the
vestibule is the small chapel which is entered from the Whispering
Gallery.

The beautiful =Lady-Chapel= was built between 1457 and 1499 on the site of
a smaller one.

The Lady-Chapel, 91 feet 6 inches long, 25 feet 6 inches high, and 46
feet 6 inches high, consists of four bays, which, as the wall of the
chapel is so low, are chiefly composed of fine tracery and glass.

     “All the wall below the windows is arcaded with foiled arches, with
     quatrefoils above them. The wall between the windows is panelled
     with delicate tracery like that in the windows, and in its three
     chief tiers contains brackets for figures, with richly carved
     canopies overhead. Many of these canopies (like the walls) show
     traces of colour.

     “Vaulting shafts of great beauty support one of the grandest
     Perpendicular roofs that has ever been made. Each boss in the roof
     is worth minute inspection, and since the restoration (1896) it is
     possible to see the bosses in practically the same condition as
     they were when they left the masons’ hands in the Fifteenth
     Century. With three exceptions they are all representations of
     foliage.

     “It has been said above that the chapel is cruciform. The arms of
     the cross are represented by the two side chapels, like diminutive
     transepts on the north and south sides, with oratories above them,
     to which access is given by small staircases in the angles of the
     wall. Both these side chapels contain some exquisite fan-tracery
     vaulting, which is supported upon flying arches, fashioned in
     imitation of the graceful flying arches in the choir.

     “On the north side the chapel contains a full-length effigy of
     Bishop Goldsborough (who died in 1604) robed in his white rochet,
     black chimere, with lawn sleeves, scarf, ruff and skull-cap.

     “The east window in this chapel is in memory of Lieut. Arthur John
     Lawford (1885), and is dedicated to St. Martin.

     “The chapel above has a vaulted roof with bosses of foliage, and
     there are small portions of ancient glass.

     “The Lady-chapel is one of the largest in the kingdom, and is said,
     at the time of the Dissolution, to have been one of the richest. A
     great part of it is said to have been gilded and gloriously
     ornamented. Traces of the colour can be seen in the mouldings of
     the panellings and in the carving upon the walls.”--(H. J. L. J.
     M.)

The =Reredos= still retains traces of its gorgeous colours. It is very
richly ornamented.

The =East Window=, consisting of nine lights, dates from 1472-1479. The
monuments are not especially remarkable. The tiles of the floor and the
sedilia are notable.

On our right, as we leave the Lady Chapel, we come to =Abbot Boteler’s
Chapel= (1437-1450). It contains a fine ancient reredos, interesting
tiles and a curious wooden =effigy of Robert, Duke of Normandy=, son of
William the Conqueror. Critics think it nearly contemporary with the
Duke himself. The figure rests on a Fifteenth Century chest.

Next we come to =St. Paul’s Chapel= (north-west) entered by a doorway. The
reredos here is very fine. It was repaired in 1870. St. Peter, St. Paul
and St. Luke, by Redfern, ornament the niches.

An ancient stone reading-desk, from which pilgrims to the shrine of
Edward II. were addressed, attracts our attention near the door leading
into the =North Transept=. This is originally Norman, cased over with
Perpendicular panelling, more developed, however, than that in the south
transept. The work here was done in 1368-1373. Angular mouldings are
used in the place of round mouldings and the mullions run right up to
the roof, which is much richer than that in the south transept. The
vaulting of the north transept somewhat resembles the fan-tracery of the
cloisters. This transept is 8 feet lower than that on the south side and
it is 2 feet shorter.

Beneath the north window is a greatly admired piece of Early English
(1240), supposed to have been a =Reliquary=. The middle of the three
divisions is a doorway. Beautifully carved foliage and Purbeck marble
shafts are the chief ornamentation.

Opposite, between the tower-piers, is a small chapel, said to have been
dedicated to St. Anthony. It is used as the Dean’s vestry.

The =South Transept= (=St. Andrew’s Aisle=) was transformed from the Norman
in 1329-1337. The vaulting is lierne with short ribs. The walls are
panelled.

On the north side of the south transept, we find the =Seabroke Chapel=.

     “The alabaster effigy represents the Abbot in his alb, stole,
     tunic, dalmatic, chasuble, amice and mitre, with his pastoral staff
     on his right side. The chapel has been partially restored. Traces
     of colour are to be seen in the reredos and the roof over it.

     “Almost opposite to this, but nearer to the iron gate, is a
     recessed tomb to a knight in mixed armour of mail and plate, and by
     his side his lady, with kirtle, mantle and flowing hair. Both wear
     SS. collars, and this helps to give the age of the monument, by
     narrowing the date down to a year not earlier than 1399.”--(H. J.
     L. J. M.)

On the east side the =Chapel of St. Andrew= occupies a corresponding
position to that of =St. Paul= in the north transept. This chapel has been
restored. Some of the best glass in the Cathedral is contained in the
east window over St. Andrew’s Chapel. It dates from about 1330 and
consists of the head of a white scroll-work of vine leaves, etc., on a
fine ruby-coloured ground, and below plain quarries with very simple
borders.

Opposite Boteler’s Chapel we find =St. Philip’s Chapel= (south-east),
restored in 1864. There is some dog-tooth moulding near the piscina. A
fine Perpendicular arch, supporting the triforium above, attracts
attention before the Lady-Chapel is entered.

The =Crypt= is entered from the eastern door in the south transept. It is
one of the five great eastern crypts erected before 1085[5] and consists
of an apse, three small apsidal chapels and two chapels underneath the
eastern chapels of the north and south transepts.

     “Great alterations have from time to time been made in the crypt.
     The large semicircular columns against the walls, though of great
     antiquity, are not parts of the original structure, but are casings
     built round, and enclosing the former smaller piers, and the ribs
     springing from their capitals are built _under_, with a view to
     support the vaulting.”--(F. S. W.)

Through a door in the organ screen in the north aisle of the nave we
enter the =Cloisters=, which are among the most perfect and beautiful in
England. They form a quadrangle and each walk is divided into ten
compartments. Fan-tracery is thought to have originated here in the
vaulting. They were begun by Abbot Horton (1351-1377) and completed by
Abbot Froucester (1381-1412).

     “The view looking down either of the walks is very fine, mainly
     owing to the richness of the groined roof, which is the earliest
     example of the fan-vault. This style of vaulting is entirely
     peculiar to England; and Professor Willis has suggested that the
     school of masons who were employed in this cathedral may have
     originated it. The wall sides of the cloisters are panelled; and
     the windows, divided by a transom, have rich Perpendicular tracery.
     The lights above the transom were glazed. Each walk is divided into
     ten compartments. In the south walk are the Carrels--places for
     writing or study, twenty in number, formed by a series of arches,
     running below the main windows. In each carrel is a small and
     graceful window of two lights.[6] The very fine view at the angle
     of the south and west walks should especially be noticed. In the
     north walk are the lavatories, projecting into the cloister garth;
     these are very perfect. Under the windows is a long trough or
     basin into which the water flowed. The roof is groined. Opposite in
     the wall of the cloister, is the recess for towels, or
     _manutergia_. The windows of the east walk are filled with memorial
     glass by Hardman (the eighth is by Ballantyne, as is one window in
     the west walk).”--(R. J. K.)

A small cloister, or slype, opens from the east walk between the
cathedral and the chapter-house. This is also called the =Abbot’s
Cloister=. This is Norman in its western portion and Perpendicular
beyond.[7] Above this is situated the Chapter Library, a long, dark
Perpendicular room with a roof of dark oak, a large Perpendicular window
east and a row of small windows on the north side.

Though the cloisters are quadrangular, the length of the four walks is
not quite the same. The width (12½ feet) and height (18½ feet) are
alike.

In the =North Alley=, the Monks’ Lavatory is

     “one of the most perfect of its date. It projects 8 feet into the
     garth, and is entered from the cloister alley by eight tall arches
     with glazed traceried openings above. Internally it is 47 feet long
     and 6½ feet wide, and is lighted by eight two-light windows
     towards the garth and by a similar window at each end. One light of
     the east window has a small square opening below, perhaps for the
     admission of the supply pipes, for which there seems to be no other
     entrance either in the fan vault or the side walls. Half the width
     of the lavatory is taken up by a broad, flat ledge or platform
     against the wall, on which stood a lead cistern or laver, with a
     row of taps, and in front a hollow trough, originally lined with
     lead, at which the monks washed their hands and faces. From this
     the waste water ran away into a recently discovered (1889) tank in
     the garth.”--(H.)

From the =West Alley= the monks entered their great dining-hall; and at
the south-west corner a vaulted passage called the =Slype= lies under part
of the old lodging of the Abbots, now the Deanery. In this passage, a
sort of outer parlour, the monks held conversation with strangers. In
the =South Alley= the monks studied after dinner until evensong. It has
ten windows of six lights and twenty recesses, or “carrels,” below the
transoms.

The roof of the =East Alley= is a perfectly plain barrel vault without
ribs. In the south-west corner we find a hollowed bracket, or cresset
stone, in which a wick, floating in tallow, was kept to light the
passage.

Opposite the fifth bay a doorway, containing some good Norman work,
slightly restored, leads into the =Chapter-House=.

Originally consisting of three Norman bays, it probably, like the
chapter-houses at Norwich, Reading, and Durham, terminated in a
semi-circular apse. The present east end is Late Perpendicular, and
makes a fourth bay. The vaulting of the later part is well groined, and
the window is good. The roof of the three Norman bays is a lofty barrel
vault supported by three slightly pointed arches springing from the
capitals of the columns, which are curiously set back, and separate the
bays.

Norman arcading of twelve arches--_i.e._ four to each bay--runs along
the three westernmost bays on the north and south walls.

     “The west end is arranged in the usual Benedictine fashion, with a
     central door, flanked originally by two large unglazed window
     openings, with three large windows above. Only one of the windows
     flanking the doorway can now be seen, the other having been partly
     destroyed and covered by Perpendicular panelling when the new
     library stair was built in the south-west corner of the
     room.”--(H.)

Of the four old gateways remaining the finest is =St. Mary’s Gate=, a
typical specimen of Early English work. It leads into St. Mary’s Square.
In the northwest corner of the Precincts the famous vineyard was
situated.




HEREFORD

     DEDICATION: ST. MARY AND ST. ETHELBERT. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR
     CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: NORTH TRANSEPT AND EAST END.


Hereford is situated in the fertile and cultivated valley of the Wye.

     “Almost in the midst of the city the sturdy mass of the cathedral
     building reposes in a secluded close, from which the best general
     view is obtained. The close is entered either from Broad Street,
     near the west window, or from Castle Street; the whole of the
     building lying on the south side of the close between the path and
     the river. The space between the Wye and the Cathedral is filled by
     the Bishop’s Palace and the college of the Vicars’ Choral. On the
     east are the foundations of the castle, which was formerly one of
     the strongest on the Welsh marshes.”--(A. H. F.)

A stone church was begun here about 830 in honour of St. Ethelbert, the
East Anglian king, murdered by Offa near Hereford in 792. At his shrine
miracles were wrought. This church was rebuilt in Edward the Confessor’s
reign; but was plundered and burnt by the Welsh and Irish. The present
building was begun by Robert de Losinga about 1079 and finished by the
middle of the Twelfth Century. The most remarkable part of the building
is the north transept. This is supposed to have been built by Bishop
Aquablanca (see page 177), who was succeeded by Thomas de Cantilupe, the
great saint of the Cathedral (see page 178).

Hereford has suffered greatly from calamities and restorations. In 1786
the western tower and west front fell. They were reconstructed by Wyatt.
He also shortened the nave by one bay and destroyed the Norman
triforium. Repairs and restorations were undertaken in 1841, 1852 and
1858.

The most striking feature of the exterior is the central =Tower=--of two
stories above the roof with buttresses and exhibiting the ball-flower in
great profusion. The four pinnacles at the corners were added in 1830.
The Lady-Chapel with its tall lancet-shaped windows and bold buttresses
is also interesting. On the south side the Audley Chantry projects with
great effect; and from the west we gain a good view of the =Bishop’s
Cloisters=, with the square turreted tower called the =Lady Arbour=, though
nobody knows why. Only the east and the south walks now remain. They are
Perpendicular with fine window openings and richly carved roof.

We enter the Cathedral by the =North porch=, completed in 1530. It is of
two stages, and projects beyond an inner porch of the Decorated period.
The doorway opening into the church is also Decorated.

On entering the =Nave=, we pass to the west end to get the best general
view.

     “The nave, which is separated from the aisles by eight massive
     Norman piers (part of the original church), of which the capitals
     are worthy of notice, has somewhat suffered by restorations at the
     hands of Wyatt. The triforium, the clerestory, the vaulting of the
     roof and the western wall and doorway are all his work; and it must
     not be forgotten that he shortened the original nave by one entire
     bay. Walking to the west end, from which the best general view is
     to be obtained, one is impressed by the striking effect of the
     great Norman piers and arches and the gloom of the choir beyond.
     Through the noble circular arches, which support the central tower
     and the modern screen on the eastern side of it, we see the eastern
     wall of the choir, pierced above by three lancet windows and below
     by a wide circular arch receding in many orders. A central pillar
     divides this lower arch, two pointed arches springing from its
     capital, and leaving a spandrel between them, which is covered with
     modern sculpture. In the far distance may be distinguished the east
     wall of the Lady-chapel and its brilliant lancet lights. Throughout
     the Cathedral the Norman work is remarkable for the richness of its
     ornament as compared with other buildings of the same date, such as
     Peterborough or Ely.

     “The main arches of the nave are ornamented with the billet and
     other beautiful mouldings and the capitals of both piers and shafts
     are also elaborately decorated. The double half shafts set against
     the north and south fronts of the huge circular piers are in the
     greater part restorations.

     “Over each pier-arch there are two triforium arches imitated from
     the Early English of Salisbury. They are divided by slender
     pillars, but there is no triforium passage. During the Late
     Decorated period the nave-aisles were practically rebuilt, the
     existing walls and windows being erected upon the bases of the
     Norman walls, which were retained for a few feet above the
     foundations. The vaulting of the roofs of the nave-aisles and the
     roof of the nave itself were coloured under the direction of Mr.
     Cottingham.”--(A. H. F.)

In the second bay of the south aisle stands an ancient =Font= of late
Norman design, decorated with figures of the Apostles, on a base with
four demi-griffins or lions. Among the monuments in the nave is an
alabaster =Effigy of Sir Richard Pembridge=, in plate and mail armour with
his greyhound. He died in 1375. Here are also the =effigy= and =tomb= of
=Bishop Booth= (died 1535), who built

[Illustration: HEREFORD: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: HEREFORD: NORTH-EAST]

the north porch. The handsome iron grille in front of the tomb is of the
same date.

The =Central Tower= rests on massive piers with Norman arches. The entire
space is open from the floor of the Cathedral to the wooden floor of the
bell-chamber, painted beneath in blue and gold. From this floor hangs a
corona of wrought iron, coloured like the screen. The tower contains a
fine peal of ten bells.

Through the north arch of the tower we pass into the =North Transept=,
said to be the work of Peter of Savoy, who became Bishop of Hereford. He
was called Bishop Aquablanca from his birthplace near Chambéry. He died
in 1268 intensely hated. The original Norman north transept was pulled
down about 1260 for this new one, rebuilt

     “on a design which is perhaps the most original, as it certainly is
     one of the most beautiful in the history of English Gothic
     architecture. To the north and west were built enormous windows,
     with tracery of cusped circles, quite exceptional in their
     elongation, more like late German than English work. On the east
     side was built an aisle of exquisite beauty. Its arches, almost
     straight-sided--its triforium windows, a ring of cusped circles set
     under a semicircular arch--its clerestory windows, spherical
     triangles, enclosing a cusped circular window--the composition of
     the triforium--the north and west windows--are quite unique, except
     so far as they were copied in later work in the city and
     neighbourhood. At the south end of the aisle is the exquisite TOMB
     of Bishop Peter Aquablanca (died 1268); no doubt built in his
     lifetime. The tomb is as unique as the transept, and chiefly
     resembles it in design. The inference is that Bishop Aquablanca
     built the transept. The credit of it, however, is constantly given
     to his successors, apparently on account of his private vices. But
     saints as well as sinners have liked to leave memorials behind them
     in stone; and, moreover, Aquablanca had his good points. To this
     day four thousand loaves are distributed every year out of funds
     which he bequeathed. It is recorded, too, that of a fine which was
     imposed on the citizens for encroachments on his episcopal rights,
     he remitted one half and handed over the other for works on the
     cathedral.”--(F. B.)

Aquablanca was succeeded by Thomas Cantilupe, as much loved as the
former was hated. Dying on a homeward journey from Rome, in 1282, his
bones were removed from the flesh by boiling and carried to Hereford to
be placed in the Lady-Chapel. Forty years later he was canonized. Many
miracles were effected at his shrine, removed to the transept in 1287.
King Edward I. sent sick falcons to be cured and people thronged with
large offerings. We shall soon see all that is left of the =Cantilupe
Shrine=.

     “The Norman arches opening to the aisles of the nave and choir
     resemble those which correspond to them on the south side of the
     church. The transept beyond them was, as we have seen, entirely
     rebuilt, and is one of the most remarkable examples of the period
     remaining in England. The unusual form of its arches, and its pure,
     lofty windows, are sufficiently impressive now; but their effect
     must have been wonderfully increased when the windows were filled
     with glass displaying the history and miracles of the sainted
     Bishop, and when the shrine itself was standing on its pedestal
     within the eastern aisle, rich with the gold and jewels offered by
     the numerous pilgrims who knelt daily before it.

     “The west side of the transept (which is of two bays beyond the
     aisle passage) is entirely filled by two very lofty windows of
     three lights each. The heads of the narrow lights are sharply
     pointed; and the tracery above is formed by three circles enclosing
     trefoils. These windows are set back within triangular-headed
     arches. On the north side is a double window of the same character
     divided by a group of banded shafts. The triple lights on either
     side of these shafts, and the foiled circles above them, precisely
     resemble the windows on the west side of the transept.

     “The vaulting springs from clustered shafts, the corbels supporting
     which, on the east side, are beautiful and singular, and resemble
     bunches of reeds, terminating in a small open flower. The small
     heads below these corbels, at the intersection of the main arches,
     should also be noticed.

     “The eastern aisles, lighted by three very beautiful windows, each
     of three lights, with three quatrefoils in the tracery, are set
     back within wider arches, as is the case with the windows in the
     main transept. In this aisle, in a line with the central pier, is
     the pedestal of the _Cantilupe Shrine_. This is a long
     parallelogram, narrowing toward the lower end, and is entirely of
     Purbeck marble. It has two divisions; the lower closed, like an
     altar-tomb, the upper a flat canopy, supported on small open
     arches. Upon this rested the actual shrine, containing the relics
     of the saint. Cantilupe was Provincial Grand Master of the Knights
     Templars in England; and round the lower division of the pedestal
     are fifteen figures of Templars in various attitudes, placed in the
     recesses of a foliated arcade. All are fully armed, in chain-mail,
     with surcoat, shield and sword. All are seated, and tread on
     various monsters, among which are dragons and swine, muzzled. The
     spandrels in this arcade, and the spandrels between the arches in
     the upper division, are filled with leafage of the first Decorated
     period, retaining some of the stiff arrangement of the Early
     English, but directly copied from nature. In the lower spandrels it
     is arranged in sprays; in the upper it is often laid in rows of
     leaves, among which occur oak, maple and trefoil. The whole of this
     work will repay the most careful examination. (It should be
     compared with the foliage of the capitals of the shafts surrounding
     the central pier of the aisle, which is far more stiff and
     conventional). On the top of the lower division of the pedestal was
     a brass of the Bishop, of which the matrix alone remains.

     “The position of the shrine in this transept may be compared with
     that of St. Frideswide at Oxford, and with that of St. Richard de
     la Wych at Chichester. All had an altar immediately adjoining the
     shrine, which was dedicated to the saint, and at which the
     offerings of pilgrims were made. In these cases, however, the usual
     position of a great shrine--at the back of the high altar--was, for
     some special reason, departed from. At Hereford, this position of
     highest honour was probably occupied by the shrine of St.
     Ethelbert.”--(R. J. K.)

Close by is the interesting =monument= of =Bishop d’Aquablanca=, just by the
north-choir-aisle. This Early English monument was once richly coloured.

The effigy of this foreign priest--Peter of Savoy--lies under a canopy
supported by delicate shafts of Purbeck marble, the gables surmounted by
floriated crosses, the central cross bearing a figure of the Saviour.
The richly canopied =tomb= under the great north window bears the effigy
of =Bishop Thomas Charlton=, treasurer of England in 1329 (died 1369).

Under the north-west-window is the canopied =tomb of Bishop Swinfield=
(1283-1317). His effigy disappeared long ago, and some unknown figure
lies there. The ball-flower is conspicuous in the mouldings of the
canopy and behind the tomb there is a mutilated carving of the
_Crucifixion_, surrounded by vine-leaves and tendrils, quite similar to
the leafage of the Cantilupe Shrine. In a neighbouring recess decorated
with the ball-flower lies the effigy of an unknown lady of the
Fourteenth Century.

The =North-choir-aisle= is entered through the original Norman arch. In
the north wall of this aisle in a series of arched recesses (Decorated)
lie the effigies of various ecclesiastics. Beyond the first one, =Bishop
Geoffry de Clive= (died 1120), a door opens upon the turret staircase
leading to a typical monastic =Library=, containing more than 2,000
volumes, MSS. and ancient deeds, the accumulations of eight centuries.
These are kept in eighty old oak cupboards and the ancient books are
chained.

Descending and passing to the corner of the north-east transept we come
to =Bishop Stanbery’s Chantry=, a rich example of late Perpendicular, with
two windows on the north side. The ceiling is richly groined. The
capitals at the corners of the chapel are very grotesque. Opposite the
chantry, on the north side of the choir, is the alabaster effigy of
Bishop Stanbery (died 1474).

In the wall of the aisle above is a =Decorated window=. The glass is in
memory of =Dr. Musgrave=, Archbishop of York, previously Bishop of
Hereford. The subject is St. Paul, the story of whose life is continued
in the windows of the chantry.

Immediately beyond, the =north-east-transept= opens. It is Early
Decorated, retaining some Norman characteristics. In the centre rises an
octagonal pier which helps to carry the quadripartite vaulting, which
has good bosses of leafage. This pier gives a peculiar character to this
transept. The windows are Early Decorated.

The =South transept= retains much that is Norman, although it was altered
during the Perpendicular period, when two huge windows were cut into the
walls. Perpendicular panelling surrounds that in the south wall. The
lierne vaulting is also of the same date. The east wall has five series
of Norman arcades. Two Norman windows in the clerestory contribute
light.

The =Denton tomb=, with its effigies in alabaster showing traces of
colour, dates from 1576.

The =organ=, in the first archway on the south side of the choir, was the
gift of Charles II. It has been twice enlarged.

Effigies of bishops fill the four Decorated arched recesses on the south
wall of the =south-choir-aisle= and on the north wall, under an arch
opening to the choir, is the tomb of =Bishop De Lorraine=, or =Losinga=
(died 1095). Here is also the monument and tomb to =Bishop Mayhew=, of
Magdalen College (1504-1516); some old windows restored by Warrington;
and the famous =Map of the World=, one of the most valuable relics of
mediæval geography in existence. It was designed about 1314 by Richard
of Haldingham, a Lincolnshire monk. It was discovered more than a
hundred years ago under the floor of Bishop Audley’s Chapel.

The =South-east-transept=, between the retro-choir and the chapter-house,
opens into the latter. The style is in the main Decorated, though the
window tracery is later quite Flamboyant. One single octagonal pillar
separates it from its eastern aisle. From this transept a lovely view of
the Lady-Chapel can be enjoyed.

The peculiar darkness of the =Choir= is due to the arrangement of the
transepts, which prevents the admission of light except from the
clerestory.

     “The main arches of the choir are of three orders, and spring from
     massive composite piers, with broad, square bases. The capitals of
     the semi-detached shafts are enriched with leafage and grotesque
     heads. The _triforium_ in each bay consists of one wide Norman arch
     circumscribing two smaller, divided by a central shaft, and
     springing on either side from two massive semicircular piers, with
     small capitals. Both outer and inner arches spring from these
     piers. The capitals of the central shafts have square abaci, and
     are enriched. The tympana of the outer arches are covered with
     scallop, leaf and billet ornament. At the base of the triforium
     runs a square string-course, enriched with minute carving. The
     lozenge ornament prevails round the main arches of the choir, as
     does the zigzag round those of the nave.

     “Broad square pilasters, with semi-detached shafts at their angels,
     fill the spaces between the piers. They terminate at the spring of
     the triforium arches in double triangular headings, with crocketed
     sides and finials of leafage. These headings are Early English, of
     the same date as the clerestory and vaulting; and between each pair
     rises a group of so-called vaulting-shafts, with capitals of
     leafage, terminating at the base of the clerestory; and connected
     (under the actual base of the clerestory) by a band of open
     flowers. The clerestory consists of one lofty pointed arch in each
     bay, divided by a central; on either side is a smaller trefoiled
     arch. The windows, of two lights, with a quatrefoil in the heading,
     are placed at the back of the wall-passage, and form in effect a
     double plane with the large inner arches. They are filled on each
     side with indifferent stained glass. The choir vaulting is plain
     quadripartite, with bosses of leafage at the intersections.”--(R.
     J. K.)

The =Choir-stalls= are Decorated. Some of the =Misereres= are quaint. The
=Bishop’s Throne= dates from the Fourteenth Century. The Cathedral also
possesses an ancient episcopal chair, which, it is said, King Stephen
sat in when he visited Hereford.

Within a great Norman arch of five orders stands the modern =Reredos=, at
the back of which rises a great pier from which spring two pointed
arches. The spandrel, or Tympanum, is covered with modern sculpture--the
Saviour in Majesty and the Evangelists; and below a statue of King
Ethelbert, who was said to have been buried in the first Saxon church
somewhere about this spot.

From the =Retro-choir= we pass into the =Vestibule= of the Lady-Chapel, the
walls of which are broken with transitional Norman window
openings,--pointed arches with massive mouldings. The foliage of the
capitals is Early English.

Five steps (necessitated by the height of the crypt below) lead up to
the =Lady-Chapel=, very rich Early English, dating from the first half of
the Thirteenth Century. It is 24 × 45 feet and of three bays. On the
north side each bay contains two large windows; on the south side, the
third bay is filled by the Audley Chapel.

     “The very rich clustered shafts and arches of the side windows
     should be especially noticed. The capitals of the shafts are Early
     English leafage; and there are small heads at the intersections and
     crowns of the arches. A circle enclosing a quatrefoil pierces the
     wall above these windows. The vaulting is plain quadripartite, and
     springs from shafts which descend upon a base raised slightly above
     the pavement. The modern pavement of the Lady-chapel is laid with
     red and green tiles in large square panels. The whole design is
     broad and good in outline; and is somewhat richer at the altar end,
     which is raised on one step.”

Ferguson has remarked that

     “Nowhere on the Continent are such combinations to be found as the
     Five Sisters at York, the east end of Ely, or such a group as that
     which terminates the east end of Hereford.”

Many of its features were hidden until the restorations and repairs were
undertaken in 1841.

     “The glorious EAST-WINDOW consists of five narrow lancets recessed
     within arches supported by clustered shafts, the wall above being
     perforated with five quatrefoil openings, of which the outside ones
     are circular and the centre three are oval. It was as a memorial to
     Dean Merewether, to whom the cathedral owes so much, that the
     stained glass designed by Cottingham was placed in the east
     windows in the narrow lancets that he loved so dearly. It
     represents scenes in the early life of the Virgin and the life of
     Christ, the last being the supper in the house of Mary and Martha.
     In the side windows the visitor should especially notice the rich
     clustered shafts and arches, the Early English capitals and the
     ornamentation of the arches. The double PISCINA and AUMBRY south of
     the altar are restorations necessitated by the dilapidated state of
     the originals.”--(A. H. F.)

In the central bay on the north side lies the effigy of =Sir Peter de
Grandison= (died 1358) under a canopy of open tabernacle work. The armour
is very interesting. Once the effigy was supposed to be Humphrey de
Bohun, Earl of Hereford. On the same side lies =Joanna de Bohun=, Countess
of Hereford (died 1327). Her effigy is a splendid study in costume. She
left a large estate to the Cathedral.

A black marble slab, with brass, marks the resting-place of =Dean
Merewether= (died 1850). =Dean Berew=, or =Beaurieu=, in the south wall of
the vestibule, is one of the best specimens of sculpture in the
Cathedral. He died in 1462.

It was not every bishop who could build two chantries; but =Bishop Audley=
(1492-1502) built himself a charming Tudor chapel, two stories high,
projecting from the south side of the Lady Chapel, a circular staircase
giving access to the upper room. He intended it for his tomb; but as he
was translated to Salisbury in 1502, he had the trouble of building
another one there, in which he was buried.

     “The lower chamber is shut off from the Lady-chapel by a screen of
     painted stone with open-work panelling in two stages. The chapel is
     pentagonal in plan, and has two windows, while a third opens into
     the Lady-chapel through the screen. The ceiling is vaulted, and
     bears evidence of having in former times been elaborately painted.

     “There are five windows in the upper chamber and the groined roof
     is distinctly good. The boss in the centre represents the Virgin
     crowned in glory. On other parts of the ceiling are the arms of
     Bishop Audley and those of the Deanery, as well as a shield bearing
     the letters R. I. The upper part of the chantry, which is divided
     from the Lady-chapel by the top of the screen which serves as a
     kind of rail, may have been used as an oratory; but no remains of
     an altar have been found. On the door opening on the staircase is
     some good iron-work, and Bishop Audley’s initials may be noticed on
     the lock. Standing by the door of this chapel, the visitor has a
     lovely view westward: two pillars rising in the roof and across the
     top of the reredos; to the right, the Norman arches of the north
     transept and further on still the nave.”--(A. H. F.)

From the south side of the Lady-Chapel we enter the =Crypt= by steps
leading down from an Early English porch. It is 50 feet long, and
consists of a nave and aisles. Because the crypt was used as a
charnel-house, it is called _Golgotha_. It is lighted by plain lancets.

There are only a few fragments of old glass in the windows, some of the
best (early Fourteenth Century) is in one of the lancets on the south
side of the Lady-Chapel. The subjects are Christ surrounded by symbols
of the Four Evangelists; Lamb and flag; Angel and Marys at the
Sepulchre; Crucifixion; Christ carrying the Cross.

A window in the north-east transept contains Fourteenth Century glass,
restored by Warrington in 1864: St. Katherine; St. Michael; St. Gregory;
and St. Thomas of Canterbury. In the south-east transept a similar
window exhibits St. Mary Magdalene; St. Ethelbert; St. Augustine; and
St. George. The many memorial windows do not call

[Illustration: HEREFORD: CHOIR]

[Illustration: WORCESTER: SOUTH-WEST]

for special attention. One, however, in the north transept, erected to
Archdeacon Lane =Freer=, is to be noticed on account of the tracery. It is
one of the largest in England of the period of Edward I.

From the south-east transept we enter a narrow passage, the =Vicars’
Cloister=, that leads to the College of Vicars-Choral (1396). It is a
picturesque quadrangle with an inner cloister (Perpendicular, about
1474).

The Bishop’s Palace lies south, between the Cathedral and the river
Wye.




WORCESTER

     DEDICATION: THE BLESSED VIRGIN, ST. PETER AND THE HOLY CONFESSORS,
     OSWALD AND WULSTAN. FORMERLY THE CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: NAVE; CHOIR-STALLS; TOMB OF KING JOHN; CHANTRY OF
     PRINCE ARTHUR; ARCADE ACROSS TRANSEPTS AND LADY-CHAPEL; CRYPT.


The Cathedral of Worcester is severe and plain; but its very severity
appeals to some critics, as do the general lines of the entire edifice.

     “The beautiful proportions of the great tower harmonise so well
     with the general plan and mass of the rest of the fabric that
     although it has no pride of place like Durham or Lincoln, it still
     dominates the whole city and vicinity in a great and unmistakable
     manner. The flat meadow-land of the Severn valley in this part of
     the county, unbroken westward up to the very foot of the Malvern
     hills, gives the Cathedral on this side the importance of the chief
     feature in many miles of landscape. And as one approaches from the
     eastward, over the slight eminences on which the battle of
     Worcester was chiefly fought, a glimpse of the tower is the
     earliest evidence of the existence of the city.”--(E. F. S.)

The history of Worcester Cathedral begins with Oswald, a Benedictine
monk, consecrated Bishop of Worcester by Dunstan in 961. Oswald’s
cathedral, finished in 983, was destroyed by the Danes in 1041, and
rebuilt in 1084-1089 by Wulstan, a monk of Worcester, who became Bishop
in 1062. Wulstan placed his church a little to the south of the first
one. His crypt still remains,--the most famous crypt in England.
Wulstan’s tomb was miraculously preserved when a fire burned parts of
the cathedral in 1113, eight years after his death. Miracles were
performed and cures effected. Finally in 1203 Wulstan was canonized.

When King John died in 1216, he was buried before the High Altar between
the tombs of Oswald and Wulstan.

The Cathedral was dedicated in 1218 in the presence of King Henry III.
and bishops, abbots, priors and nobles from all parts of the kingdom.

The church suffered from fires and storms; and the central tower fell in
1175. Rebuilding was frequently a necessity; and, therefore, many styles
are to be found throughout the fabric.

Repairs were undertaken between 1702 and 1712, when the choir was paved
and when it is supposed that the spires on the corners of the
presbytery, transepts and nave were added.

An important series of repairs and restorations were undertaken by
Wilkinson from 1748 to 1756. At this period

     “the north end of the nave transept was rebuilt, the stone pulpit
     removed from the nave to the choir, and the latter re-paved with
     blue and white stone. The old right-of-way through the cathedral
     was replaced by a more proper and convenient passage round the west
     end; and many gravestones were removed from the floors of the side
     aisles of the choir, and from the nave, which were re-paved with
     white stone. The Jesus Chapel was opened to the nave and the font
     therein erected.

     “The great flying buttresses at the east end were erected between
     1736 and 1789. The great west window was rebuilt in 1789, and that
     of the east end in 1792. In 1812 a new altar-screen and
     choir-screen were built, and the tall pinnacles taken down after
     1832.

     “In 1857 began the great restoration of the cathedral under the
     auspices of Mr. Perkins, the architect to the dean and chapter,
     whose work was continued and amplified by Sir Gilbert Scott, who
     was employed after 1864.

     “The results of this restoration, probably the most complete and
     far-reaching undergone by any British cathedral, include the
     exterior and interior of the tower, the pavements throughout the
     building; the decoration of the choir and Lady-chapel; all the
     windows, and almost the whole of the furniture and fittings,
     including a new reredos, choir-screen, organ and pulpit. The
     restored cathedral was reopened, with a magnificent choral service
     on the 8th of April, 1874. Since that date many additions have been
     made, splendid evidences of the survival of the old local
     patriotism; for almost everything is due to the munificence of
     local donors.”--(E. F. S.)

The chief feature is the central =Tower=, supposed to have been completed
in 1374. It has been restored carefully.

     “It is of two stages. The first has two lancets on each side,
     within an arcade of seven bays. Each of the upper stages has two
     louvred windows surmounted by crocketed canopies, and ornamented by
     three large sculptured figures in niches, of the whole twelve of
     which, six are modern. The whole is crowned by an open rail, or
     parapet, with six spirelets on either side and a crocketed pinnacle
     at each corner.”--(E. F. S.)

The =West End= contains one large modern window of eight lights with a
wheel window above. The gable, with three small lancet windows, is
surmounted by a cross and flanked by two buttresses topped by pinnacles.
The doorway in the west front is also modern (1857-1873); but parts of
the old Norman doorway have been inserted.

On the north side, the =North Porch= (24 feet long and 8 feet broad)
consists of two bays. The front was restored. The sculptured figures in
the canopied niches are Christ and the Twelve Apostles. Above these is a
row of saints and then Perpendicular battlements. An exterior turret
and staircase lead to the rooms above it, occupied by the porter. Two
bays, each with a window, follow; then comes the Jesus Chapel; then one
more bay; and then the north-transept, with its gable, cross and
pinnacles; then four more bays; then the choir; then three more bays;
and, finally, the Lady-Chapel. The south side is similar, with the
exception of the projecting Chapel of St. John.

Pinnacles are a striking feature on all sides of the edifice.

On entering we are struck with the long vista, for the closed
choir-screen, found in so many English cathedrals, is conspicuously
absent. The proportions of the =Nave= are justly admired. It

     “consists of nine bays, of which the two westernmost are of widely
     different character and date from the remaining seven. Its breadth,
     including the aisles, is 78 feet, its length 170 feet, and its
     height 68 feet; which dimensions may be compared with those of
     Salisbury, 82 feet, 229 feet 6 inches, and 81 feet; and of Wells,
     82 feet, 161 feet, and 67 feet, respectively. The two western
     severies are of great interest. The pier arches are pointed, but
     rise from Late Norman capitals; the triforium stages have each two
     three-light round-headed windows, of which the centre one is
     considerably the highest, surmounted with zigzag ornament and
     decorated with characteristic lozenges, the whole enclosed within a
     pointed moulding. The clerestory has, in each bay, a central
     round-headed light, with Norman ornament above it, flanked by blank
     pointed windows, considerably smaller.

     “On the north side, the whole of the walls of the five eastern
     bays, and the pier arches of the next two towards the west belong
     to the Decorated period, and may be dated between 1317 and 1327.
     The remainder of the two latter bays and the whole of the seven
     eastern bays of the south side are very early Perpendicular. Willis
     considers that this work was probably begun in the middle of the
     fourteenth century, and completed by the date of the vaulting of
     the nave, 1377, which would establish it as one of the earliest
     specimens of Perpendicular work in the country. The triforium
     arcade consists of two pointed arches, each subdivided again into
     two; and the clerestory has a large central light, with a smaller
     light on either side in each bay. On the north side these are the
     ordinary pointed arches of the Decorated period; on the south the
     lateral arches are straight sided, and the central arch only has a
     small curve on joining the vertical piers. Similar arches, but a
     century earlier in date, occur in the north transepts of Hereford
     and of Rochester Cathedrals.”--(E. F. S.)

The vaulting was finished in 1377. The glass of the windows is modern,
as is also the handsome =pulpit=, designed by Sir Gilbert Scott, Italian
in style and made of alabaster and grey and green marble.

The monuments and tombs call for no special description, with the
exception of the altar-tomb of =John Beauchamp=, fourth bay from the east.
It dates from the early Fifteenth Century and is panelled in five
compartments with coloured armorial bearings. The knight lies here in
full armour, with pointed basinet, sleeveless jupon and baldric. His
lady beside him is in the costume of the period. Her head rests on a
swan and a dog lies at her feet.

The =North aisle= (1317-1327) is Decorated. Beyond the north porch, we
come to =Jesus Chapel=, enclosed by a stone screen (Perpendicular) and
containing a wooden altar with a full-size Madonna and Child.

The =North transept= is a mixture of Norman and Perpendicular. It consists
of two bays; and in the north-west corner is the circular stair-turret.
The =South transept= is similar to the north, and has, likewise, a
stair-turret in the south-west corner.

[Illustration: WORCESTER: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: WORCESTER: CHOIR, EAST]

The west window is of Perpendicular tracery. A fine Norman arch, partly
closed by a Perpendicular screen, marks the entrance to the Chapel of
St. John. Both transepts are aisleless. The =South aisle= of the nave is
Norman and Transitional. The Font is modern.

The =Choir= was begun in 1224. The eastern transepts were added at the
same time. A little of the old Norman work betrays itself here and
there. No one seems to know why Bishop Godfrey de Giffard (1268-1301)
placed gilded brass rings around the columns, unless it was for the sake
of adding extra strength.

     “The beauty of the pier-arches and those of the triforium, relieved
     so handsomely by the black shafts of Purbeck marble bearing Bishop
     Giffard’s brass rings, and by the finely proportioned spandrels of
     each bay, is by no means to be under-estimated.

     “The choir is of five bays, including the eastern crossing, which
     is of greater width than the others. The pier-arch mouldings are of
     two patterns, one very similar to those of the choir and presbytery
     at Salisbury, having one of the ribs flanked by a double range of
     dog-tooth. The piers themselves, as well as those in the
     Lady-chapel, are octagonal, and have detached Purbeck shafts,
     eleven of which are fixed with a narrow course of marble embracing
     the shaft in the manner of a ring; and the remaining eight with
     brass rings; the two processes being used symmetrically, so that
     shafts similarly fixed stand opposite to each other.

     “The triforium consists of two large arches in each bay, subdivided
     again into two. During the restoration the pillars, which had been
     whitewashed, were restored to their original rich black colour, and
     the rings which bind them made visible. The sculptures in the
     spandrels are restorations by Boulton. The inner wall of the
     triforium walk is decorated with a finely-proportioned arcade,
     which adds greatly to the general effect. The clerestory has a
     triplet of pointed lights in each bay, the centre one being
     considerably higher than those at the side, although they rise from
     pillars of equal height. The vault of the roof springs, in each
     severy, from a single shaft terminated with a foliated capital; it
     is simple in character, and was probably completed before the end
     of the first half of the thirteenth century. The elaborate pavement
     of Devonshire marble and encaustic tiles is modern.”--(E. F. S.)

The =Choir-stalls= (restored) date from 1379. The thirty-seven _miserere_
seats represent Biblical, mythological and contemporary figures.

The =Reredos=, behind the High Altar, composed of alabaster, inlaid with
coloured marbles, lapis lazuli, agates and malachite, is modern. The
=Bishop’s Throne= is also modern; but the richly carved =Pulpit= of white
stone dates from about 1630. It bears the arms of England, France,
Scotland and Ireland.

In the centre of the choir in front of the altar steps stands the =Tomb
of King John=. When John died in the Castle of Newark in 1216, his body
was brought to Worcester Cathedral and buried before the High Altar. In
1797 the tomb was opened. The effigy, now gilded, is the earliest royal
effigy in England. It dates from the early Thirteenth Century and is
probably a good likeness of the Magna Charta king. Bloxam’s description
in 1862, gives an idea of its original appearance:

     “The effigy was originally the cover of the stone coffin in which
     the remains of that monarch were deposited in the Chapel of the
     Virgin, at the east end of the cathedral. The altar tomb is of a
     much later period, probably constructed early in the sixteenth
     century, when the tomb of Prince Arthur was erected.... The sides
     of this tomb are divided into three square compartments by panelled
     buttresses; each compartment contains a shield bearing the royal
     arms within a quatrefoil richly cusped; the spandrels are also
     foliated and cusped.... It is, however, the effigy of the king,
     sculptured in the early part of the Thirteenth Century, and
     probably the earliest sepulchral effigy in the cathedral, to which
     our chief attention should be drawn. This effigy represents him in
     the royal habiliments; first, the tunic, yellow, or of cloth of
     gold, reaching nearly to the ankles, with close-fitting sleeves, of
     which little is apparent. Over the tunic is seen the dalmatic, of a
     crimson colour, with wide sleeves edged with a gold and jewelled
     border, and girt about the waist by a girdle buckled in front, the
     pendant end of the girdle, which is jewelled, falling down as low
     as the skirt of the dalmatic. Of the yellow mantle lined with green
     little is visible. On the feet are black shoes, to the heels of
     which are affixed spurs. On the hands are gloves, jewelled at the
     back; the right hand held a sceptre, the lower portion of which
     only is left; the left grasps the hilt of the sword. On the head is
     the crown; there are moustaches and beard, and the light-brown hair
     is long. On either side of the head is the figure of a bishop
     holding a censer, perhaps intended to represent St. Oswald and St.
     Wulstan, between whose tombs the king was interred in the Chapel of
     the Virgin.”

On the south side of the sanctuary we find the =Chantry of Prince Arthur=,
son of Henry VII., who died at Ludlow Castle in 1502. This is the most
famous piece of work in the Cathedral, and one of the best examples of
Tudor architecture in existence. It was erected in 1504, and

     “consists of six bays of open tracery divided by panels of canopied
     niches containing figures and heraldic bearings surmounted by a
     battlemented rail and pinnacles. Within is a richly groined roof,
     with unusual flying supports, east and west. At the east end are
     the mutilated remains of a rich stone reredos, containing a figure
     of our Lord, and others hardly recognisable, which was above the
     altar formerly placed here. At the west end is a small figure of
     Henry VII. seated.

     “The tomb itself of the Prince stands in the centre of the chantry.
     It is singularly plain, in contrast to the richness of its
     surroundings, almost the only ornament being the arms of England
     and France within panels on the sides. Around the top runs a
     painted inscription, obviously a late substitute for a brass which
     has been removed, to this effect: ‘Here lyeth buried prince Arthur,
     the first begotten sonne of the righte renowned Kinge henry the
     Seventhe, whiche noble Prince departed oute of this transitory life
     ate the Castle of Ludlowe, in the seventeenth yeere of hys father’s
     reign, and in the yeere of our Lorde god on thousande fyve hundred
     and two.’”--(E. F. S.)

The =Chapel of St. John=, projecting from two bays of the
south-choir-aisle, is on the site of a Norman chapel. The Norman arch at
the west end is its finest feature. It has three windows filled with
modern glass and a piscina in the south wall.

The =Eastern transepts= demand careful attention.

     “The design of the walls ... is extremely beautiful. Two lofty
     triplets of lancet lights are placed the one above the other. The
     lower triplet has a gallery in front of it immediately above the
     arcaded wall, and at the same level as the sill of the adjacent
     side aisle windows. The upper triplet has a similar gallery at the
     level of the triforium. Rich clustered shafts rise from the lower
     gallery in two orders; the inner order carries molded arches to
     correspond with the heads of the lower triplet; the shafts of the
     outer order rise from the lower gallery up to the impost of the
     upper triplet, grouping themselves with the shafts that stand in
     front of the upper triplet, and uniting in one group of capitals at
     the impost, where they carry a range of three arches with deep rich
     mouldings. Thus the entire composition represents a gigantic window
     of six lights.”--(W.)

One of the finest features of the Cathedral is the arcade that runs
along the whole extent of the eastern transepts and across the
Lady-Chapel.

     “This is a series of trefoil headed arcades of three mouldings,
     resting on slender Early English shafts, each spandrel having been
     filled with carvings which take high rank among the best of the
     English school of the Thirteenth Century. They have now been, to a
     great extent, restored (by Boulton), and many, including all at the
     east end, are entirely new. The best of the old ones are figured by
     Aldis; and the most interesting, whether entirely ancient or partly
     restored, are as follows, starting from the west wall of the
     south-eastern transept:

     “Two crusaders fighting a lion. A centaur. An angel weighing a
     soul, and the devil pulling down the scale. Devils roasting a soul
     in hell. The Jaws of Death. A body borne to burial. Expulsion of
     Adam and Eve. An angel leading a righteous soul to heaven. The dead
     rising from coffins. Christ enthroned. The archangel blowing the
     last trump. An angel holding a cross.

     “_South Aisle._--Two monks building. A queen instructing an
     architect. Two monks discussing plans. A devil with bird’s claws,
     riding on a man’s shoulders. The Crucifixion.

     “_Lady-Chapel._--Centaur and crusader. Prophets and Bible subjects
     (modern), grotesque.

     “_North Aisle._--Bishop offering a model of the cathedral at an
     altar (perhaps Bishop Henry de Blois, d. 1236). The Annunciation.
     The Visitation. The Nativity.

     “_North Transept._--Old Testament subjects. A bishop. A monk
     chastising a novice.”--(E. F. S.)

The tracery of the windows in the choir aisles and the Lady-Chapel is
modern, patterned on Early English models. The entire east wall is
modern. The window consists of five lights in two tiers. The glass dates
from 1860 and represents the _Crucifixion_ and the _Ascension_.

In the south aisle of the Lady-Chapel we notice one of the finest
effigies in the building. It is a Fourteenth Century lady, whose left
hand holds the cord of her cloak. A little dog lies at her feet. It is
interesting to compare this with another unknown effigy of a lady of the
Thirteenth Century in the north aisle of the Lady-Chapel. The left hand
holds a glove.

In front of the altar and on the floor of the Lady-Chapel are the
effigies of =Bishop William de Blois= (died 1236) and his successor =Bishop
Walter de Cantelupe= (died 1265). The latter is in higher relief than the
former and was originally set with gems. In the north aisle we must also
note the large effigy of =Sir James de Beauchamp=, in complete armour with
surcoat and long shield of Henry III.’s reign. Beneath the reredos lies
the richly robed figure of =Hawford=, Dean of Worcester in 1553-1557. On
the south side lies =William, Earl of Dudley=, in white marble on arches
of alabaster. The Lady-Chapel is of the same date as the choir.

From the south transept of the nave we enter the famous =Crypt=, which
dates from 1084. It was built after that of Winchester (1079) and before
those of Gloucester (1089) and Canterbury (1096). Three rows of pillars
form four walks, with an outer aisle of two rows of pillars. It was
surrounded by several chapels, but only the southern chapel is now
accessible. The pillars are admired for their grace and lightness, when
illuminated. It suggests the Mosque of Cordova. In comparing the crypts
of Winchester, Gloucester, Canterbury, and Worcester, Willis says:

     “The height of all these crypts is nearly the same; so that at
     Winchester and Gloucester the arches are flattened into ellipses,
     the pillars are low and squat, and the crypts appear as sepulchral
     vaults; while at Worcester, where the arches are semicircular and
     the pillars more slender, the crypt is a complex and beautiful
     temple.”

The =Cloisters= form an irregular quadrangle enclosing a lovely green
garth, 83 feet square. The roof of the walks is richly vaulted. The
glass in the windows in the south alley depicted the history and
miracles of St. Wulstan, but the glass was destroyed by the Puritans.

Beyond the south walk is the =Refectory=, a handsome building of red
sandstone, dating from about 1372. It is now used as a class-room of the
Cathedral School founded by King Henry VIII. The monks’ lavatory
occupies two bays in the north alley.

From the west walk we enter the =Chapter-House=, originally a Norman
building of the Eleventh Century. It was repaired about 1400, when the
Norman windows and vaults were supplanted by those we now see. The
present Chapter-House

     “consists of ten bays, with a Perpendicular vaulted roof rising
     from a central Norman Column. Each bay contains a light traceried
     window, of which two are entirely, and two half, blocked up. Below
     these is a series of slightly hollowed niches in grey, blue and
     yellow stone in alternate courses, resting on three courses of
     rough red masonry. These niches have slight traces of ancient
     fresco painting; they are surmounted by an arcade of intersecting
     circular arches containing smaller arches. Similar ornamentation is
     to be found in the chapter-houses at Bristol and Rochester, and in
     the external wall of Ernulf’s crypt at Canterbury.”--(E. F. S.)




LICHFIELD

     DEDICATION: ST. CHAD AND ST. MARY. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR
     CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: SPIRES; WEST FRONT; NAVE; LADY-CHAPEL; HERKENRODE
     GLASS.


Lichfield is famed for its three beautiful spires, the only church in
England with this distinguishing feature. They are locally known as
“Ladies of the Vale,” or “Ladies of the Valley.”

The central spire, which always groups so charmingly with the two that
rise above the west front, dates from the Restoration, and is an
imitation of the western ones. Its predecessor, destroyed during the
Civil Wars, was supposed to have been rebuilt about 1250. The two
western spires are said to have been built by Roger de Norbury
(1322-1359), but the north-west one was rebuilt in Perpendicular times
in imitation of the earlier style. The south-west, or =Jesus Tower=, also
the belfry, got its name from the Jesus Bell, given by Dean Heyward in
1477, and destroyed during the Civil Wars. The Jesus is a little higher
than the other tower. Both spires are octagonal. At intervals they are
broken by windows.

     “Of all the cathedral churches of England, Lichfield may be said to
     be the most lovely. Other cathedrals are larger--indeed, this is
     one of the smallest;--many are grander, or more magnificent; but
     for simple beauty, for charm, for delicacy of construction and
     appearance, Lichfield may rightly claim to take the foremost place.
     Peterborough, when we stand inside the west door and look down its
     line of enormous piers, fills us with awe at its immensity and

[Illustration: LICHFIELD: WEST FRONT]

[Illustration: LICHFIELD: NAVE, EAST]

     strength; a feeling which is perhaps a little impaired by the
     present position of its stalls. Salisbury appeals to us with its
     perfect simplicity and symmetry, and York with its unequalled
     grandeur and splendour; but after viewing all the cathedrals of
     England, it is Lichfield which is most likely to be remembered
     among them for something which may be most aptly called charm. What
     can be more delightful than the view which confronts the traveller
     who, approaching from the town, pauses to look across the sparkling
     water of the pool at the three graceful spires standing out amid a
     wealth of green trees and shrubs? Truly a picture to be long
     remembered.

     “The cathedral stands in a close which was once surrounded by
     strong walls with bastions and a moat. Nature had supplied the moat
     on the south side, and the Cathedral Pool, as it is now called, is
     still there. The artificial moat has been drained, but its course
     can be easily traced running round the bishop’s palace, and its
     water has been replaced by lovely gardens and gravel walks. Some
     bits of the old wall remain, the north-east bastion in the palace
     gardens and a turret on a house at the south corner: the ‘beautiful
     gates’ of Bishop Langton are gone; but in the Vicars’ Close at the
     west of the cathedral are two small irregular courtyards with
     houses so old that we feel sure that their wooden beams and plaster
     were there when the Royalists of the neighbourhood housed
     themselves within the fortified close.

     “The close is not large, and of course, as Lichfield is a cathedral
     of the old establishment, there are no monastical buildings, no
     ruined cloisters. On the north side the ground rises rapidly in a
     grassy slope to a terrace, behind which are some of the canons’
     houses. Opposite the north transept is the deanery, a substantial
     red brick house in the style of the middle of the last century;
     next to it, and farther east, is the bishop’s palace.”--(A. B. C.)

Lichfield was built in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries and is,
therefore, almost entirely in the styles of Early English and Decorated.
The Early English may be studied in the transepts which were begun
first; Early Decorated in the nave; and fully developed Decorated in
the Lady-Chapel and Presbytery.

There is a curious similarity between the building of Lichfield and
York:

     “The Norman Cathedral of York was built in 1080, and that of
     Lichfield at an uncertain date. Between 1154-1181, Archbishop Roger
     substituted for the original chancel at York a long, square-ended
     choir, with the aisle carried behind the end. At Lichfield, during
     the same period, the large chapel was built at the end of the
     Norman apse; and about the beginning of the Thirteenth Century the
     whole Norman eastern termination was, as at York, replaced by a
     long, square-ended choir with the low aisles behind. Next, at York
     the Norman transepts were rebuilt in Early English: the south
     transept, 1230-1241; followed by the north transept, 1241-1260.
     Also at Lichfield the Norman transepts were rebuilt in Early
     English, beginning with the south and ending with the north. The
     Early English work of this cathedral is shown by the licenses to
     dig stone to have been in progress in 1235 and 1238. York nave and
     Lichfield were next rebuilt in Early Decorated--the first in
     1291-1324. Lastly, at Lichfield, the elongation of the eastern part
     was begun at the extreme east, beyond the existing choir by the
     Lady-chapel, in late Decorated under Bishop Langton, 1296-1321, and
     followed by taking down the choir, and continuing the same work on
     its site westward. The works at York followed in the same order,
     but forty or fifty years later, by first erecting the presbytery
     outside the existing choir, and then taking down the latter and
     continuing the work of the presbytery to form the new choir. The
     plans of the two cathedrals rival each other in the simplicity of
     their proportions.”--(W.)

Nothing definite is known of the early history of this Cathedral, as all
records were destroyed during the Civil Wars. In all probability there
was the same old story of a Saxon church in the Seventh Century
succeeded by several other churches until the Norman Cathedral was
built, probably like Peterborough, only smaller.

This, of course, fell a victim to the change of fashion, and was pulled
down gradually as the new building--the one we know to-day--arose. The
first thing that was done was the building of a new choir (Early
English) from the central tower to the seventh bay of the present choir.
Some of this was destroyed at a later period. The sacristy and adjoining
room were also built. Then, about 1220, the south transept was begun,
then the nave, north transept and west front, with the two towers.

Walter de Langton (1296-1321) began the Lady-Chapel; and while this was
being built the Early English presbytery was pulled down and rebuilt in
the Decorated style, to be uniform with the Lady-Chapel. The old
clerestory of the choir was also rebuilt in the same style. Walter de
Langton also built the Bishop’s Palace, which was destroyed in 1643,
bridged the Cathedral Pool, and erected a splendid shrine to St. Chad,
which cost £2,000. This stood behind the high altar in the eastern bay
of the retro-choir, with an altar to this saint on its west.

St. Chad, or Ceadda (669-672), was the patron saint of Lichfield, who,
when Bishop of Mercia, chose Lichfield as his seat and thus founded the
diocese; and he built a small church near St. Chad’s Well. His service
was short and he died in 672.

Miracles were immediately performed at his shrine in Stowe Church; but
his remains were removed to the Cathedral. St. Chad’s Head was placed in
a separate chapel (see page 213).

When Henry VIII. despoiled the shrine he found a great horde of
treasures--jewels, golden and silver crosses, chalices, maces, and
copes, and other vestments had accumulated in great number. In the
Fourteenth Century a document mentions “the head of Blessed Chad, in a
certain painted wooden case; also an arm of Blessed Chad; also bones of
the said saint in a certain portable shrine.”

Lichfield suffered greatly during the Civil Wars. The Royalists hoisted
the king’s flag on the central steeple and defied the Roundheads led by
Lord Brooke. The Cathedral was besieged in March, 1643; and on the
second day of that month, which happened to be St. Chad’s Day, Lord
Brooke was killed by a shot fired by a son of Sir Richard Dyott, called
“Dumb Dyott,” because he was deaf and dumb. This was regarded as a
miracle. A contemporary letter notes:

     “We have had the honour in these parts to bring my Lord Brooke to a
     quiet condition. That enemy of our Church (March 2) was slain in
     his quarrel against our Church, by the God of our Church, with a
     shot out of the Cathedral, by a bullet made of Church lead, through
     the mouth which reviled our Church; and (if this be worth your
     reading) this Cathedral was dedicated to the memory of an old Saxon
     holy man (called Ceadda, commonly Chad); the blow of death came
     from St. Chad’s Church upon St. Chad’s Day.”

The Cathedral remained in a ruinous condition for a year or more after
the Restoration. Then Bishop Hackett (1661-1671) went to work to clear
away the rubbish and make repairs. In eight years’ time the Cathedral
was ready for a new dedication.

Perpendicular tracery was inserted in some of the windows in the
Fifteenth Century, when the Cathedral was at the height of its beauty.

The present =West Front= is a restoration of the beautiful work of the
Middle Ages.

In 1820 the west front was completely covered with cement which
concealed all its beauty until 1877, when the authorities began to
remove it. Only five of the original statues remained and it was decided
to fill all the 113 niches. Tradition said the long row of figures over
the doors represented the Saxon and English kings with St. Chad in the
centre; but the others were unknown. They are now as follows:

     “The two rows on the northern tower to the north of the great west
     window: higher row, St. Editha, David, St. Helena, Solomon, St.
     Gabriel, Zechariah, Nahum, Amos, Jeremiah; lower row, Dean
     Bickersteth, St. Mark, Queen Victoria, St. Luke, St. Uriel,
     Malachi, Habakkuk, Obadiah, Daniel (Jeremiah just above Daniel by
     the window).

     “The two rows on the southern tower to the south of the great west
     window: higher row, Isaiah, Hosea, Jonah, Zephaniah, St. Michael,
     Bishop Hacket, Bishop Lonsdale, Bishop Selwyn; lower row, Ezekiel,
     Joel, Micah, Haggai, St. Raphael, Bishop Clinton, Bishop
     Patteshall, Bishop Langton.

     “Next is the long row of kings with St. Chad in the centre,
     stretching right across the cathedral: William the Conqueror,
     William Rufus, Henry I., Stephen, Henry II., Richard I., John,
     Henry III., Edward I., Edward II., Edward III., Richard II., St.
     Chad, Penda, Wilphere, Ethelred, Offa, Egbert, Ethelwolf,
     Ethelbert, Ethelred, Alfred, Edgar, Canute, Edward the Confessor.

     “Lowest row, broken three times by the doors: St. Cyprian, St.
     Bartholomew, St. Simon, St. James the Less, St. Thomas (northern
     door), St. Philip, St. Andrew (central door), St. Paul, St. Matthew
     (southern door), St. James the Greater, St. Jude, St. Stephen, St.
     Clement, St. Werburga.”

The Duke of York (James II.) gave the money for the tracery of the large
=West Window= after the original had been destroyed during the Civil Wars.
This was removed in 1869, for another more in sympathy with the style
of the Fourteenth Century.

The =West Door= is one of the most beautiful in England, taking rank with
the Prior’s Door of Lincoln Cathedral. The porch is recessed and the
outer arch, cusped. Within, a central support rises to form two arches.
The whole is richly carved. Above the central pillar is a bas-relief
representing Christ in Glory, with angels by his side. On the central
column stands a figure of the Virgin and Child, and on either side of
the door beneath canopies are Mary Magdalene and St. John the Evangelist
(north), and Mary, wife of Cleophas, and St. Peter (south).

What the original statues were is not known. Most of the ironwork on the
doors is supposed to be original.

The two side doors are deeply recessed. The figures in the northern
doorway are of princes and princesses who promoted Christianity in
England; and in the southern, the chief missionaries. The gable and
towers are also adorned with statues of Biblical fame.

The nave is ornamented and strengthened by buttresses and
flying-buttresses. In the north transept we find a handsome =North
Doorway=, a splendid specimen of Early English with traces of the Norman.
It is deeply recessed and revealing a double arch carved with foliage.
The mouldings are also carved. The outer one contains bas-reliefs
showing the genealogy of Christ, beginning with Jesse and ending with
the Virgin and Child. On the right side, opposite Jesse, is St. Chad
baptizing the sons of King Wulphere, and above are the Apostles. The
architrave is surmounted by a weather moulding in the form of a gable
on the top of which is a cross. The pillars on each side of the doorway
have finely carved capitals and dog-tooth ornamentation. The graceful
centre pillar consists of four slender shafts with carved capitals. Next
comes the octagonal Chapter-House; then the choir and presbytery; and
then the Lady-Chapel, entirely restored and with new saints in the
niches. On the south side of the Lady-Chapel are mortuary chapels.

The south side shows the buttresses of the choir; then the turrets of
the sacristy with their crocketed pinnacles; and then the =South
Transept=, the gable of which contains a beautiful rose window. The =South
Door=, much restored, resembles the northern one, only it is not so fine.
The heavy buttresses on this side are Wyatt’s. Now we have again come to
the Jesus tower (south-west), in which the ten bells are hung.

Entering by the west door, the beauty of the interior bursts upon us. We
have an unbroken vista and the Cathedral therefore impresses us as
immensely long. The beautiful arches of the roof carry the eye straight
down to the windows of the Lady-Chapel.

The =Nave= is transitional from Early English to Decorated and is dated by
various authorities from 1250 to 1280.

The large piers are composed of clustered shafts with richly carved
capitals of foliage. From these spring mouldings. The top of each arch
touches the string-course, and then comes the triforium, so beautiful
here with its row of double arches, each one sub-divided into two
lights, above which is geometrical tracery. Dog-tooth ornament decorates
the mouldings of these triforium arches, and also the string-course
that separates the triforium from the clerestory. The clerestory windows
are curious: spherical triangles enclosing three circles with quatrefoil
cusps. Dog-tooth ornamentation runs around the windows. A large circle
with five cusps ornaments the spandrels of most of the pier-arches
across which the vault shaft passes. At the intersection of the various
ribs (five ribs) are finely carved bosses. Much of the effect is
obtained from the size of the triforium.

The glass in the big west window dates from 1869, a memorial to Canon
Hutchinson, who was a zealous worker for the Cathedral’s restoration, by
Sir Gilbert Scott.

In the north aisle of the nave we note the tablet placed there by Ann
Seward to the memory of her father, Canon Seward, his wife and daughter,
upon which Sir Walter Scott added lines to the memory of the poetess.
There is also a neighbouring tablet to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who
was born in Lichfield.

In the =north transept= we find a curious monument to Dean Heywood (died
1492) showing the skeleton of this worthy. The upper part (which
represented him in full canonical costume) has gone. Similar monuments
are in Exeter and Lincoln. In the =South Transept= there are busts and
memorials to Dr. Samuel Johnson, a native of Lichfield (died 1784), and
to David Garrick (died 1779), an early resident of Lichfield. In the
first bay of the aisle, there is a monument to the officers and men of
the 80th Regiment (Staffordshire Volunteers), over which hang colours
taken from the Sikhs. At the south end we note a fine altar to one of
Nelson’s captains, Admiral Sir William Parker (died 1866). Note the big
south window (Perpendicular) in which there is some Herkenrode glass
(see page 212).

There is another memorial window in the south aisle of the nave to the
officers of the 64th (2d Staffordshire Regiment) who fell in the Indian
Mutiny.

The =Transepts=, as we have seen, were built before the nave. Each
consists of three bays with eastern aisles. Most of the windows are
Perpendicular.

     “At the south end was probably a large five-light Early English
     window, surmounted by a rose window. The rose window still remains,
     but, being above the present groining, cannot be seen from inside
     the cathedral; the five lights are replaced by a nine-light
     obtuse-headed window, which seems much too large for the transept;
     and this effect is increased by the extreme whiteness and
     transparency of its glass. At the north end, the five-light window
     is surmounted with three small lights, but these last again are
     hidden in the roof.”--(A. B. C.)

Now we come to the =Choir=, which, including the presbytery and
retro-choir, has eight bays. It has no triforium.

The splays of the windows are beautifully decorated with quatrefoil
ornamentation. There is only one of the original Decorated windows (east
on south side). The others are Perpendicular.

     “The vaulting is very much the same as in the nave, but the
     vaulting-shafts divide into seven instead of five ribs; the bosses,
     as everywhere else in the cathedral, are very deeply and richly
     carved.

     “On the four eastern sets of piers long slender shafts run up from
     the base of the piers in the same way as in the nave, and similarly
     the spandrels are ornamented with foliated circles, of which nearly
     all trace had disappeared before the recent restoration. This,
     however, is not the arrangement on the three western pairs. It was
     found here that these shafts did not reach the ground; and so Sir
     Gilbert Scott, having discovered a portion of the sculptured wing
     of an angel just above the dean’s present stall, decided upon
     finishing the shafts with corbels in the form of angels occupied in
     minstrelsy. Above each of these angels--which were innovations--he
     placed, under richly crocketed canopies and standing on very
     finely-carved brackets, the figures of six saints.”--(A. B. C.)

Architects love to study the merging of the two styles in this part of
the Cathedral, and one of the best illustrations is the entrance to the
vestibule of the Chapter-House. The arch at the west end of the
north-choir-aisle is very old and interesting and so is the arcading in
the aisles.

     “In the first three western bays in both aisles the large arcading,
     with its plain trefoiled arches, is clearly Early English. The
     arcading in the other bays is equally clearly of the Decorated
     period, and is considerably smaller. In the four eastern bays in
     each aisle the arches go right up to the course which forms the top
     of the arcading, and the triangular spandrels thus formed are
     ornamented each with a curious little head, having queer headgear;
     the rest of the spandrel is carved with foliage, and in the plates
     of the foliated arches are quaint animals. The arcading in the
     remaining bay is similar, but angels’ heads with wings take up the
     whole spandrel. Some of the arcading, notably that in the three
     easterly bays of the south aisle, is unrestored. The inferiority of
     the modern work in the next bay is only too patent.”--(A. B. C.)

The window over the tomb of Bishop Hackett in the =South-choir-aisle= is
adorned by lovely foliage. Here, too, we find the very interesting
=Minstrels’ Gallery=. It was probably placed here in the Fifteenth Century
because the arcading has been cut away to make room for it. The little
gallery rests upon fan-shaped vaulting. As it stands directly in front
of the chapel of the Head of St. Chad, it may have been used for the
purpose of exhibiting this relic to the devout in the aisle below. (See
page 213.) It is similar in style to the minstrel gallery of the
Mediæval halls: hence its name. A staircase in the wall leads to the
gallery.

The =Choir-screen=, of ornamental metal-work, designed by Sir Gilbert
Scott, is similar to those of Salisbury, Hereford and Worcester. The
Choir-stalls, Bishop’s Throne and elaborate Reredos are all modern. The
south-choir-aisle contains a number of interesting monuments. There is a
monument to “=Hodson of Hodson’s Horse=,” killed in the Indian Mutiny.
Under the cross is the King of Delhi surrendering his sword to Major
Hodson, with figures of Justice, Fortitude, Temperance and Mercy and
statuettes of Joshua, David, St. Thomas of India and St. George of
England. Here is also the monument of =Bishop Langton= (died 1296) with
mutilated effigy. Opposite is the curious monument to =Sir John Stanley=
of Pipe, the effigy representing the knight naked to the waist, and the
legs in armour. It seems that Captain Stanley had been excommunicated
for some offence, and, after atonement, had been allowed burial here on
condition that evidence of his punishment should appear on his effigy.
The most famous monument of all, however, is that of =The Sleeping
Children=, by Sir Francis Chantrey in 1817. It established his fame and
is an early example of the natural style just coming into favour. It
represents two young daughters of William Robinson, Prebendary of the
Cathedral, sleeping in each other’s arms.

We must notice in the north-choir-aisle one window in which King David
is teaching the singers of the House of God. The glass is old Flemish.

Now we have the =Lady-Chapel=, the gem of the whole Cathedral, rendered
exceptionally beautiful because of the old glass in the windows.

     “In shape it forms a symmetrical extension, both in height and
     width, to the choir, but without aisles; and it has an octagonal
     apse--the only example, it is said, of such a termination in the
     country. It is lighted by nine high windows, with Decorated
     tracery. This tracery has recently been restored in the style of
     that in the three end windows; until this was done most of the
     windows contained Perpendicular tracery.

     “The windows rest on an arcade of very beautiful design. The arcade
     may be said to consist of a series of small decorated canopies,
     supported by shafts with carved capitals, and separated by
     ornamented buttresses. The canopies, which bow forward, have
     trefoil ogee arches, surmounted with crockets and finials. Above
     the arcade is a similar embattled parapet to that in the choir,
     with a similar passage round the chapel behind it.

            *       *       *       *       *

     “The vaulting of the roof is like that in the choir; the same
     number of ribs diverging from the slender shafts which run right
     down to the bends of the arcade. Halfway up these shafts are
     niches, the brackets and canopies to which are beautifully carved.
     These are old, but until recently were empty, and no authentic
     record remained as to what were the characters represented.”--(A.
     B. C.)

In 1895 ten virgin saints and martyrs, by C. E. Kempe, were placed here.

Of course, all the glass was crashed during the siege of Lichfield; and,
therefore, the windows are filled with other than the original. The
seven most eastern windows contain what is called the =Herkenrode glass=,
originally in the Abbey of Herkenrode near Liège. The designs are
supposed to be by Lambert Lombard of the Sixteenth Century. Two of the
windows depict founders and benefactors of the abbey, and the other
five, scenes in the life of Christ. The Herkenrode glass (340 pieces)
was bought by

[Illustration: LICHFIELD: FROM EAST WINDOW]

[Illustration: CHESTER: NORTH]

Sir Brooke Boothby in Belgium in 1802, for £200, now valued at £15,000.
What remained was used to fill other windows in the Cathedral. On the
south side of the Lady-Chapel are three “Mortuary Chapels,” with groined
roofs. In the central one lies the effigy of =Bishop Selwyn= (buried
outside), Bishop of New Zealand, who organized the church in that
far-away country. This accounts for the frescoes showing the Maoris. The
two end windows are also old glass supposed to have come from the Low
Countries. One is a symbolic picture of _Baptism_; the other, the
legendary _Death of the Virgin_.

We have yet to examine the =Sacristy= of the Chapter-House. The sacristy
is on the south side (Early English). Its upper floor was the =Chapel of
St. Chad=, which, as we have seen, was entered from the minstrels’
gallery (see page 211). The restored chapel was re-dedicated on St.
Chad’s Day (March 2), 1897.

     “The Chapel of St. Chad, first Bishop of Lichfield, and, with the
     Blessed Virgin Mary, patron of our Cathedral Church, was destroyed
     in all probability when the rest of the Cathedral was laid in ruins
     in 1643, the siege beginning on St. Chad’s Day, March 2nd of that
     year. Little was left: the four walls remained in a broken
     condition, with the vaulting-shafts and caps for the springers of
     the stone groining, and the wall-ribs, to mark its original lines;
     also the very beautiful Early English windows--twelve lancets in
     groups of three--which, singularly enough, were little injured.
     Externally these are very plain, but internally they are full of
     interest, and there is nothing better of the kind in the Cathedral.
     The site of the old altar is clearly marked; indeed, a small
     portion of it has been preserved. The piscina also still remains.
     The aumbry remains in which antiquarians suppose that St. Chad’s
     relics were preserved.”--(L.)

The =Chapter-House= and the vestibule leading to it were built about the
middle of the Thirteenth Century (Early English). The vestibule contains
beautiful arcading; the capitals of the pillars are finely carved. The
entrance door into the Chapter-House is very handsome, with deeply cut
mouldings, and capitals of the grouped shafts richly carved with leaves.
Dog-tooth and trefoils are also used as ornamentation. The Chapter-House
is octagonal. The central pillar, composed of clustered shafts with
richly carved capitals of foliage, carries the eye upward, where the
ribs spread out beautifully over the roof and bosses mark their
intersection. The windows are Early English, of two lights. Below them
runs a fine arcading.




CHESTER

     DEDICATION: CHRIST AND THE BLESSED VIRGIN. ORIGINALLY THE CHURCH OF
     A BENEDICTINE ABBEY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CHOIR; CHOIR-STALLS; CHAPTER-HOUSE.


Chester was the church of the Benedictine Abbey of St. Werburgh when
Henry VIII. founded the See after the dissolution of the monasteries. It
had been originally an establishment of secular canons. The patron
saint, St. Werburgh, was a niece of St. Etheldreda of Ely; and she took
the veil at Ely, where she eventually became abbess. St. Werburgh was
buried at Hanbury; but when the Danes were ravaging Mercia, the monks of
Hanbury fled with the relics of St. Werburgh to Chester, where they were
richly enshrined in the old church of St. Peter and St. Paul. This
church was rebuilt in the Tenth Century; and when a new foundation was
made in 1095 by Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester, at the desire of St.
Anselm, the church was rebuilt, the canons replaced by Benedictine monks
and the house called the Abbey of St. Werburgh.

Rebuilding was again necessary in 1194 and was continued for centuries.
The eastern portion of the church is Early English, the rest is
Decorated with alterations and additions in the Perpendicular style.

Ancient and royal Chester is one of the most picturesque cities in
England. It was so important in Roman times that it was called the “City
of Legions.” It was also a stronghold of Saxons and Danes. From the
Norman Conquest until the reign of Henry III. the Earls of Chester had
their own courts and parliaments at Chester. Since Henry III. bestowed
the title of Earl of Chester upon his oldest son, the heir to the throne
has always held the earldom. The old church did not become a cathedral
until 1541.

Chester Cathedral, being built of soft red sandstone, suffered from the
weather. Restoration was a necessity. Consequently the exterior is
almost exclusively of the Nineteenth Century. It is handsome and
effective, though, unfortunately, owing to the situation, somewhat below
the level of the street, and the crowding of buildings, a good view of
the Cathedral is hard to obtain.

At one time it was one of the most beautiful, as well as the richest, in
England. It was terribly defaced during the Civil War, when the Puritans
used it for a stable and broke the windows. Subsequent repairs and
restorations have greatly transformed it.

One of the curious features of the Cathedral is the south transept. It
was claimed as the Parish church of St. Oswald until 1881. Oswald
(604-642), be it remembered, was the son of King Ethelfrid, and became
King of Northumbria. He was a convert to Christianity, which he
introduced among the Anglo-Saxons. Killed by Penda, the King of Mercia,
he was canonised by the Roman Catholic Church.

     “On approaching the cathedral on the south side, the transept, or
     church of St. Oswald, is a remarkable feature. Projecting to nearly
     the same length as the nave, with its lofty clerestory and great
     south window, it attracts attention as well by its own importance
     as by the unusual ground-plan which it gives to the entire
     building.”--(R. J. K.)

Let us look at the chief features of the exterior:

     “The WEST FRONT consists of an eight-light canopied Perpendicular
     window, with a band of elaborate tracery succeeded by ordinary
     tracery of the period in the head, set between two banded octagonal
     turrets, which are battlemented. The west door is peculiar; it
     consists of an arch under a square head, with foliated spandrels
     and a range of angels in the mouldings, deeply recessed under a
     larger arch with another square head. On each side are four
     crocketed niches, with pedestals denuded of their statues. To the
     west is a four-light canopied window, under a panelled band and
     flanked by a rich but empty niche on either side.

     “The door of the SOUTH PORCH is Tudor with two-light, square-headed
     windows and a canopied niche, and an intervening rich band. The
     windows of the aisles and clerestory of the nave are Perpendicular;
     the parapet is shallow. The SOUTH TRANSEPT, as long as the choir
     and as broad as the nave, has a Perpendicular clerestory and south
     windows, the former of four lights and with two transoms. The
     windows of the aisle are Late Decorated and of four lights
     separated by buttresses. This description applies to the south side
     of the choir, but the aisles are extended within one bay of the
     east end of the Lady-chapel, which has Perpendicular windows; the
     great east window is of the same date. Traces of Early English
     architecture appear in the north side of the choir and
     Chapter-house. The north window of the transept and windows of the
     nave are Perpendicular.”--(Wal.)

We can enter, as we prefer, by the west door, or the south porch. The
=Nave= is uninteresting. It consists of six bays, the piers are groups of
attached shafts terminating in foliage capitals. The roof is modern.

Decorated windows light the =South aisle=. The =North aisle= contains some
old Norman work. Here we find an ancient Italian font, presented in
1885, and an old piece of tapestry that has been in the Cathedral since
1668.

The =North transept= is small, owing to the monastic buildings on this
side. Here we find Norman work. Some of the windows exhibit
Perpendicular tracery. The roof is Perpendicular.

Until 1881 the =South Transept= was, as we have said, the Parish Church of
St. Oswald. It has Decorated windows. Perpendicular windows light the
west aisle.

We now enter the =Choir=. The screen is modern and by Sir G. Scott.

     “The choir is remarkable for the great beauty of the wood-work
     which it contains, as well as for its architectural merits. The
     style is that of the transition between the Early English and
     Decorated. The north side differs from the south, especially in
     regard to the mouldings. The north side is earlier than the south,
     the building having been commenced at the east end of that side.
     The mouldings on the north are bold rounds, while those on the
     south are shallow and small hollows. The triforium has a series of
     elaborately-carved cusped arches, and the clerestory windows are
     light and graceful with geometrical tracery. The vault is modern,
     constructed of good English oak. At the east there are figures of
     the sixteen prophets and at the west are angels playing musical
     instruments. There are some curious grotesque corbels, from which
     the vaulting shafts spring.

     “The carving of the CHOIR STALLS is equal, if not superior, to
     anything in England. These are Fourteenth Century work and rival
     the noble stalls of Amiens. They have been restored with much
     accuracy and taste. The carving of the dean’s stall should be
     noticed, as it represents the Jesse tree, surmounted by the
     Coronation of the Virgin. That representing Jacob’s Dream is
     modern. The _misereres_ are extremely interesting and curious and
     full of religious instruction, though often conveyed in the way of
     sarcastic reproof. There are forty-eight, of which three are
     modern. Some of the most curious are: a pelican feeding her young;
     St. Werburgh and the stolen goose; a wife beating her husband; the
     strategy of the fox; stag hunt; Richard I. pulling out the heart of
     a lion; a fox in the garb of a

[Illustration: CHESTER: CHOIR, WEST]

[Illustration: CHESTER: CHOIR-STALLS]

     monk presenting a gift to a nun; various wild men; wrestlers;
     unicorn resting its head on a virgin’s knee, and numerous
     grotesques.”--(P. H. D.)

The =Altar= is modern and is made of oak of Bashan, olive-wood from the
Mount of Olives and the cedar of Lebanon. The Reredos, a mosaic of the
Last Supper, the Pulpit and the Bishop’s Throne are all modern.

For many years the =Shrine of St. Werburgh= was used for the latter. We
pause to look at this interesting piece of Fourteenth Century work,
remembering how many eyes of Mediæval pilgrims have gazed with reverence
upon it.

     “At the end of the stalls on the south side is the Bishop’s Throne.
     This has been formed from the base of the shrine of St. Werburgh,
     which seems to have served its present purpose since the foundation
     of the See in the Sixteenth Century. It has, however, so greatly
     altered during the late ‘restoration,’ that it is difficult to
     ascertain the ancient arrangement. The lower part, with niches for
     figures, is ancient. The part resting on this, as high as the small
     gilt figures, is modern. The figures themselves are old, and before
     the alteration they rested on the ancient base. The pinnacles and
     all the upper portion are modern. The ancient portions are early
     Decorated work of the Thirteenth Century. The niches in front and
     at the sides of the base are lined with a small arcade and vaulted.
     Above them are foliaged canopies. The gilt figures hold scrolls,
     once perhaps bearing names. They are conjectured to represent kings
     and queens of Mercia, connected either directly or collaterally
     with St. Werburgh. It is possible that when the shrine itself was
     perfect, the lower part, with niches, formed a portion of the base,
     whilst the small figures may have been a canopy supported by marble
     shafts. Under this canopy and on the base the feretory or actual
     shrine, with the relics, may have rested. This, however, is but
     conjecture, since no drawing or description exists of the shrine
     before the Reformation.”--(R. J. K.)

The =North aisle= of the choir will detain the student because there is
much Norman work here. Here can also be traced the termination of the
old Norman apse. The arch in the east wall of the transept is also
Norman, and early, too. The doorway from the north aisle is Fourteenth
Century work. The apse was rebuilt in the Early English period and made
to end in a square. In the Perpendicular period it was extended further.
Note the gates of old Spanish workmanship across both aisles. They date
from 1558.

At the end stands the =Lady-Chapel=.

     “The Lady-Chapel is of Early English design, and was built about
     1266, previous to the present choir. Many alterations were made
     subsequently, including the removal of the ancient steep and lofty
     roof and the substitution of a flat roof and the insertion of
     Perpendicular windows. Most of these additions have been removed
     and the Early English character restored. The east window of five
     lights was designed by Scott, and the original form of the roof has
     been restored. The vault, which is original Early English, has a
     boss representing the murder of Thomas à Becket. The mosaics were
     designed by Sir A. Blomfield. Here the consistory court was held at
     the time of the Reformation, and George Marsh, the Chester martyr,
     was condemned to be burnt.”--(P. H. D.)

Through a Norman doorway in the north aisle of the choir, we enter the
=Cloisters=.

     “The south walk is entirely new, having been restored by Scott. The
     west walk adjoins a fine Early Norman chamber, probably the great
     cellar of the abbot’s house. The cloisters are Perpendicular work.
     In the south and west walks there is a double arcade on the
     cloister-garth side, which contained the _carrels_, or enclosed
     studies of wainscot, where the monks read or wrote, and on the
     opposite side are recesses which are not tombs, but _Armaria_ or
     cupboards, where their books and materials for illuminations were
     stored. In the Perpendicular period the roof of the cloisters was
     raised, which was not an advantage, as it caused the aisle windows
     and those of the refectory to be partly blocked up, and the
     vaulting cuts into the earlier work. The _Lavatorium_ is near the
     _Refectory_, an Early English building with Perpendicular windows.
     It is a noble structure, shorn of some of its length, and now used
     as a music room. The stone pulpit is remarkably fine, of Early
     English design, which rivals the famous pulpit of Beaulieu
     Abbey.”--(P. H. D.)

A doorway in the east walk carries us into the =Vestibule= of the
Chapter-House.

In the vestibule (Early English) light graceful piers support the
vaulting. The mouldings are very much admired.

The =Chapter-House= is also Early English and ranks high among these very
national productions. It dates from about 1240. The east window of five
lights is a handsome example of its date.




MANCHESTER

     DEDICATION: ST. MARY THE VIRGIN, ST. GEORGE AND ST. DENIS. FORMERLY
     SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CHOIR-STALLS; GORDON WINDOW.


Manchester was built for a parish church and only became a cathedral in
1847. It is a very fine specimen of Perpendicular Gothic of the early
Fifteenth Century, though there are some remains of older work here and
there. The oldest is the arch leading into the Lady-Chapel. This shows
some influences of the Decorated style.

The choir, aisles and chapter-house date from 1422-1458; the nave was
built in 1465-1481; Chapel of the Holy Trinity, 1498; Jesus Chapel,
1506; St. James’ Chantry (Ducie Chapel), 1507; St. George’s Chapel,
1508; Ely Chapel, 1515; and Lady-Chapel in 1518. The Cathedral suffered
during the Civil Wars and has been much restored.

The exterior is not particularly impressive. The walls are grimy with
smoke and there is no emerald sward, nor are there ivy-covered walls.

The one tower (built in 1864-1868) rises above a still more recent
=Western porch=, designed by Basil Champneys and ornamented with a parapet
and a single crocketed turret, which gives it a very unsymmetrical
appearance. The square tower contains a clock in the first stage, soars
140 feet and is finished with a pierced battlement with pinnacles at the
corners.

Turning round the corner, we come to the =South porch=, two bays and two
stories (modern) and elaborately carved. Next comes the Jesus Chapel;
then the octagonal Chapter-House; then the Fraser memorial chapel; and
then we turn the corner and come to the Lady-Chapel, unusually small and
projecting only about eighteen feet. The windows are Eighteenth Century,
though the tracery is Decorated in general character.

Passing the window of the north-choir-aisle and the eastern end of the
Derby Chapel, we again turn the corner. The first projection is the Ely
Chapel and the next and smaller one is an engine room used for working
the organ. The small door next opens into the ante-chapel of the Derby
Chapel. Finally we reach the north porch.

     “It is a dimly lighted building; this is due chiefly to two causes:
     first to the fact that it is enormously wide, and the aisle windows
     are therefore far from the central nave, and secondly to the fact
     that almost all the windows both of aisles and clerestory are
     filled with painted glass, in many cases of a deep colour, and
     rendered still more impervious to light by the incrustation of
     carbon deposited on their outside by the perpetual smoke of the
     city. So dark is the church that in the winter months it has
     generally to be lit with gas all the day long, and even in the
     summer, in comparatively bright weather, some gas burners will
     generally be found alight. The mist also of the exterior atmosphere
     finds its way into the building, and hangs beneath the roof,
     lending an air of mystery to the whole place, and giving rise to
     most beautiful effects when the sunlight streams through the
     clerestory windows. The tone also of the nave arcading and
     clerestory rebuilt in recent years, of warm, rose-coloured
     sandstone, is very lovely.”--(T. P.)

The =Nave= is wider than it is long. With its double aisles it measures
114 feet; its length is only 85 feet. The choir is about the same
proportion. The Lady-Chapel, at the extreme east, is very small. The
sides of the nave and choir are still further extended by chapels,
partitioned off by screens. On the south side of the nave we have first
=St. George’s Chapel= (founded in 1508) and =St. Nicholas’s Chapel= (founded
in 1186, before the present church was built); and on the north side the
space once occupied by the =Holy Trinity Chapel= (1498) and =St. James’s
Chapel= (1507).

     “This church differs from most of our cathedral and abbey churches
     in having no triforium.[8] And the clerestory is not lofty, so that
     the church is rather low for its width, though the height of the
     arches of the main arcade prevents this being felt. The roofs of
     the aisles are all modern, but that of the nave, though extensively
     repaired, has much of the original work in it, and, with the
     exception of a few bosses, the choir roof is old. All the roofs are
     of timber; in the nave the intersections of the main beams are
     covered by beautiful bosses carved out of the solid wood. On either
     side, at the points from which the main cross beams spring, is a
     series of angelic figures splendidly carved in wood: those on the
     south side playing stringed instruments, those on the north side
     wind instruments.

     “The pillars of the main arcade of the nave are modern work built
     in imitation of the original ones. They are light and graceful,
     and, like many other pillars of fifteenth century date, are formed
     of shafts of which only half have separate capitals, the other
     mouldings running round the arch. The spaces between the arches are
     elaborately carved with heraldic shields.”--(T. P.)

In the nave we find the one interesting window in the Cathedral (the
most eastern one in the Ducie Chapel), a memorial to =General Gordon=
killed at Khartoum in 1888. It consists of five lights. Gordon is in the
centre, his hand on the head of a native boy. Natives and angels occupy
the other lights.

Towards the east end of the nave stands the

[Illustration: MANCHESTER: SOUTH]

[Illustration: MANCHESTER: NAVE, EAST]

modern pulpit and then an ancient rood-screen with three wide openings
and double doors.

Passing through the screen, we enter the =Choir=, sometimes called the
=Radcliffe Choir=, because members of this family were buried here.

The =Choir-stalls= date from the early Sixteenth Century and resemble
those in Ripon Cathedral and Beverley Minster.

     “There are twelve stalls on either side, and three on each side of
     the entrance through the rood-screen facing east. The stalls are
     furnished with _misereres_, which, in common with many others both
     in England and on the Continent, represent all manner of quaint
     subjects, monsters, animals, hunting scenes, etc.

     “The carved elbows of the stalls and the end of the book desks are
     also worthy of careful examination, especially the Eagle and Child
     and general carving of the Dean’s Stall, which is a marvel of
     beautiful workmanship, and said by high authorities to be
     unequalled.

     “Between the stalls the floor is one step higher than that of the
     nave, and at the east end of the stall, there is a further rise of
     two steps as we pass into the presbytery. Here, on the south side,
     we see the bishop’s throne--modern work, carved with a view to be
     in harmony with the stalls, but comparing unfavourably with them in
     execution. There is a rise of two more steps into the sanctuary,
     and the altar itself is raised two steps higher; this gives a good
     effect. Behind the altar is an elaborately carved wooden reredos of
     modern work, richly painted and gilt.”--(T. P.)

A fine ancient screen runs across the arch at the opening of the
=Lady-Chapel=.

Along the south side of the south-choir-aisle we first come to the
vestry, then to the =Jesus Chapel= (now a library), separated from the
aisle by a handsome screen of the Sixteenth Century. Then we reach the
fine entrance to the =Chapter-House=, beneath a large arch. At the end is
the =Fraser= =Chapel=, with an altar cenotaph to the second Bishop of
Manchester, James Fraser (died 1885), buried elsewhere.

On the north aisle of the choir the space is occupied by the =Derby
Chapel=, dedicated to St. John the Baptist. It was the private chapel of
the Stanley family, to which the Earls of Derby belong. It was begun by
James Stanley (1485-1509), who became Bishop of Ely. He died in 1515 and
was buried near the =Ely Chapel=, where the original tomb and brass are
still to be seen.




CARLISLE

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY TRINITY. FORMERLY SERVED BY AUGUSTINIAN
     CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CHOIR AND EAST WINDOW.


In the ancient town of North Cumberland--the famous border town
appearing so frequently in ballads as “Merry Carlisle”--the Cathedral
shares the honours with the Castle. Both date from about 1092.

When William Rufus II. rebuilt and fortified Carlisle, he left one
Walter, a Norman priest, as governor. He began to build a church and
priory, but died in the meantime and Henry I. continued the work. The
church was dedicated in 1101; the monastery of Augustinians was founded
in 1121; and the Cathedral established in 1133. It was built in the
Norman style, a nave with aisles, transepts and a tower at the
intersection of the latter. The architect was Hugh, once abbot of
Beaulieu. The Norman choir was taken down early in the Thirteenth
Century and rebuilt in the Early English style. Two fires--especially
the one in 1292--wrought much damage. About the middle of the Fourteenth
Century the choir was completed in the Decorated style, and the
magnificent East window was also inserted at this time. Robert Bruce
took up his quarters in the Cathedral after the Battle of Bannockburn
(1314). In 1392 the north transept suffered from fire. Bishop Strickland
(1400-1419) restored it and rebuilt the central tower, adding to it a
wooden spire. Henry VIII. disestablished the monastery and formed a
Cathedral.

During the Civil War the Puritan soldiers were quartered in the
Cathedral and did much damage.

They pulled down two-thirds of the Norman nave in order to get stones
with which to repair the fortifications. At the rising of Charles
Edward, “Bonnie Prince Charlie,” in 1745, his soldiers captured Carlisle
and used the Cathedral for their headquarters; and when the Duke of
Cumberland arrived, the church was again used as barracks and many of
the Jacobites were confined in its walls.

Carlisle is a fine place to study all the styles of Early English in
simple, pointed, geometric and flowing. It is famed for its wonderful
East Window and the superb Choir, one of the finest in England.

     “A good view is obtained from the castle. The usual approach is
     from the east end, whence we observe the grand east window with its
     beautiful Late Decorated tracery. It is flanked by buttresses, with
     niches and crocketed pinnacles. In the niches are statues of SS.
     Peter, Paul, James and John. A foliated cross crowns the gable and
     on each side are four similar crosses. In the gable is a triangular
     window, having three trefoils, and below is a niche with a figure
     of the Virgin. The Central Tower, built by Bishop Strickland
     (1400-1419) on the old Norman piers, is too small for the huge
     choir and lacks dignity. Formerly it was crowned with a wooden
     spire, but this has been removed. There is a turret set at the
     north-east angle, and in the north side is a niche with the figure
     of an angel. The lower part of the choir is Early English, with the
     exception of a Perpendicular window at the west, and a Decorated
     one in the east bay. The clerestory is Late Decorated, and the
     windows have flowing tracery. The ball-flower ornament is
     extensively used in the cornice. The sculpture at Carlisle is
     worthy of notice. Carved heads and curious gargoyles abound. The
     North Transept is

[Illustration: CARLISLE: SOUTH-WEST]

[Illustration: CARLISLE: CHOIR]

     nearly all modern. It was rebuilt by Strickland in the Fifteenth
     Century, and again rebuilt when the church was restored. There is,
     however, an Early English window in the west wall. On the east side
     there was formerly a chapel, which has not survived the repeated
     alterations. The greater part of the Nave was taken down by
     Cromwell’s soldiers. What is left is of unmistakable Norman
     character. There is some modern imitation work, and late
     architectural detail. Most of the windows are modern, and also the
     doorway. The south side is similar to the north. The South Transept
     preserves the old Norman walls. On the south is a modern doorway
     with a window over it. On the east is St. Catherine’s Chapel, a
     Late Early English or Early Decorated building. The south side of
     the choir is similar to the north, and presents Early English
     details of construction. The monastic buildings once stood on the
     south side of the church but they have been pulled down with the
     exception of the fratry and gatehouse, the stone being used for
     repairing the fortifications of the city by Puritan soldiery. The
     refectory, or fratry, was rebuilt in the Fifteenth Century, and is
     now used as a chapter-house. There is a fine reader’s pulpit here.
     The gateway was erected by Prior Slee in 1527. The Deanery is a
     fine old house, and was formerly the prior’s lodging. It was
     rebuilt in 1507.”--(P. H. D.)

The =Nave= is Norman, but of the eight bays only two now remain. The piers
are low, the arches semicircular, and it appears that later hands carved
the Early English foliage on the capitals. The triforium shows plain
round-headed arches. The clerestory has three arches in each bay,
resting on shafts with carved capitals. The west end is modern. Sir
Walter Scott was married here in 1797.

The =North Transept= was rebuilt in the Fifteenth Century and the north
end again in modern times. The large window is modern and Decorated in
style. An Early English window in the west end is a good example of
plate-tracery. The roof is modern; the arch of the choir aisle,
Decorated. Norman piers support the =Tower=, to which Bishop Strickland
added additional columns, Perpendicular with foliated capitals. The
crescent and fetterlock on the capital of the eastern arch are emblems
of the Percy family; the rose and scallop shell on the western side, of
the Dacres and Nevilles.

The =South Transept= is only one bay: The arch into the choir-aisle is
Norman with zigzag ornaments and cushion capitals. Another Norman arch
opens into =St. Catherine’s Chapel=, now a vestry. It was founded by John
de Capella, a wealthy citizen. The beautiful screen is Late Decorated.

The =Choir= consists of eight pointed arches: it is 138 feet long and 72
feet high.

     “We now enter the choir by the door in the organ-screen. This is
     one of the finest in England--spacious, lofty, well-proportioned
     and rich in all its details. The arches of the main arcade are
     Early English, as the mouldings and dog-tooth ornament testify.
     These remained after the fire of 1292 and were retained. The piers
     are Early Decorated and were evidently built to support the arches
     after the fire. The capitals were carved later in the Late
     Decorated period, when the upper parts of the choir, triforium,
     clerestory, roof and east end were rebuilt. The builders were
     probably Bishops Welton and Appleby (1353-1395). When the choir was
     rebuilt in Early English times, the architect determined to enlarge
     it, and as the monastic buildings on the south prevented any
     expansion in that direction, the south piers of the choir retained
     their old position, while the north were moved further northward,
     and a new north aisle added. Thus the choir and the tower and nave
     are not quite symmetrical, and there is a blank wall at the
     north-west end of the choir which is thus accounted for. The
     details of the architecture of the choir merit close attention,
     especially the sculpture. Small figures of men, animals and
     monsters are mingled with the foliage. There are some admirable
     representations of the seasons, beginning with the second capital
     on the south, counting from the east end. There is a very fine
     timber roof, constructed about the middle of the Fourteenth
     Century. The scheme of colour decoration is, unfortunately, not
     original.”--(P. H. D.)

The =East Window= is one of the finest Decorated windows in existence. The
stone-work is not new, but it is believed to be an exact reproduction of
the original. It is composed of 86 distinct pieces of stone and is
struck from 263 centres. There are nine lights. The glass of the upper
portion is ancient, dating from the reign of Richard II. The pictures
are the Resurrection, the Final Judgment and the New Jerusalem. Hell is
shown with all the terrors familiar to the Mediæval mind. The modern
glass below represents scenes from the life of Christ.

The =Stalls= are Late Perpendicular and are beautifully carved. The fine
tabernacle-work is dated about 1433. The _misereres_ represent the usual
grotesque monsters, such as dragons, griffins and fables in which the
crafty fox is prominent. A Fifteenth Century brass to Bishop Bell (1495)
on the floor of the choir deserves notice.

A Renaissance screen partitions off the north-choir-aisle. Here we
notice the Early English arcade and the windows with two lights,
dog-tooth ornament and deep mouldings. The last bay eastward is Late
Decorated; the last bay westward contains a Perpendicular window.

In the north wall two Early English sepulchral recesses are unique
because of their chevron moulding. The effigy lying in one of them is
supposed to be Silvester of Everdon (1254). The stalls in the
=North-choir-aisle= are ornamented with very strange paintings of the
Fifteenth Century illustrating the lives of St. Anthony and St.
Cuthbert, with descriptive verses.

The =South-choir-aisle=, with a similar screen to the opposite one, also
contains painted stalls representing the life of St. Augustine. It
resembles the north-choir-aisle.

The narrow =Retro-choir= is of the same date as the big window.

The lower part of the Choir is Early English with the exception of the
Perpendicular window in the west bay and a Decorated one in the east
bay. The clerestory is Late Decorated, the windows noticeable for their
flowing tracery. Everywhere the ball-flower ornament abounds, and carved
heads and weird gargoyles are omnipresent.

The south side resembles the north with the exception of St. Catherine’s
Chapel, a Late Early English, or Early Decorated construction. The
monastic buildings have disappeared with the exception of the =Refectory=,
rebuilt in the Fifteenth Century, now used as the =Chapter-House=, and the
gateway built in 1527. The fine old =Deanery=, formerly the prior’s house,
was rebuilt in 1507.

[Illustration: CARLISLE: EAST END]

[Illustration: DURHAM: WEST FRONT]




DURHAM

     DEDICATION: ST. CUTHBERT. FORMERLY THE CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE
     MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: GALILEE CHAPEL; CHAPEL OF THE NINE ALTARS;
     NEVILLE SCREEN; JOSEPH’S WINDOW.


Durham is the most beautifully situated of all English cathedrals. It is
perched upon a rocky and wooded eminence above the Wear River, and with
the castle by its side makes a noble picture. When seen from the
opposite side of the river the west end of the Cathedral is very
charming; for the Galilee Chapel, the western towers and gable, the tall
central tower and the roof of the nave show variety of line and mass.
The Galilee Chapel completely hides the western doorway; but above it
rises the big window of 1346, the semicircular arch and the small gable
between the twin towers.

Durham Cathedral owed its existence to St. Cuthbert (one of the three
great English saints), and was fortunate enough to possess his shrine.
Therefore, it is well to recall his life before visiting the church. St.
Cuthbert was born about 635, and in Ireland, according to tradition. He
is first heard of as a shepherd-boy in Northumbria, where, in 651, while
watching his flocks by night, he had a vision of the heavens opening and
angels carrying thither the soul of St. Aidan, the pious bishop of
Lindisfarne. He decided to become a monk and entered the monastery of
Melrose, where he became prior. After a few years he went to
Lindisfarne, and also became prior there. In 676 he became an anchorite
on Farne Island, where he died, March 20, 687. The fame of St. Cuthbert
increased after his death and his anniversary was a great festival in
the English Church. Many churches in the north were dedicated to him.
His body rested quietly in Lindisfarne for two hundred years, but in
875, when the Danes were ravaging Northumbria, the pious monks of Holy
Island, bearing the body on their shoulders, fled inland and found a
temporary resting-place in Chester-le-Street, half-way between Newcastle
and Durham. In 995 they transferred the body of St. Cuthbert to Ripon;
but in the same year removed it to Durham.

Legend says that after the monks left Chester-le-Street, St. Cuthbert
appeared and announced that he desired to rest at Dun-holm. The monks
wandered about in search of this place. Finally they heard a woman
asking another if she had seen her lost cow. The other answered: “It’s
down in Dun-holm.” The monks remembering that Dun-holm meant
hill-meadow, carried the body of St. Cuthbert into the lonely field.

Here they built a stone chapel to protect the body; and Bishop Aldhun
soon began a great church. This “White Church” was consecrated in 999.
Aldhun died in 1018. The next important bishop was William of Saint
Carileph (1080-1096), appointed by William the Conqueror. He turned the
place into a Benedictine monastery. Then he determined to build a better
Cathedral, and laid the foundation-stone in 1093. When he died, three
years later, the walls of the choir, the eastern walls of the transepts,
the arches of the tower and a part of the first bay of the nave were
finished. A temporary shrine was also made for St. Cuthbert’s body.
Ranulph Flambard (1099-1128) was the next great builder. The nave, the
aisles, the west doorway, the lower part of the western towers and the
vaulting of the aisles are his. In 1104 he removed the body of St.
Cuthbert from the cloister-garth to the splendid shrine behind the high
altar. Here the sacred relics were supposed to work miracles, and
pilgrims flocked in great numbers to this holy place. William the
Conqueror, Henry III., Edward II., and Henry VI. were among the royal
personages who did homage to the saint.

When Henry VIII. suppressed the monasteries in 1540, the shrine was
destroyed; but the monks secured St. Cuthbert’s body and buried it
beneath the platform on which the shrine had stood. In 1827 the grave
was opened. A coffin was found that had been made in 1541; this enclosed
another, supposed to date from 1104; and this, a third, that agreed with
the description of the one made in 698. In the latter was found St.
Cuthbert’s body, wrapped in five robes of embroidered silk. Thus it
almost seemed as if there were some reason for the legend that his body
was supposed to be incorrupt.

William the Conqueror, anxious to see this incorrupt body, ordered the
shrine to be opened; but, at the first stroke, such sickness and terror
fell upon him that he rushed from the Cathedral; and, mounting his
horse, he never drew bridle until he had crossed the Tees.

Until the Reformation the banner of St. Cuthbert hung over his shrine.
It was made from a cloth used by St. Cuthbert in celebrating mass and it
was believed to insure victory to the army in whose ranks it was
carried. Flodden was one of the many fields in which the defeat of the
Scots was ascribed to the Standard of St. Cuthbert. Another was
Neville’s Cross, near Durham, when 15,000 Scots perished. A thanksgiving
hymn was ordered to be sung on top of the Cathedral tower on each
anniversary of the battle. This custom is still observed.

Returning now to the architectural history of the Cathedral, the next
great builder was Hugh Pudsey (1153-1195), in whose time the Norman
style was passing out of fashion. Pudsey began to build a Lady-Chapel at
the east end; but when he saw great cracks appearing in the walls, he
thought that St. Cuthbert was manifesting his displeasure. Consequently
he removed all his building materials, including the Purbeck marble
columns, and began and finished the wonderful Galilee Chapel at the west
end, about 1175.

Pudsey was a great prince as well as a fine builder. He was only
twenty-five when he became Bishop of Durham. He bought the earldom of
Northumberland and also a manor. When King Henry decided to go to
Jerusalem after his capture by the Saracens, Pudsey fitted out ships and
had a seat of silver for himself in one of them. The King died, and
Pudsey remained at home; and while King Richard went on the trip Pudsey
and the Bishop of Ely quarrelled. Pudsey was decoyed to London and
thrown into the Tower. He was released. He died on another journey from
Durham to London in 1195.

Bishop Poore (1229-1237), arriving from Salisbury Cathedral (see page
77), planned the Chapel of the Nine Altars, another special feature of
Durham and one of the best examples of Early English in existence. As
soon as he arrived in Durham, Bishop Poore began to plan the eastern
transept, for the apse of Carileph’s choir had been deemed unsafe.
Building, however, was not undertaken until after his death.

In the Fourteenth Century the large window in the north transept and the
west windows of the nave were added. Then the cloisters were built and
several halls. The refectory was turned into a library in 1661-1684.

The central tower was repaired and rebuilt in the Fifteenth Century.

Wyatt, who had charge of the restorations in 1796, destroyed the fine
Norman Chapter-House (built in 1133-1140), rebuilt the turrets on the
Chapel of the Nine Altars and placed a window of his own design in the
east end, removing for the purpose the great Early English window. The
original glass was also taken out and piled up in baskets. After much
had been stolen the remainder was locked up in the Galilee. Some of it
was inserted in the great round window.

Wyatt came very near destroying the Galilee Chapel so that he could open
the west doorway; but he was fortunately stopped.

The chief restorations of late years have been those of 1870-1876, when
the new choir-screen and pulpit were erected, the choir-stalls replaced
and the floor of the choir paved with marble mosaic.

From the large open space between the Cathedral and Castle, known as the
Palace Green, we gain a fine view of the northern side of the building;
the tall central tower and transept with its splendid window (1362) (The
Four Doctors of the Church); and the north aisle to the Chapel of the
Nine Altars that completes the eastern end.

From this side we can study the towers to advantage. The two square,
solid western towers date from Norman time; but the Norman work ends at
the roof of the nave; then begins what is probably work of the
Thirteenth Century. Here we have four stories ornamented with arcading,
blind and open. The first and third have pointed arches, and the second
and fourth round arches. The open parapets and pinnacles were added at
the end of the Eighteenth Century.

The =Central Tower= dates from about 1474, replacing an older tower that
had been condemned. The belfry had been struck by lightning in 1429. The
tower consists of two stories separated by a narrow gallery with a
pierced and embattled parapet. This is called the Bell Ringers’ Gallery.
The windows are arranged in pairs surmounted by ogee label moldings,
crocketed and ornamented with finials. The tower is finished with an
open-worked parapet, and at each corner are buttresses with canopied
niches containing figures.

We walk eastward to gain a nearer view of the Chapel of the Nine Altars
with the Early Decorated window and turrets crowned with pyramids. We
particularly want to see on the north-west turret the panel of the =Dun
Cow=, a modern reproduction of an ancient work, commemorating the legend.

We now turn and walk westwards. Then we enter the =North Door=, the
principal entrance to the Cathedral. The exterior is the work of Wyatt;
and though we take some pleasure in the carvings of foliage, figures,
chevrons and lozenges that ornament the capitals and arch-moulds, it is
the doorway, with its sanctuary knocker, that attracts our attention.

Criminals were wont to claim sanctuary at Durham from 740 to 1524. As
soon as the fugitive grasped the ring he was safe. This knocker is a
grotesque head of bronze with a ring hanging from the grinning mouth.

     “The north entrance door tells an interesting tale. The present
     door is a modern restoration, and some of the original features of
     the famous entrance have been obliterated. Towards this door many a
     poor wretch hastening to escape the hands of the avenger has sped
     his fearful steps in days gone by. Attached to the door still
     glares a fearful-looking metallic head holding a ring in its mouth.
     In its now eyeless sockets were once in all probability balls of
     crystal, or enamel. When once the ring was grasped by the hand of
     the fugitive he was safe. He had claimed the ‘peace’ of St.
     Cuthbert, and the sanctity of the neighbouring shrine shielded him.
     Above the door by day and night watched relays of monks to admit
     those who claimed sanctuary. So soon as ever a fugitive had reached
     the door he was admitted. This done he had to confess the crime of
     which he was guilty, and his statement was taken down in writing.
     All the while a bell was tolling to give notice that some one had
     taken refuge in the church. Then the culprit was arrayed in a black
     gown with a yellow cross on his left shoulder, and remained within
     the precincts for thirty-seven days. If, at the end of that time,
     he could not obtain a pardon of the civil authorities, he was
     conveyed across the seas to begin life elsewhere.”--(T.)

The exterior has not prepared us for the great impression that we
experience on entering the =Nave= with its enormous columns and noble
arches. These columns are deeply cut, some with spirals, some with
zigzags, some with reeds, etc. The whole effect is solemn. Fortunately
the modern screen allows the gaze to traverse the entire length of the
nave and choir until it is checked by the famous =Neville Screen=.

     “The triforium is almost uniform throughout the whole church. In
     each sub-bay it consists of two small arches under one large one,
     with the tympanum solid. Here also the capitals are cushions and
     perfectly plain.

     “Above the triforium is the clerestory, which contains one light to
     each sub-bay, and surmounting all is the vaulting, which springs
     from the piers and from grotesquely carved corbels between the
     triforium arches. The vaulting ribs are ornamented with chevrons on
     either side of a bold semicircular moulding. So much for the
     general arrangement of the bays. Some idea of the massiveness of
     the structures may be gathered when it is known that each group of
     the clustered pillars separating the bays covers an area of two
     hundred and twenty-five square feet at its base, while those of the
     cylindrical columns of the sub-bays are twelve feet square, and the
     columns themselves have a circumference of over twenty-three feet.
     There is little room to doubt that the effect obtained by the old
     builders of Durham was intentional. The masterly way in which great
     masses of solid masonry, greater than was constructively necessary,
     are handled, and the reticence and delicacy of the ornament combine
     to prove this. There is in the whole scheme a delightful union of
     great power and vigour in the masses, and of tenderness and loving
     care in the detail.”--(J. E. B.)

At the west end of the nave stands the =Font=, a modern work in the Norman
style carved with medallions depicting scenes from the life of St.
Cuthbert. It is covered by a large wooden canopy, dating from 1663 and
curiously carved with a mixture of Classic and Gothic ornamentation.

Durham is built in the form of a Latin cross, with transept, and in the
centre of the arms rises the tower. At the east end another transept
runs--the Chapel of the Nine Altars. At the west end we have the =Galilee
Chapel=.

[Illustration: DURHAM: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: DURHAM: GALILEE CHAPEL]

No one seems to know the origin of the word Galilee. According to Canon
Talbot:

     “Its name of Galilee has probably some reference to Galilee of the
     Gentiles, and implies that it was considered less sacred than the
     rest of the Cathedral. St. Cuthbert had a more than monkish fear of
     women, and they were not allowed to approach the shrine. A cross
     let into the pavement of the nave at the far west end curiously
     marks the far-removed spot nearer than which women might not
     approach. The prejudices of the good saint were thus perpetuated
     long after his death. The whole effect is light and graceful, and
     if the women were not allowed to enter farther than the western
     extremity of the church, they certainly had a most beautiful place
     of worship.”

The Galilee Chapel is the most beautiful example of Transitional Norman.

     “Entering the chapel by the steps leading from the Norman nave, the
     visitor is at once impressed with the lightness and delicacy of the
     work before him, as compared with the massive grandeur of the
     Norman cathedral behind. Here we have, in fact, one of the latest
     uses of the round arch influenced by the rapidly developing Early
     English Gothic. In plan the chapel consists of a nave with double
     aisles, which perhaps might be more properly called five aisles.
     These are divided by arcades, each of which is of four bays. These
     arches and the columns which support them are the chief beauty and
     characteristic of the chapel. The arches are semicircular, of one
     order, with three lines of chevrons, one on each face, and one on
     the soffit between two roll mouldings. The capitals are light and
     graceful and carved with a volute, and the columns clusters of
     marble and freestone shafts. The whole seems to have been coloured
     in fresco, and remains of this are still to be seen. The stone
     shafts, which alternate with those of marble, do not carry any of
     the weight of the arch, and are, undoubtedly, an addition, probably
     in the time of Cardinal Langley, when they must have been added,
     with a view to improving the appearance. The dimensions of the
     chapel are forty-seven feet from east to west, and seventy-six
     feet from north to south. The existing roof and the three
     Perpendicular windows on the west end are also additions by
     Cardinal Langley. On the walls above what were once the altars of
     the Virgin and Our Lady of Pity, remains of fresco painting may be
     noticed, all that remains of what has evidently been beautiful
     work. These were only brought to light by the removal of successive
     coats of whitewash with which they had been covered.”--(J. E. B.)

The two doorways at the end of the north aisle and south aisle of the
nave were made by Cardinal Langley, who closed up the great =West door=,
reopened in 1846. This was built by Flambard (1099-1128) and consists of
an arch of four orders decorated with chevrons. Grotesque animals also
appear in medallions. Langley also made a new roof, for which he raised
the walls.

In front of the principal altar stands =Langley’s Tomb=, erected by
himself; but of far more interest is the resting-place of a greater man.

No visitor can look upon the stone slab that marks the grave of the
=Venerable Bede= without awe. Bede, so famed for his learning and piety,
was a contemporary of St. Cuthbert and spent his long life chiefly in
the monasteries of Monkwearmouth and Jarrow. He died in 735 and was
buried at Jarrow. In 1022 his remains were stolen and placed in the same
coffin with those of St. Cuthbert. Pudsey removed them into the new
Galilee Chapel. “There, in a silver casket gilt with gold, hee laid the
bones of Venerable Bede, and erected a costly and magnificent shrine
over it,” so the _Rites of Durham_ inform us. When the shrine was
destroyed in 1542, the bones were interred beneath the site of the
shrine and were left undisturbed until 1831, when they were exhumed,
examined, enclosed in a lead-lined coffin and replaced in the tomb.

     “The most interesting monument here is the plain altar-slab which
     marks the burial-place of the great Northumbrian scholar. On the
     tomb are engraved the well-known words, _Hac sunt in fossâ Bedæ
     Venerabilis ossa_ (In this grave lie the bones of the Venerable
     Bede). According to the old legend the monk, who was casting about
     for a word to complete the scansion of his line between _Bedæ_ and
     _ossa_, left a space blank until he could in the morning return to
     his task with a mind refreshed. However, during the night an
     unknown hand added the metrically suitable _Venerabilis_. This,
     according to the legend, is the origin of the peculiar preface
     Venerable, always associated with the name of Bede.”--(T.)

There are few monuments and tombs in Durham Cathedral. The most
interesting is that of =Lord Ralph Neville= and his wife, =Lady Alice=, in
the south side of the nave. Unfortunately the effigies of 1367 and 1364
are much mutilated. Near them is the altar-tomb of =Lord John Neville=
(died, 1386), and his wife, the daughter of Lord Henry Percy, the famous
“Hotspur.” Their effigies are headless and mutilated, but traces of
colour and gilding are to be seen. The carving of the canopies is very
beautiful and between each of the niches are two square panels bearing
the arms of Neville and Percy.

We now come to the =transepts=. Each consists of two bays, with an aisle
on the eastern side, to which three steps lead. In these at one time
altars stood--to St. Nicholas and St. Giles, to St. Gregory and St.
Benedict in the north transept; and to St. Faith and St. Thomas the
Apostle, to Our Lady of Bolton and Our Lady of Houghhall, in the south
transept. A large window ornaments and lights each end.

The one in the north end is supposed to date from 1362. It is composed
of six lights, and the head shows late geometrical tracery. The transom
crossing the mullions is not visible from the outside. Below it a second
set of mullions supports a small gallery which leads to the triforium.
This window was repaired in 1512 and filled with glass of the period
representing its chief figures--St. Augustine, St. Jerome, St. Gregory
and St. Ambrose. Therefore it became known as =The Four Doctors of the
Church=. Prior Castell, who had charge of the repairs, placed himself
here kneeling before the Virgin. The opposite window, in the south end
of the transept, is called the =Te Deum=. It contains six lights and is
Perpendicular in style, dating between 1416 and 1446. There are
corresponding stairways in the north-west and south-west corners of the
transepts.

Now we come to the =Tower=, supported on four large Norman piers with
semicircular arches. We look above about seventy feet and see the first
story of the lantern with a gallery. Panels, grotesque heads, corbels,
crockets and finials and a string-course ornamented with the Tudor
flower give us plenty to study. Then come the windows, each with two
lights and divided by a transom, and, last of all, the handsome groined
roof with bosses on the ribs.

The =Choir= is the earliest part of the church. It contains Early Norman,
Early English and Early Decorated work. The two later styles occur in
the eastern part, and much beautiful detail is to be enjoyed. Where the
one leaves off and the other begins affords interesting study.

Carileph’s work is seen in the western bays. Arcades adorn the piers on
both sides of the choir. The lower row has six arches and the upper
three. All these are carved with foliage, heads and half figures. On
each pier of the upper arcade there is an angel under a canopy. The
vaulting dates from the Thirteenth Century. It is quadripartite. Square
leaves and the dog-tooth decorate the ribs. The bosses at the points of
intersection are very fine.

An altar-tomb with the effigy of =Bishop Hatfield= (1345-1381), beneath
the Bishop’s Throne, reminds us of the days when bishops were princes
and warriors. Hatfield led eighty archers to the siege of Calais; and
during his rule at Durham the battle of Neville’s Cross occurred (see
page 236). Such a magnificent bishop had to have a magnificent tomb; and
so, according to the custom of the day, he designed one for himself.
Here he lies beneath a canopy that once was bright with painting and
gilding. His effigy shows his splendid robes.

The =Screen=, separating the choir from the nave, dates from 1870-1876.
The =Choir-stalls= were made from 1660 to 1672 to replace the originals
destroyed by the Scottish prisoners incarcerated in the Cathedral in
1650 after the battle of Dunbar.

Above the high altar rises the splendid =Neville Screen=, erected about
1380 chiefly at the expense of John, Lord Neville of Raby. It runs along
the entire choir, and forms _sedilia_ of four seats on either side. The
screen was originally filled with 107 statues. The Virgin stood in the
centre, and one side of her was St. Cuthbert, and on the other St.
Oswald.

     “The prior of the day employed at his own expense seven masons for
     nearly a year to fix the screen, the execution of which is supposed
     to have been the fruit of the labours of French artists. The screen
     originally was much more elaborate than at present, being covered
     with rich colour and every niche filled with sculptured figures,
     but even now its present appearance is graceful.”--(T.)

The Neville screen is pierced by two doors that lead directly to the
=Shrine of St. Cuthbert= in the Chapel of the Nine Altars just behind it;
for in this chapel repose the bones of the patron saint. Facing the
great rose window there is an oblong platform (37 × 23 feet), about six
feet higher than the floor. The shrine was placed here in 1104 and
remained until 1540, when the body was taken from it and buried beneath
this spot.

The =Chapel of the Nine Altars= was so named because beneath the nine
lancet windows formerly stood nine altars to the following saints: (1),
St. Andrew and St. Mary Magdalen; (2), St. John the Baptist and St.
Margaret; (3), St. Thomas of Canterbury and St. Catherine; (4), St.
Oswald and St. Lawrence; (5), St. Cuthbert and St. Bede; (6), St.
Martin; (7), St. Peter and St. Paul; (8), St. Aidan and St. Helen; (9),
St. Michael the Archangel.

     “It is approached from the aisles by steps, the floor level being
     lower than that of the church proper. It is altogether a remarkable
     and interesting structure. With its lightness and loftiness
     contrasting grandly with the massive Norman nave and choir, its
     clustered columns of polished marble alternating with stone, its
     fine bold sculpture, its splendid vaulted roof and rich arcading,
     it forms a perfect example of the Early English style. Though
     regular and symmetrical in general design, the detail shows great
     variety, and even irregularity, a quality so often present in old
     work, and so much to its advantage.

     “The ‘New Work,’ as it was always called, was commenced in the year
     1242. The eastern wall, with its rose and nine lancet windows, is
     the earliest part of the chapel, the north and south walls being
     later. The joining and blending of the work with the Norman of
     Carileph’s choir had evidently been accomplished when the chapel
     was almost completed. The eastern wall is of three bays, each bay
     having three lofty lancet windows. The bays are not of equal width,
     the centre one being regulated by the width of the nave of the
     church, and narrower than the north and south bays.

     “A very beautiful arcade runs completely round the walls. It is of
     trefoil arches deeply and richly moulded, supported on marble
     columns carved with foliage. Over the arches is a hood-mould
     terminating with heads. In the spandrels are a series of deeply
     sunk and moulded quatrefoils, two of which contain sculpture. The
     bases of the columns rest on a plinth. Surmounting this arcade is a
     moulded string from the level of which rise the windows, and above
     the windows another string-course and a second range of windows. In
     the centre bay, however, is the large rose window, which is over
     thirty feet in diameter.

     “The division of the chapel into three bays is effected by two main
     vaulting arches, which spring on the western side from the piers of
     the east end of the choir, and on the eastern side from responds of
     clustered shafts alternately of marble and stone, banded at
     intervals and having richly carved capitals. The arches themselves
     are deeply moulded and ornamented with dog-tooth ornament and
     foliage. The vault of the central bay has eight ribs--two springing
     from each of the clusters just described, and two from each of the
     choir piers. The vaulting of the remaining bays is quadripartite,
     but has peculiarities which are worthy of notice, arising from
     inequality of width. We must not omit to call attention to the
     exquisite sculpture of the vaulting. The centre has figures of the
     Four Evangelists, while in the north is a beautifully executed
     carving of vine and grapes, and in the south, figure subjects.
     Among the sculptured heads on the wall arcade at the south end, at
     the western side of the two bays into which the south wall is
     divided, are two which are portraits of the men to whom we owe the
     design and execution of the beautiful sculpture of this chapel. One
     is an elderly man, the other much younger, and both wear linen
     dust-caps over their heads.”--(J. E. B.)

The rich and varied carving of the capitals of the vaulting-shafts and
vaulting-bosses will delight the lover of beautiful sculpture.

The beautiful Early Decorated north window of six lights was originally
filled with glass illustrating the history of Joseph. Hence it was
called =Joseph’s Window=. It is a particularly fine example of the tracery
of the period.

The two windows in the south end of this transept were once filled with
glass representing the life and miracles of St. Cuthbert. They show
tracery of the Perpendicular period. Each window is divided by a central
mullion and is widely splayed inwards.

The rose window over the lancets of the middle bay consists of an outer
circle of twenty-four and an inner circle of twelve radiating lights,
the mullions of which are received on a foliated circle in the centre.
This is Wyatt’s work, for, as we have seen, he removed the fine Early
English window from this place.

The =Cloisters= and the =Chapter-House= we find on the south side of the
Cathedral. The cloisters were begun in 1388-1406 and completed about
1438. They are much altered and restored. From them various halls of the
monks could be entered.

From the eastern alley we pass into the Chapter-House, a restoration of
what was considered the finest Norman Chapter-House in England when
Wyatt pulled it down.

[Illustration: DURHAM: NEVILLE SCREEN]

[Illustration: RIPON: SOUTH]




RIPON

     DEDICATION: ST. PETER AND ST. WILFRID. FORMERLY A COLLEGIATE CHURCH
     SERVED BY AUGUSTINIAN CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: NAVE; ST. WILFRID’S NEEDLE; ROOD-SCREEN; EAST
     WINDOW; CHOIR-STALLS.


Ripon did not become a cathedral until 1836. From the Eighth Century
until that date it was in the diocese of York, and the Archbishop of
York, having his throne in the choir, gave the church great importance.

Ripon monastery was established in the Seventh Century. The monks came
from Melrose Abbey on the Tweed and represented the Christianity that
was introduced into the north by way of Ireland through St. Columba’s
missionaries. Their great abbot was Wilfrid, who became Bishop of
Northumbria. In 669 he began a stone monastery, on the site, in all
probability, of the earlier one; and this was dedicated in 670 to St.
Peter. Wilfrid died in 709 and was buried in his church at Ripon.
Miracles took place at his tomb, which drew such large crowds that the
monks tried to restrain them. In 948, when Eadred was quelling a
rebellion in Northumbria, “was that famed minster burned at Ripon which
St. Wilfrid built.”

The next date of interest is the rebuilding of the church by Roger de
Pont l’Évêque (1154-1181), the great rival of Thomas à Becket. It was a
cruciform edifice; its nave was without aisles. Of this, the two
transepts, half of the central tower, and portions of the nave and
choir remain. Ripon is, therefore, one of the most important examples
extant of the transition from Norman to Early English.

Archbishop Walter de Gray (1216-1255) translated the relics of St.
Wilfrid to a new shrine in 1224.

The west front with its two towers was built about this time; and the
eastern part of the choir was rebuilt in the Decorated style by
Archbishop John Romanus (1286-1296).

The church was used as a refuge and fortress by the people of Ripon when
the Scots invaded it in 1317. Many necessary repairs were made under
Archbishop de Melton (1317-1340). The central tower fell in 1450 and had
to be rebuilt; also the east side of the south transept and the south
side of the choir. The present rood-screen and canopied stalls were
erected at the end of the Fifteenth Century. Then the nave was rebuilt;
but progress was delayed by the outbreak of a plague in 1506. St.
Wilfrid’s Shrine was demolished by Henry VIII. In 1593 the central spire
was injured by lightning. During the Civil Wars the Parliamentary
soldiers shattered the splendid glass of the east window and did other
damage. In 1660 the central spire fell and injured some of the canopies
of the choir-stalls; and, therefore, in 1664, the western spires were
removed for fear that they might fall also. Many repairs were made in
1829. Restorations on a large scale were undertaken by Sir Gilbert Scott
in 1862-1870.

The =West Front= is Early English. It has two square towers and a central
gable. String-courses divide the façade into four stages. In the first
are three doorways adorned with gables and crosses. The central door,
which is larger than the others, consists of five orders and five triple
shafts. The two others have three orders and three shafts. Some of the
mouldings are filled with the dog-tooth ornament. All three doors open
into the nave. Between the gables spouts issue from the heads of
animals. Above the doors comes a row of five lancet windows and above
them a group of three small lancets placed very high. The towers are
ornamented with arcades and lancets, buttresses, parapets and pinnacles.
The ten bells hang in the south tower.

The =Central Tower= is interesting because it is composed of two styles of
architecture. On the north and west sides it is Twelfth Century and on
the two others Perpendicular. The windows on all sides are round-headed.
The dog-tooth ornament appears in the moulding. Ripon, though finely
proportioned, is somewhat cold and severe in general appearance. The
north transept with its round-headed windows and its interesting
doorway, with a rather curious inner arch and capitals of carved
foliage, is a good example of the Twelfth Century. The south side of the
nave is preferred to the north side by critics. In the south transept we
have Archbishop Roger’s work again. The doorway is elaborate. The
foliage on the capitals of the columns approaches the Early English
style. The lintel is square. The south side of the choir is partly
hidden by the Chapter-House with the Lady-Loft above. The buttresses
that follow are of the Twelfth Century. The three western bays are
Perpendicular; the others, Decorated. The two flying-buttresses are like
those on the north side. Gargoyles appear at intervals along the string
of the roof. The east end is Decorated. Its chief feature is the
splendid window, of which the tracery alone remains.

Entering the west doorway we look upon one of the great naves of the
Perpendicular period, ranking next in size after York, Winchester,
Chichester and after St. Paul’s in width.

     “Among very late Gothic buildings there are few indeed which are of
     so good a quality as this nave of Ripon, which, like the late
     church towers of Somerset, shows that Mediæval art took long to die
     out in regions remote from London. It is, indeed, the architecture
     of the days of Agincourt rather than of the eve of the English
     Renaissance. The pillars are characteristic of the Perpendicular
     style, their section being a square with a semicircle projecting
     from each side, and the corners hollowed. Their bases have complex
     plinths of considerable height and are polygonal, but follow
     roughly the form of the pillar, and the mouldings, as usual in this
     style, overhang the plinth. The capitals, with small mouldings and
     many angles, are of somewhat the same form as the bases. On the
     westernmost complete pillar of the north arcade are two shields,
     charged respectively with the arms of Ripon (a horn) and of Pigott
     of Clotherholme. The arches, instead of being of that depressed
     form which is so common in late work, are very beautifully
     proportioned, and their mouldings are bold, numerous and well-cut.
     There is no triforium; but a passage, at a slightly lower level
     than in Archbishop Roger’s bays, runs below the great clerestory
     windows, which were once, no doubt, gorgeous with stained glass.
     Their arches are moulded, but the splay is left plain. The
     roof-shafts, which are in clusters of three and have fillets upon
     them, spring from semi-octagonal corbels, and where each cluster
     passes the string-course there is an angel holding a shield. A sign
     of decadence may be found, perhaps, in the way in which the
     hood-moulds of the windows intersect with these shafts. Though the
     two sides of the nave are not quite of the same date, they are
     almost alike, but for some slight differences in the capitals, the
     arch-mouldings, and the hollows on the pillars; the builders
     feeling, doubtless, that any marked variation would mar the general
     perspective--a consideration which, of course, could not bind them
     in designing the north aisle. The original Perpendicular roof may
     have resembled that which now covers the transepts. About 1829
     Blore put up an almost flat ceiling of deal. The present oaken
     vault, by Sir Gilbert Scott, was copied from that of the transepts
     of York Minster, and is adapted to the old roof-shafts, between
     which have been added angel corbels of wood. As the ribs intersect
     near their springing, they weave a network over the whole vault,
     and the carved bosses at the intersections amount to 107. A passing
     notice is merited by the pulpit, which is Jacobean.”--(C. H.)

The two great tower arches under the west towers are Early English;
those of the central tower are round. Their great piers are composed of
clusters of engaged shafts. Massive arches also mark the opening of each
aisle of the nave into the transept. In the south aisle stands a blue
marble =Font=, and near it an older one, probably of the Twelfth Century.
Tradition says that the altar-tomb here is that of an Irish prince who
brought home from Palestine a tame lion. On the bas-relief a lion, a
kneeling man and two birds are represented, which gives cause for the
story. The work is presumably of the Fourteenth Century. Above the font
we can see the only Mediæval glass in the Cathedral--fragments of
Fourteenth Century work left from the wreckage of the Puritan soldiers.
St. Peter, St. Paul and St. Andrew will easily be recognized. There is
also a shield bearing the English arms in this window. In the south wall
of the nave there is a fine =Piscina= dating from the Twelfth Century. At
this point we shall have to interrupt our walk through the Cathedral to
examine =St. Wilfrid’s Needle=, the popular name for the Saxon =Crypt=.

     “From a trap-door in the pavement below the piscina a flight of
     twelve steps winds down into a flat-roofed and descending passage
     2½ feet wide and slightly over 6 feet high, which, running a few
     feet northwards and bending at right angles round the south-west
     tower pier, extends eastward for about 10 yards, with a descent of
     one step near the end, and terminates in a blank wall. There is a
     square-headed niche at the turn and a round-headed niche at the
     end, both meant, doubtless, to hold lights. Three feet from the end
     a round-headed doorway, 2 feet wide and over 6 feet high, opens
     northwards with a descent of two more steps, into a barrel-vaulted
     chamber, 11 feet 5 inches long from east to west, 7 feet 7 inches
     wide and 9 feet 10 inches high. In the north wall of this chamber,
     and approached by three wide steps, is the celebrated St. Wilfrid’s
     Needle, a round-headed aperture pierced through into a passage that
     runs behind. This aperture was connected with one of those
     superstitions that so often flourished before the Reformation in
     notable centres of religion, and ability to pass through it, or
     ‘thread the needle,’ was regarded as a test of female chastity; but
     it was, of course, in the later middle ages that this superstition
     arose, and the ‘needle’ (or rather needle’s eye) is evidently only
     one of the original niches with the back knocked out. Of these
     niches (which again were doubtless for lights) there are four in
     the chamber besides the ‘needle,’--one in each wall,--and, like the
     niche at the end of the passage of entrance, they all have
     semicircular heads, each cut in a single stone. That in the west
     wall has a hole or cup at the bottom, probably to hold oil in which
     a wick might float, while the others (except the ‘needle’) have a
     sort of funnel at the top, doubtless to catch the soot from
     lamps.”--(C. H.)

The =North Transept= is a fine specimen of the transitional from Norman to
Early English, and is almost in its original condition. It is 34 feet
wide, or 52 feet including the aisle. Here we find a stone pulpit of the
Perpendicular period, its five

[Illustration: RIPON: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: RIPON: CHOIR, EAST]

sides embellished with panelling. At the north wall was probably
situated the =Markenfield Chantry=; for the aisle is still called by this
name. Two family tombs remain.

The =South Transept= is slightly narrower than the north. Parts of it were
altered in the Perpendicular period. In the aisle we find the =Mallory
Chapel=, where members of the Studley family are buried. The northern bay
is filled by a stone stairway, at the top of which are two doors. One
opens into a chamber containing the bellows of the organ and the other
into the Lady-Loft, or Library. This stairway was erected by Sir Gilbert
Scott to replace an older one.

The elegant =Rood Screen= is of the Fifteenth Century. It contains a
central doorway surmounted by a crocketed ogee hood, beneath which is a
mutilated carving of The Trinity. Four large niches stand on either side
of the door and a row of twenty-four smaller ones runs above these.
Cinquefoils and feathered cusps decorate the whole screen, which is
twelve feet thick. In the passage through it a door on the right opens
into a winding staircase to the loft above and one on the left into a
deep pit.

We pass on to the =Choir=. This is of three styles: the first three bays
on the north side are Twelfth Century; the first three on the south
side, Perpendicular; and the last three on both sides, Decorated. The
triforium windows are filled with glass.

     “The great window in the central compartment is one of the finest
     examples of Geometrical tracery, if not one of the largest windows,
     in England. It is over 50 feet high, is 25 feet wide, and has seven
     lights. Of these the three at either end are comprised under a
     sub-arch, in the head of which are three cinquefoiled circles,
     while the central light of the seven is surmounted by an arch, not
     so high as its neighbours, but impaling upon its acute point a huge
     circle which fills the head of the window and contains six trefoils
     radiating from its centre. The arch of this superb window is rather
     acutely pointed and richly moulded, and has two very slender shafts
     worked on the stones of either jamb, with foliage on their
     capitals.

     “The huge window, which is not splayed, has a deep rear-vault
     bounded by a massive rib, whose outer edge rests on slender engaged
     shafts with foliage on their capitals, while the inner edge ends in
     bunches of foliage. Between this rib and the tracery is another rib
     springing on the north side from a bunch of foliage and on the
     south from a grotesque corbel. The inner arch has slender shafts,
     and so has the moulding next to the tracery, but in the latter case
     the capitals are plain. Few acts of vandalism are more to be
     regretted, probably, than the destruction in 1643 of the
     magnificent Fourteenth Century glass which once occupied this
     window. The present very poor glass, by Wailes of Newcastle,
     commemorates the revival of the See of Ripon in 1863.

     “Over the window may be seen the mark of one of the earlier roofs.
     The choir is thought to have received a groined vault of oak after
     the rebuilding of the east end, but this vault was probably renewed
     more than once, especially after the accident to the tower about
     1450, and the fall of the spire in 1660. Sir Gilbert Scott found a
     vault of lath and plaster (probably the work of Blore) for which he
     substituted the present roof, a groined wooden vault, admirable in
     its lofty pitch and judicious colouring. Its chief feature,
     however, is the splendid bosses along the ridge, which are
     survivals from either the Decorated or a subsequent Perpendicular
     vault. In some of these bosses the figures are five feet
     long.”--(C. H.)

The =Choir-Stalls= are splendid specimens of the Fifteenth Century, with
very ornate canopies of tabernacle-work bristling with spires and
pinnacles.

     “There are ribbed vaults under the canopies, and upon the pendants
     in front are hovering angels. The canopies on the south side were
     wrecked by the fall of the spire in 1660, and those over the eight
     easternmost stalls were then reconstructed in the ‘Jacobean’ style
     with a gallery above, while of the canopies now over the other
     nine, eight are said to have been brought across from the eastern
     end of the north range, where more Jacobean canopies were erected
     in their place. Sir Gilbert Scott removed all this Seventeenth
     Century work and set up reproductions of the Fifteenth Century
     design. Thus the eight easternmost canopies on either side are
     modern. The _misereres_ and arms of the stalls are exquisitely
     carved.

     “The subjects upon the former are as follows, beginning from the
     archway in the screen:--

     “_North side_:--(1) (CANON IN RESIDENCE) lion attacked by dogs; (2)
     dragon attacked by dogs; (3) angel with shield; (4) dragon and
     birds; (5) hart’s-tongue ferns; (6) conventional flowers; (7) ape
     attacked by lion; (8) vine; (9) birds pecking fruit; (10)
     antelopes; (11) fox preaching to goose and cock; (12) fox running
     off with geese; (13) fox caught by dogs; (14) dragons fighting;
     (15) fruit and flowers issuing from inverted head; (16) man holding
     club with oak leaves and acorns; (17) (MAYOR’S STALL) griffin
     catching rabbit.

     “_South side_:--(1) (DEAN) angel with book; (2) angel with shield
     bearing date 1489; (3) lion _versus_ griffin; (4) griffin devouring
     a human leg; (5) owl; (6) mermaid with mirror and hair-brush; (7)
     two pigs dancing to bagpipe played by a third; (8) Jonah thrown to
     the whale; (9) man wheeling another who holds a reed and a bag;
     (10) fox caught carrying off goose by dog and by woman with
     distaff; (11) winged animal; (12) hart, gorged and chained; (13)
     pelican feeding young; (14) Jonah emerging from the whale; (15)
     Samson carrying the gates; (16) head (modern); (17) (BISHOP’S
     THRONE) Caleb and Joshua carrying the grapes and watched by Anakim.

     “Most of these _misereres_ have exquisite conventional flowers
     (especially roses) cut upon them in addition to the
     figure-subjects. The desks in front of the stalls have rich
     finials, and their panelled fronts form the backs of a lower tier
     of seats, the arms of which are supported each on a square shaft
     set diamondwise. In front of these lower seats the desks again
     have carved finials and panelled fronts and on those parallel with
     the Rood-Screen the tracery is distinctly Flamboyant. The finial
     before the stall of the Canon in Residence has a griffin attached
     to it and that in front of the Dean’s stall a lion. Before both
     these stalls the ends of the two tiers of desks are richly carved.
     The Bishop’s throne and Mayor’s stall have each a canopied niche on
     the exterior toward the east, and two small apertures in the east
     side to enable the occupant to see the altar, and in front of these
     two stalls the ends of the two tiers of desks are again richly
     carved. The Mayor’s stall is wider than the others, and attached to
     the finial in front is a grotesque ape, beneath which the
     supporting shaft is of open work. The end of this desk displays a
     shield charged with two keys in saltire, for the see of York.

     “The Bishop’s throne was originally occupied by the Archbishops of
     York. The Jacobean canopy, which succeeded that of the Fifteenth
     Century, comprised the space of two stalls, as did also the modern
     structure by which it was itself succeeded and which is now in the
     Consistory Court. The present canopy resembles those of the other
     stalls but is higher and more elaborate. Upon the back of the
     throne inside is a small mitre. The finial in front consists of an
     elephant carrying a man in his trunk, and bearing on his back a
     castle filled with armed soldiery, and in front of the elephant is
     a centaur (renewed), the shaft under which is again of open-work.
     The end of this desk displays a large mitre above a shield charged
     with the three stars of St. Wilfrid and supported by two angels,
     between whom is a scroll with the date of 1494.”

The altar stands against the east wall of the presbytery. The =Reredos= is
a restoration of the original Decorated one. The =Sedilia= and a =Piscina=
are placed on the south side.

Sir Gilbert Scott considered them Late Decorated work, but they have
rather the appearance of Late Perpendicular.

Some historians think that the shrine of St. Wilfrid stood in the east
end of the north-choir-aisle. The remains were kept in a superb coffer,
which was carried in processions.

Passing down the south-choir-aisle from the east we first come to the
vestry; then to the Chapter-House; and then to the Mallory Chapel. A
round-headed door in the west wall of the Chapter-House opens upon a
stairway that leads into another =Crypt= that belonged to Norman times.

The =Chapter-House= is of the Twelfth Century. Above it is a =Lady-Chapel=,
called here the =Lady-Loft=. It is unusual to find a Lady-Chapel on the
south side of the Choir and on an upper floor. It dates from about the
middle of the Fifteenth Century. It is now used as a Library.




YORK MINSTER

     DEDICATION: ST. PETER. SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: WEST FRONT; CHOIR; CHAPTER-HOUSE; WINDOWS.


York, “the King of Cathedrals,” is one of the noblest and best examples
of Gothic architecture. In form and proportion, in detail of ornament,
in exterior and interior, the famous Minster takes rank with the
greatest ecclesiastical buildings. Not only is it enormous--a forest of
architecture--but it contains, perhaps, more ancient stained glass than
any other building in the world.

     “Other English cathedrals are more finely placed, several are
     richer in ornament, one or two have a more delicately varied
     outline. None are so stately and so magnificent; and there is
     hardly a church in Europe that appears so vast as the Minster,
     viewed from the north.

     “The low-pitched roof of the Minster, the solidity of the central
     tower, the simple and tranquil front of the north transept, give
     the building an air of masculine and stately repose, and of perfect
     finish seldom to be found in foreign churches; while the apparent
     uniformity of style, though the architecture is of three different
     periods, frees it from the picturesque inconsequence of many
     English cathedrals. Yet neither inside nor outside does the Minster
     appear to be the expression of the spiritual aspirations of a
     people. It represents rather a secular magnificence, the temporal
     power of a Church that has played a great part in the history of
     the nation. The archbishops of York have been forced by
     circumstances to be militant prelates, contending with Canterbury
     for precedence, leading armies against the Scotch, sometimes even
     heading rebellions against the king; and in their cathedral they
     have expressed their ambition and their pride.”--(A. C.-B.)

The visitor who has a short time to visit York Minster will study the
west front, the choir, the Chapter-House, and the windows.

     “If the beauty in the form of our _flos florum_ is due to its
     architecture, very much of its beauty in colour depends on the
     glowing and mellowed tints with which its windows are filled. But
     it is a large subject to enter upon, for as regards quantity there
     are no less than one hundred and three windows in the Minster, most
     of them entirely, and the remainder, only excepting the tracery,
     filled with real old Mediæval glass. Some of the windows, too, are
     of great size. The east window, which is entirely filled with old
     glass, consists of nine lights and measures seventy-eight feet in
     height, thirty-one feet two inches in width. The two choir transept
     windows, that in the north transept to St. William, and the south
     to St. Cuthbert, measure seventy-three feet by sixteen feet. They
     have both been restored, the latter very recently, but by far the
     greater part of them is old glass. On each side of the choir, the
     aisles contain nine windows measuring fourteen feet nine inches by
     twelve feet, only the tracery lights of which are modern; the same
     number of windows fill the clerestory above, the greater portions
     of which are ancient.

     “The famous window of the north transept, the Five Sisters,
     consists of five lights, each measuring fifty-three feet six inches
     by five feet one inch, and is entirely of old glass. There are six
     windows in the north and six in the south aisles of the nave, with
     only a little modern glass in the tracery. The superb Flamboyant
     window at the west end of the centre aisle measures fifty-six feet
     three inches by twenty-five feet four inches, and consists, I
     believe, entirely of old glass, except the faces of the figures.
     The clerestory windows are studded with ancient shields, but a
     great part of the glass is, I fancy, modern; those of the
     vestibule, eight in number, measuring thirty-two feet by eighteen,
     are of old glass, including the tracery lights. The east window has
     been clumsily restored by Willement. In the side windows of the
     transept there is some old glass, and the great rose window over
     the south entrance still retains much of the old glass; while far
     overhead in the tower there are some really fine bold designs of
     late, but genuine, design and execution. Altogether, according to
     actual measurements, there are 25,531 superficial feet of Mediæval
     glass in the Minster, i.e., more than half an acre--a possession,
     we should think, unequalled by any church in England, if not in
     Christendom.”--(P.-C.)

York, or, to use its older name, Eboracum, had been an important British
settlement long before the Romans made it the principal seat of their
power in the north between the years 70 and 80 A.D. It continued to be a
Roman court until the Emperor Honorius left Britain in 409. Hadrian
lived here; Severus and Constantine Chlorus died here; and here
Constantine the Great was proclaimed Emperor. Many churches in the
vicinity were dedicated to the latter’s mother, St. Helena, the
legendary discoverer of the True Cross.

York was therefore the great military post and the great ecclesiastical
seat in the north of England.

The question of precedence between York and Canterbury arose as early as
the days of St. Augustine. Gregory the Great instructed the latter to
appoint twelve bishops, one of whom was to be the Bishop of York, who
was to ordain other bishops in the north of England. He was to be
subordinate to Augustine; but subsequently precedence should be
determined by priority of consecration. This occasioned dissensions for
centuries, culminating in the murder of Thomas à Becket (see page 2),
which Roger de Pont l’Évêque is said to have instigated. It was this
Archbishop of York who, refusing to take a lower seat at the Council of
Westminster in 1176, sat himself in the lap of Becket’s successor only
to be pulled off and soundly beaten. The question was not finally
settled until the time of John of Thorsby (1352-1373), when Innocent VI.
determined that the Archbishop of Canterbury should be styled Primate of
All England and the Archbishop of York, Primate of England.

The first archbishop was Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester (see page 33),
who accompanied Ethelburga, daughter of the King of Kent, when she went
to Northumbria to marry King Edwin. Edwin embraced Christianity and was
baptised in 627, by Paulinus, in a temporary wooden church on the site
of the present glorious York Minster. Immediately afterwards Edwin began
to build a stone church in this same place, which he dedicated to St.
Peter. This church was repaired by the next archbishop--the great
Wilfrid--about 669.

When Thomas of Bayeux, the first Norman archbishop, arrived in 1070, he
found the Cathedral in ruins, owing to the Danish invasion and to the
wars of the Conqueror; and, if William of Malmsbury may be believed,
Thomas began the church from its foundations and also finished it.

Roger de Pont l’Évêque (1154-1181) rebuilt the choir.

About this time York acquired its patron saint, William Fitzherbert,
great-grandson of the Conqueror, who became Bishop of York in 1143.
Expelled from office in 1147, he was restored in 1153. On his return he
performed a miracle and died almost immediately afterwards, so suddenly,
in fact, that he was thought to have been poisoned out of the holy
chalice. The monks buried him in the Cathedral. His tomb attracted
pilgrims because of the marvellous cures. St. William was canonised in
1284; and in that year his relics were translated from the nave to the
choir. Edward I. and Queen Eleanor were present and gave jewels to the
shrine, which was placed at the eastern end of the nave under a huge
canopy. St. William’s head was preserved in a silver reliquary.

There is now no Norman work visible in York Minster except in the crypt
and in parts of the nave and tower. In 1200, however, the nave, choir,
towers, and transepts were Norman. About 1230 it was decided to rebuild
the transepts on a big scale. Walter de Grey (1216-1265) began the south
transept (Early English); and he lies there under an arch, in a splendid
tomb. John Romeyn, treasurer of York, built the north transept and also
an Early English tower to replace the Early Norman tower. His son, John
Romeyn, also archbishop from 1286 to 1296, began the new nave.

John of Thorsby (1352-1373) began the present choir in 1361. The work
was started at the extreme east end. Thorsby was a Yorkshireman, who

     “had the further development of the glories of the Minster
     thoroughly at heart. At once he sacrificed his palace at Sherburn
     to provide materials for an appropriate Lady-Chapel, gave
     successive munificent donations of £100 at each of the great
     festivals of the Christian year, and called on clergy and laity
     alike to submit cheerfully to stringent self-denial to supply the
     funds.

     “During his tenure of office of twenty-three years the Lady-Chapel
     was completed, a chaste and dignified specimen of early
     Perpendicular style, into which the Decorated gradually blended
     after the year 1360, and unique in its glorious east window,
     seventy-eight feet high and thirty-three feet wide, still the
     largest painted window in the world, enriched with its double
     mullions, which give such strength and lightness to its graceful
     proportions, and with its elaborate glass executed by Thornton of
     Coventry, at the beginning of the following century. But Roger’s
     choir, which was still standing, must now have looked sadly dwarfed
     between the lofty Lady-Chapel and the tower and
     transepts.”--(P.-C.)

Edward I. made York his capital during the war with Scotland, to the
expense of which the archbishop and clergy gave one-fifth of their
income. Parliament assembled there in 1318. The archbishops were great
politicians and intriguers, now plotting against the king and now
supporting him; great military leaders, sometimes defeated, like Melton
at Myton-on-Swale, where he led 10,000 men against the Scots, or
victorious, like William La Zouche (1342-1352) at Neville’s Cross near
Durham; and nearly always great builders and benefactors of the
Cathedral. Richard Scrope’s rebellion is famous. Lord Chancellor of
England and Bishop of Lichfield before he became Bishop of York in 1398,
Scrope was advanced by Richard II. In 1405 he headed a rebellion and was
captured. The Chief Justice refused to try him. He was taken to his own
palace at Bishopthorpe, condemned to death and beheaded near York in
1405. Buried in the Minster, thousands flocked to his tomb in the
north-choir-aisle. Naturally enough the king who had murdered him tried
to check the stream of offerings; but Scrope’s tomb became more popular
than that of St. William. Scrope was a Yorkshireman, the son of Lord
Scrope, of Masham, and the Scropes had a chantry in the chapel of St.
Stephen, now destroyed.

The great central tower was erected in 1400-1423 and the church was
re-consecrated on July 3, 1472; and so, at the close of the Fifteenth
Century, York Minster existed as we see it: save for two fires (1829
and 1840) and a judicious repairing and restoration in 1871, the great
Minster has not been changed.

When Henry VIII. disestablished the monasteries there were many
outbreaks in York, and the famous “Pilgrimage of Grace” (1536) was much
excited by the seizure of St. William’s head, still a beloved relic of
the Cathedral. Lee, then archbishop, was taken by the rebels and forced
to support them. Before this, however, Thomas Wolsey had been arrested
at Cawood. Though Archbishop (1514-1530), it is said that he was never
at York.

When York was besieged by the Parliamentarians in 1644, Fairfax
restrained his soldiers to some degree, which explains why so much of
the ancient glass is left. Thomas Mace’s description of the siege,
however, shows how little respect the army really had for the Minster:

     “The enemy was very near and fierce upon them, especially on that
     side of the city where the church stood; and had planted their
     great guns mischievously against the church; with which constantly
     in prayer’s time, they would not fail to make their hellish
     disturbance by shooting against and battering the church; insomuch
     that sometimes a cannon bullet has come in at the windows and
     bounced about from pillar to pillar (even like some furious fiend
     or evil spirit) backwards and forwards and all manner of sideways,
     as it has happened to meet with square or round opposition amongst
     the pillars.”

On February 2, 1829, Jonathan Martin, brother of the painter, John
Martin, hid himself behind the tomb of Archbishop Greenfield, in the
north transept during evening service; and after the church had been
closed, set fire to the choir. The stalls, organ, and vault were
destroyed and much of the stone-work was damaged. Restorations were
started in 1832. Another fire occurred in 1840 in the south-west tower,
occasioned by some workmen who were repairing the clock in the
south-west tower. The wooden vault of the nave and the tower and bells
were damaged. In 1871 some of the side walls were rebuilt.

Every one is familiar with the =West Front= of York; but the traveller who
looks upon it for the first time is, nevertheless, overwhelmed.

     “The West Front is more architecturally perfect as a composition in
     its details than that of any other English Cathedral, and is
     unquestionably the best cathedral façade in this country. The lower
     part, with the entrances and lower windows, belongs to the Early
     Decorated period. Above the windows the work is Late Decorated and
     the towers above the roof Perpendicular. Numerous niches cover the
     surface. It is doubtful whether they ever contained statues. The
     principal entrance is divided by a clustered pier, and above it is
     a circle filled with cusped tracery. Over the whole doorway is a
     deeply-recessed arch, and over that a gable with niches, one of
     which contains the statue of an archbishop, supposed to be John le
     Romeyn, who began the nave in 1291, and other niches have figures
     of a Percy and a Vavasour, who gave the wood and stone for the
     building. The favourite ballflower ornament of the Decorated style
     is seen on the gable, and the mouldings in the arches have figures
     representing the history of Adam and Eve. Above the entrance is a
     large eight-light window, pronounced by many to be too large even
     for York Minster, containing very elaborate and beautiful tracery,
     and over it is a pointed gable. On each side of the west window are
     buttresses covered with panelling and niches. The noble towers
     rising on each side of the west front, have buttresses similarly
     adorned, and each three windows, and over the second an open
     battlement forms a walk along the whole front. The towers have
     battlements and pinnacles. The south-west tower (1433-1457) was
     injured by fire in 1840; and the north tower (1470-1474) has the
     largest bell in the kingdom, Great Peter, which cost £2,000 in 1845
     and weighs ten tons.”--(P. H. D.)

The twin-towers rise to a height of two hundred feet and are ornamented
with windows, battlements, and pinnacles.

The =Central Tower= at the crossing of the transepts, built in 1410-1433,
Perpendicular, is also two hundred feet high. It is the largest in
England, and is considered not only one of the triumphs of Fifteenth
Century architects, but one of the finest towers in the world. Much of
it is supposed to be the work of Walter Skirlawe, Bishop of Durham, and
its resemblance to the central tower of Durham Cathedral justifies the
assumption. It has never been finished.

     “The central tower rises a single story above the ridge of the roof
     and is open inside to the top. But for small gables on the
     buttresses, it is quite plain up to the level of the roof ridge.
     Above this it contains two long and narrow Perpendicular windows on
     each side, of three lights each, with a transom. These windows are
     ornamented ogee gables, and between them are three niches, one
     above the other, with canopies. The external buttresses are split
     up with vertical mouldings and ornamented with niches and
     panelling. The tower is crowned with a battlement. Horizontal
     string-courses with gargoyles divide the buttresses at intervals.
     There are no pinnacles on these buttresses, and they appear never
     to have been finished. It is possible that it was intended to set
     another story on the top of the present one, but this is merely
     conjecture.

     “The English architects of the Fifteenth Century, if they were
     inferior to earlier builders in invention and vigour, were at any
     rate supreme in the management of towers. Their wonderful sense of
     proportion, their habitual use of vertical lines, and the character
     of their windows helped them to build what are perhaps the finest
     towers in Europe, and the central tower of York Minster

[Illustration: YORK MINSTER: WEST FRONT]

[Illustration: YORK MINSTER: SOUTH]

     is one of the finest of all. Even the absence of pinnacles, if it
     is an accident, seems to be a lucky accident, and gives this tower
     an unrivalled dignity and an air of restraint suitable to the
     character of the whole cathedral.”--(A. C.-B.)

We enter the Cathedral by the south door of the =South Transept= and are
introduced to what is considered one of the most superb architectural
views in the world. The enormous width of the church and length of the
transepts and the tremendous lantern produce almost the effect of St.
Paul’s or St. Peter’s. Neither the east nor the west end is visible, for
we are looking right across the arms of the crossing straight to the
north end of the transept, where the =Five Sisters= display their jewels.

The =Lantern= is very lofty--180 feet from the floor--each transept is
four bays long--223 feet from north to south--and 93 feet wide. To the
top of the roof they measure 99 feet.

     “The transepts, therefore, are unusually prominent, even for an
     English cathedral, and they have many other unusual features. Taken
     in conjunction with the lantern, they produce an effect to be found
     in no other Gothic church in the world. In England there are none
     so wide and so lofty. In France there are interiors even loftier,
     but in France the transepts are seldom a prominent feature of the
     design. Often they do not project beyond the outer wall of the
     aisles of the nave, and oftener still there is no central tower
     large enough to allow of a lantern at all. It is a great piece of
     good fortune, also, that the five vast lancets of the north
     transept end, known as the Five Sisters, still keep their beautiful
     original glass. If we look at these windows and consider how
     utterly ineffective they would be if they were glazed with plain
     glass, we can understand how little remains of the original beauty
     of the interior of Salisbury.

     “The Five Sisters are, no doubt, the largest lancet windows in
     England, and it was a bold idea to fill almost the whole of that
     great front with them, but the boldness was entirely justified by
     the result.

     “The glass in the Five Sisters is Early English of the simplest and
     most beautiful design. The colour, an almost uniform scheme of
     greyish green, is a curious contrast to the vivid blues and yellows
     of the period which preceded it, and examples of which may be seen
     in the choir of Canterbury. The pattern is an elaborate but
     restrained arrangement of the foliage of the _Planta Benedicta_
     (herb benet). The plain border surrounding the Early English glass
     was inserted in 1715. At the foot of the central light is a panel
     of Norman glass, the subject of which is either the dream of Jacob,
     or Daniel in the lions’ den.”--(A. C.-B.)

The glass in the lancets above the Five Sisters is modern.

In the eastern aisle of the south transept (Early English) the =Tomb of
Walter de Grey= (died 1255), shows an effigy in full canonicals. The
right hand is raised in blessing, the left grasps a crozier, and the
feet crush a dragon. The columns at the sides are ornamented with leaves
at equal distances. On either side of the gable over the Archbishop’s
head an angel stands. The canopy is supported by nine pillars. In the
eastern aisle of the north transept we stop to look at the tomb of
=Archbishop Greenfield= (died 1315). This is decorated with an ornamented
canopy.

A rich and elaborate =Rood Screen= separates the choir from the crossing.
It dates from 1475-1505 and is composed of a central doorway and fifteen
canopied niches containing statues of English kings from William the
Conqueror to Henry VI. The latter is the only modern one. Above these
are angels by Bernasconi. The central arch is surmounted with an ogee
moulding decorated with foliage and a niche, on either side of which is
an angel with a censer. The capitals of the shafts are carved; and
rosettes and rows of foliage appear between the shafts. The canopies are
very ornate. It is interesting to compare this screen with the one at
Exeter.

The =Choir=, including the retro-choir, consists of nine bays--the largest
and loftiest choir in England and one of the most beautiful. It was
begun in 1361 at the east end and completed in 1405. It has been
described as an “interesting example of a Perpendicular building carried
out on the lines of an earlier Decorated design.”

     “The choir itself is like an enormous college chapel. The aisles
     exist, but play no part in the design, which still culminates in
     the splendid blaze of glass from the eastern transepts and the
     great east window, and once culminated on the still more splendid
     blaze of the altar.

     “The retro-choir, far too short and wide to be judged as an avenue
     of stone, is still more dependent for its effect on its glass. As
     most of that glass luckily remains, it is a miracle of airy
     splendour; one may see from it what were the objects, and how great
     the success of the much-maligned Perpendicular architects at their
     best.

     “To sum up, then, this choir has not the delicate and spiritual
     beauty of the choirs of Lincoln or Ely. That is never found even in
     the finest work of Perpendicular architects; but for stateliness
     and magnificence it has not a rival in England. These qualities may
     be best appreciated standing midway between the two transepts and
     in front of the altar. From that point glittering screens of glass
     and soaring shafts of stone are to be seen on all sides; the whole
     effect is one of triumphant light and space and colour, not to be
     surpassed by the splendours even of Moorish or Italian
     architecture.”--(A. C.-B.)

The magnificent Perpendicular stalls perished in the fire of 1829, so
did the Perpendicular altar-screen. The present stalls and screen are
reproductions of these. The reredos of terra-cotta and wood is modern.

The vault of the choir is of wood, an imitation of the vault destroyed
by fire in 1829. The windows of the clerestory are Perpendicular and
contain five lights.

     “The glass in the choir is almost wholly Perpendicular. As in the
     nave, it is very fragmentary and disordered. The change in the
     character of the design will be easily noticed. The Perpendicular
     glass is not so clear and delicate in colour, and the architectural
     and other patterns are less pronounced. This glass, regarded simply
     as decorative, is perhaps superior to that in the nave.

     “Mr. Winston has pointed out that the earliest Perpendicular glass
     in the choir is contained in the third window from the east in the
     south aisle; in the third and fourth windows from the east in the
     north clerestory; and in the fourth clerestory window from the east
     on the opposite side. These windows date from the close of the
     Fourteenth Century. There is also an early Perpendicular Jesse in
     the third window from the west in the south aisle of the choir. The
     other windows of the choir aisles east of the small eastern
     transepts, as well as the glass in the lancet windows on the east
     side of the great western transepts, appears, he says, to be of the
     time of Henry IV.; the rest of the glass in the choir is of the
     reigns of Henry V. and VI., chiefly of the latter. He notices also,
     that the white glass in the windows is generally less green in tint
     than usual, and that he has learnt from Mr. Browne that it is all
     of English manufacture.”--(A. C.-B.)

We now come to the smaller transepts situated between the four eastern
and four western bays of the choir. They are practically one bay of the
choir with the triforium and clerestory removed. At each end are immense
windows. Each is 73 feet long by 16 feet wide. Both have been restored;
but the glass is original and very splendid. The north window contains
scenes from the life of =St.= =William=; the south window depicts the
history of =St. Cuthbert=, and is thought to date from about 1437. In it
are members of the house of Lancaster.

The east end of the choir is almost entirely filled with the great =East
Window=.

The space behind the altar is sometimes called the =Lady-Chapel=. This
occupies four bays. It was built in 1361-1405, and is Perpendicular in
style. The Altar of the Virgin stood under the great east window and
here also was a chantry founded by the Percys.

     “The great east window was glazed by John Thornton of Coventry. The
     terms of the contract for this work, dated 1405, are extant. They
     provide that Thornton shall ‘portray the said window with his own
     hands, and the histories, images, and other things to be painted on
     it.’ It was to be finished within three years. Glass, lead and
     workmen were to be provided at the expense of the chapter, and
     Thornton was to receive 4s. a week, £5 a year and £10 at completion
     for his trouble.

     “The window is 78 feet high and 32 feet wide, and contains nine
     lights. It is entirely filled with old glass, except for certain
     pitches of modern glass, rather crude in colour, and inserted, it
     is said, after the fire of 1829. It contains 200 panels of figures.
     The subjects in the upper part are from the Old Testament, reaching
     from the creation of the world to the death of Absalom. The lower
     part contains illustrations from the Book of Revelations. In the
     loftiest row of all are representations of kings and archbishops.

     “In the top lights are figures of prophets, saints and kings. At
     the apex of the window is a representation of the Saviour in
     Judgment.

     “This window is probably the finest example of Perpendicular glass
     in England.

     “The great east window, like the windows of the transepts, has a
     double plane of tracery reaching to about half the height of the
     whole. Between the two planes a passage runs at the base of the
     window, between two doors which lead to staircases in the turrets
     on each side of the windows. These staircases, in their turn, lead
     to a gallery across the window on the top of the inner plane of
     tracery. The view from this gallery is very fine.”--(A. C.-B.)

Of the numerous tombs and monuments in the east end below the windows in
the retro-choir and choir-aisles, we note only two. That of =Archbishop
Bowet= (died 1423), in the retro-choir (south side), is one of the finest
Perpendicular monuments in existence, much mutilated, it is true; but
still exhibiting its clusters of tabernacles and pinnacles joined to the
arch beneath with fan-tracery. Bowet was still alive when this monument
was erected in 1415. The other is =William of Hatfield= (died 1344),
second son of Edward III., aged eight. The Plantagenista ornaments the
canopy. Unfortunately the effigy of the little prince is much damaged.

The =Nave= is also superb and all the decoration most elaborate.

     “The first impression on viewing this nave is a sense of its
     magnitude. Archbishop Romeyn and his builders determined to build a
     vast church which would eclipse all other rivals. They would have
     large windows, high, towering piers, a huge, vaulted roof, and
     everything that was grand and impressive. Edward I. was then
     fighting with the Scots and made York his chief city. It was
     immensely prosperous and the ecclesiastical treasury was replete
     with the offerings of knights and nobles, kings and pilgrims.
     Nowhere should there be so mighty a church as York Minster. In
     order to have space for large windows they made the triforium
     unusually small, which is formed only by a continuation of the
     arches of the clerestory windows. The design for the stone vaulted
     roof was never carried out. The builders feared that the great
     weight of a roof with so large a span would be too much for the
     walls, so a wooden vault was substituted. The piers have octagonal
     bases and consist of various sized shafts closely connected. The
     capitals are beautifully enriched with foliage of oak and thorn,
     and sometimes a figure is seen amidst the foliage. We notice
     thirty-two sculptured busts at the intersection of the
     hood-moulding with the vaulting shafts. Coats-of-arms of the
     benefactors of York appear on each side of the main arches. The
     clerestory windows have each five lights. The old roof was
     destroyed by fire in 1840. The present one has a vast number of
     bosses representing the Annunciation, Nativity, Magi, Resurrection,
     besides a quantity of smaller ones.”--(P. H. D.)

Looking up at the west end of the nave we have a double study in the
splendid =West Window= (only surpassed by the famous window of Carlisle
Cathedral); for the tracery of the Curvilinear, or flowing Decorated
style has been carefully restored, and the window, which measures 56 ×
25 feet, is almost entirely filled with the original glass given by
Archbishop Melton in 1338.

     “This is remarkable not only for the purity and boldness of its
     scheme of colours, but for the admirable way in which the design of
     the glass fits the elaborate pattern of the tracery. It will be
     noticed that both the figures and the architectural ornaments are
     in bolder relief than in the earlier glass of the Five Sisters, or
     the later of the choir. Some of the faces of the figures have been
     restored by Peckett, but not so as to interfere with the decorative
     effect of the whole. The window contains three rows of figures, the
     lowest a row of eight archbishops, the next a row of eight saints,
     including St. Peter, St. Paul, St. James and St. Katharine, and
     above this a row of smaller figures unidentified.

     “The window contains eight lights. These lights are coupled in
     pairs by four arches with a quatrefoil in the head of each, and
     again formed in groups of four by an ogee arch above the other
     arches. The flowing curves of these ogee arches are most
     ingeniously and beautifully worked into the pattern of the upper
     part of the window, which contains five main divisions of
     stonework, each like the skeleton of a leaf in shape and in the
     delicacy of its pattern. Of these five divisions the top one is
     made by splitting up the central mullion; two diverge from it at
     the top of the lower lights; and two others curve inwards from the
     outside arch. The central mullion runs up almost to the top of the
     arch. The mullions are alike in moulding and size. Below the window
     is the west door, the head of which is filled with ancient stained
     glass. There is a gable above it, running up to the bottom of the
     window and containing three niches. There are kneeling figures on
     each side of the gable, so that the top of it may have held a
     figure of Christ. All that portion of the west end not occupied by
     the window and the porch is filled with stories of niches and
     arcading.”--(A. C.-B.)

The windows of the aisles of the nave are Decorated.

The =Nave= contains eight bays. Each bay consists of two main divisions:
the upper half containing the triforium and clerestory; and the lower
half, the main arches. A slender moulding runs between the two
divisions. The piers consist of a group of separate shafts and the
capitals are very delicate in design. The triforium is little more than
an extension of the clerestory window-lights; but a band of stone
ornamented with quatrefoils separates triforium and clerestory. The
clerestory windows are geometrical Decorated. The design is much
admired.

     “It consists of five lights, the two outer of which are grouped in
     a single arch, with a quatrefoil piercing in its head. Between
     these two arches and on the top of the arch of the central light is
     a circle fitting into the arch of the window, and ornamented with
     four quatrefoils, four trefoil piercings, and other smaller lights.
     There are capitals to the outside shafts of the windows, and to the
     main shafts of the two inner mullions. All these mullions are very
     delicately moulded.

     “The first window from the west end is plain. The glass in the
     other windows is rather finer and less fragmentary than in the
     north aisle.

     “The second window appears to have been largely restored. The
     tabernacle work is very crude in colour. It contains figures of St.
     Laurence, St. Christopher, another saint, and three coats-of-arms
     below. The top lights are fine, and perhaps of Perpendicular date.

     “The third window is one of the richest in colour in the minster,
     with its gorgeous arrangement of crimsons, greens and blues. There
     are inscriptions by Peckett, with the date at the bottom, 1789. His
     deep blues on the top lights are particularly unfortunate.

     “The sixth window is also very bright. It probably contains Norman
     fragments. All the windows except the fifth contain insertions by
     Peckett.

     “The clerestory window contains fragments and coats-of-arms.

     “In the westernmost light of the second window from the west, on
     the north side, are portions of an Early English Jesse window. The
     wheel of this window, and those of the next five, also contain
     fragments of Early English glass. And in the lower lights of the
     fifth and seventh windows from the west are remains of the same
     date.

     “The wheels in the clerestory windows on the south side of the nave
     all contain Early English glass, except the third from the west.
     There is also some Early English glass in their lower lights.

     “The aisles of the nave are bolder in design and altogether more
     satisfactory than the nave itself. Like the nave they are unusually
     wide and lofty. In the two farthest bays to the west, above which
     are the western towers, the rough wooden roof, which has never been
     covered with a vault, may be seen. The vault of the aisles is of
     stone, with only structural ribs, finely moulded and with carved
     bosses. The aisle windows are, like those of the clerestory, of the
     geometrical Decorated Style, but of an earlier and simpler, uniform
     design. They each contain three lights. Above the three lights are
     three quatrefoils, pyramidally arranged.”--(A. C.-B.)

The second window from the east in the north aisle of the nave is said
to have been given by a guild of bell-founders, or by Richard Tunnoc
(died 1330), Lord Mayor of York. Tunnoc appears in the design kneeling
before the Archbishop and around the picture of the casting of a bell is
the legend “_Richard Tunnoc me fist_.” Above Tunnoc is a window. Bells
appear in the border of the glass.

The window at the west end of the north-aisle of the nave is also very
fine. It represents the Virgin and Child and St. Catherine with her
wheel. In the west window of the south-aisle of the nave the subject is
the Crucifixion. The head of Christ is supposed to be of the Eighteenth
Century.

The choir-aisles are very similar to those of the nave. They have stone
vaults and their windows are very beautiful. They have been described as
representing “a design of which the tracery is arrested half-way in its
process of stiffening from the curved lines of the Decorated style to
the straight of the Perpendicular.” Each window is divided into three
lights, each ending in an obtuse arch. Above these are three other
arches and above them again two quatrefoils, and above them a sexfoiled
opening.

For a description of the glass in these aisles we turn to A.
Clutton-Brock:

     “In the north aisle the east window is also very fine. It contains
     a representation of the Crucifixion, with St. John, St. James and
     the Virgin.

     “The first window from the east is very fragmentary. The windows in
     the south aisle are rather fragmentary. In the first two from the
     west the top lights are empty.

     “The second window is remarkable for the delicate modelling and
     drawing of the heads. The head of the Virgin reminds one of one of
     Lippo Lippi’s Madonnas. That of an old man with a beard in the
     central light is German in character. If these are compared with
     the crude

[Illustration: YORK MINSTER: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: YORK MINSTER: CHOIR, WEST]

     and simple design of the heads in the other windows, it will be
     obvious that they are of a different origin. Nothing, however, is
     known of their history.

     “The third window has borders by Peckett. It contains the Jesse
     noted before.

     “The fourth window is very fragmentary. It contains a beautiful
     figure of a saint in one of the top lights; the other top lights
     are by Peckett. In the central division, at the bottom, is the name
     of Archbishop Lamplugh, with a coat-of-arms. (Lamplugh’s tomb is
     close to this window.)

     “The last of those windows contains painted glass given by Lord
     Carlisle in 1804, and bought from a church at Rouen. It is a
     representation of the Visitation, Mr. Winton says, taken from a
     picture by Baroccio, and dates from the end of the Sixteenth
     Century. The upper lights contain the original glass.

     “The east window of this aisle is very fine in colouring, and
     fairly coherent in design. The subject is not clear.”

In the westernmost bay of the north-choir-aisle the eight-year-old son
of Edward III.--=William of Hatfield=--was buried (see page 274). West of
the tomb of =Archbishop Sterne= (died 1683), which has been called “an
example of almost everything that a monument should not be,” we find the
tomb of =Archbishop Scrope=, beheaded by Henry IV. (see page 265),
interesting because it was a place of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages.

From the north-choir-aisle we enter the =Crypt=. This was discovered after
the fire of 1829. Here we find Norman work and some authorities go so
far as to say some portions of the wall are of the Saxon church, built
by Edwin in the Seventh Century. The capitals of the pillars (time of
Roger Pont l’Évêque) are varied and very interesting.

     “Entering the vestibule we notice the exact place where the Early
     English builders finished their work and the Decorated style
     begins. The difference between the styles in the Chapter-House and
     vestibule shows that the former was erected first. It has a wall
     arcade, and above are windows of curious tracery, filled with
     beautiful old glass. The shafts of the arcade support trefoiled
     arches, with a cinquefoil ornamented with a sculptured boss. Each
     boss and capital is beautifully carved with foliage, amidst which
     the heads of men and dragons appear. The glass is Early Decorated,
     and contains representations of Royal personages.

     “The Chapter-House is one of the most beautiful in England. The
     entrance is an arch, divided into two arches by a canopied pier,
     which bears a mutilated statue of the Virgin and Child. Clustered
     shafts, with capitals, are on each side of the doors, which have
     remarkably good scrolled iron-work. The chamber itself is very
     magnificent. It is octagonal and in each bay there are six canopied
     stalls under a five-light window. The window tracery is superb.
     Clustered shafts support the vaulted roof. Everywhere we see richly
     carved stone-work, the finest in any cathedral, the foliage of
     maple, oak, vine and other trees. Here are pigs and squirrels
     feeding on acorns, men gathering grapes, birds, and coiled dragons
     and reptiles. The grotesques are most curious and interesting. In
     1845, unfortunately, the building was restored and the painted
     figures of kings and bishops were destroyed, a poor tiled floor
     laid down; but, in spite of all, it can still maintain its proud
     boast:

    ‘_Ut Rosa flos florum_
     _Sic est Domus ista Domorum._’

     [‘As the Rose is the flower of flowers, so is this House the chief
     of Houses.’]”

The date of this building is generally given as 1320.

A curious doorway at the north-east end of the north transept opens into
the vestibule that takes us into the Chapter-House. This is a narrow
passage running north for three bays, then turning at right angles and
running east for two bays. It is Decorated in style. Traces of ancient
painting may be observed, and the windows display their original glass,
chiefly Decorated. In the upper lights there are some fragments of
Norman and Early English glass.

The =Chapter-House= differs from most chapter-houses in having no central
pillar. It is octagonal and is divided into eight bays. An
acutely-arched window, with geometrical Decorated tracery, fills each of
the seven bays. The space over the entrance is occupied with blank
tracery like that of the windows. The windows contain five lights, each
light terminating in a trefoiled arch. The glass, chiefly medallions and
shields, dates from the time of Edward II. and Edward III. The one
modern window declares itself.

Passing to the =East Front= we find that it is square, and, like the West
Front, it is almost entirely filled with an enormous window. The great
=East Window= contains nine lights, beautifully divided by mullions and
crossed by three transoms. The arch of the head is filled with a great
number of small divisions. Over the window is an ogee gable, surmounted
by a pinnacle. Panelling forms a kind of background for it. Buttresses,
tall and narrow, and containing six tiers of niches, flank the window on
either side. Each is finished with a spire. The two aisle windows also
have ogee gables, surmounted with finials. Above them runs a band of
panelling. At each corner rises a tall buttress, finished with a lofty
spire.

     “The Choir and Lady-Chapel are Perpendicular work. The four eastern
     bays constituting the Lady-Chapel, are earlier than the later ones
     of the choir and vary in detail. The triforium passage in the
     former is outside the building, and the windows are recessed.
     Strange gargoyles, with figures of apes and demons, adorn the
     buttresses. The east end is mainly filled with the huge window,
     the largest in England, which does not leave much space for
     architectural detail. Above it is the figure of Archbishop
     Thoresby, the builder of this part of the Cathedral. Panelling
     covers the surface of the stone, and below the window is a row of
     seventeen busts, representing our Lord and his Apostles, Edward
     III. and Archbishop Thoresby. There are two aisle windows;
     buttresses adorned with niches separate the aisles from the central
     portion, and others, capped with spires, stand on the north and
     south of this front.”--(P. H. D.)

From the south-east we gain a very satisfactory view of the central
tower and the ornate and elegant =South Transept= (Early English), dating
from 1216-1241. The gable, with its large rose-window, cusped lights,
turrets, buttresses, and lancet windows, all make a harmonious
architectural picture. The south porch is considered rather small and
has been much restored. Dog-tooth moulding is plentiful along the
arches. It also occurs on the windows and gable.

Pinnacles and weird gargoyles decorate the =Nave=, divided into seven bays
by tall buttresses.

The north side of the Minster is far less ornate than the south. Of
course, the chief features here are the =Chapter-House=, with its curious
roof and lovely windows, and the =North Transept=, very fine Early English
of 1241-1260. Here we have the famous group of lancets, the Five Sisters
(see page 270), and seven beautifully arranged lancets in the gable
above--a very fine contrast to the gable of the south transept, with its
rose-window. A vestibule leads from the North Transept to the
Chapter-House, that splendid octagonal building, perhaps the finest
example of Early Decorated in existence. Buttresses, topped with
pinnacles, project at each of the eight corners. The strange pyramidal
roof is surrounded by a battlement and curious gargoyles; among them
bears peer out into space.




LINCOLN

     DEDICATION: ST. MARY. A CHURCH SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: ST. HUGH’S CHOIR; ANGEL CHOIR; EAST WINDOW;
     CENTRAL TOWER.


Lincoln Cathedral possesses a commanding site and three splendid towers
that form a beautiful picture. Distance lends enchantment to the view at
all times of the day and seasons of the year.

     “Throughout a vast district around the city, the one great feature
     of the landscape is the mighty minster, which, almost like that of
     Laon, crowns the edge of the ridge, rising, with a steepness
     well-nigh unknown in the streets of English towns, above the lower
     city and the plain at its feet. Next in importance to the minster
     is the castle, which, marred as it is by modern changes, still
     crowns the height as no unworthy yoke-fellow of its ecclesiastical
     neighbour. The proud polygonal keep of the fortress still groups
     well with the soaring towers, the sharp-pointed gables, the long
     continuous line of roof, of the church of Remigius and Saint
     Hugh.”--(E. A. F.)

Lincoln Cathedral is also a landmark in the history of architecture, for
here was developed the first complete and pure form of the third great
form of architecture--the architecture of the Pointed Arch.

     “The best informed French antiquaries acknowledge that they have
     nothing like it in France for thirty years afterwards; they thought
     it was copied from Notre-Dame at Dijon, to which there is a
     considerable resemblance, but that church was not consecrated till
     1230, so that the Dijon architect might have copied from the
     Lincoln one, but the Lincoln could not have copied from
     Dijon.”--(J. H. P.)

To the historian, as well as to the student of architecture, Lincoln
makes a strong appeal for many visits. Those whose time is limited will
be impatient to inspect St. Hugh’s Choir, and the more beautiful Angel
Choir beyond it. We must, however, pause a moment to recapitulate its
history before we begin our walk through the Cathedral.

     “The surface or exterior of Lincoln Cathedral presents at least
     four perfect specimens of the succeeding styles of the first four
     orders of Gothic architecture. The greater part of the front may be
     as old as the time of its founder, Bishop Remigius, at the end of
     the Eleventh Century; but even here may be traced invasions and
     intermixtures, up to the Fifteenth Century. The large indented
     windows are of this latter period, and exhibit a frightful heresy.
     The western towers carry you to the end of the Twelfth Century;
     then succeeds a wonderful extent of the Early English, or the
     pointed arch. The transepts begin with the Thirteenth, and come
     down to the middle of the Fourteenth Century; and the interior,
     especially the choir and the side aisles, abounds with the most
     exquisitely varied specimens of that period. Fruits, flowers,
     vegetables, insects, _capriccios_ of every description, encircle
     the arches or shafts, and sparkle upon the capitals of pillars.
     Even down to the reign of Henry VIII. there are two private
     chapels, to the left of the smaller south porch, on entrance, which
     are perfect gems of art.”--(T. F. D.)

In the Seventh Century, Paulinus, Bishop of York, made converts in the
Roman hill-town of Lincoln, and several churches were founded. The
“bishop’s stool” was at Sidnacester and Dorchester-on-Thames before it
was fixed at Lincoln.

     “The king” (William the Conqueror) “had given Remigius, who had
     been a monk at Fescamp, the bishopric of Dorchester which is
     situated on the Thames. This bishopric, being larger than all
     others in England, stretching from the Thames to the Humber, the
     bishop thought it troublesome to have his episcopal See at the
     extreme limit of his diocese. He was also displeased with the
     smallness of the town, the most illustrious city appearing far more
     worthy to be the See of a bishop. He therefore bought certain lands
     on the highest parts of the city, near the castle standing aloft
     with its strong towers, and built a church, strong as the place was
     strong, and fair as the place was fair, dedicated to the Virgin of
     Virgins, which should both be a joy to the servants of God, and as
     befitted the time unconquerable by enemies.”

Such is Henry of Huntingdon’s account of the transference of the See,
which took place between 1072 and 1075.

The church built by Remigius, on the site of an earlier church, was
completed in twenty years. Remigius died three days before the date
appointed for the consecration, May 9, 1092, and was buried before the
Altar of the Holy Cross in front of the rood-screen. This first church
was 300 feet long. It was severely plain; but so strong that Stephen
used it as a fortress in 1141, when the castle opposite was held by his
enemies.

The next great builder was Alexander the Magnificent (1123-1148), nephew
of Roger, Bishop of Salisbury. A fire destroying the roof in 1141
necessitated repairs. Alexander remodeled parts of the church. He added
the elaborate doorways in the west front in 1146; the Norman arcade
along the west front; and built the western towers.

     “Part of the west front of Lincoln was built by Bishop Remi, or
     Remigius, 1085-1092: the small portion which remains of this work
     is a very valuable specimen of early Norman, the more so that the
     insertion of later and richer Norman doorways by Bishop Alexander,
     about fifty years afterwards, enables us to compare early and late
     Norman work, while the jointing of the masonry leaves no doubt of
     the fact that these doorways are insertions and, therefore,
     confirms the early date of the three lofty arches under which they
     are inserted. A comparison of the capitals and details of these two
     periods, thus placed in juxtaposition, is extremely interesting.
     The wide-jointing of the masonry and the shallowness of the carving
     distinguish the old work from the new. Several capitals of the
     later period are inserted in the older work, as is shewn on careful
     examination by the jointing of the masonry, and by the form of the
     capitals themselves: the earlier capitals are short, and have
     volutes at the angles, forming a sort of rude Ionic; the later
     capitals are more elongated, and have a sort of rude Corinthian, or
     Composite foliage.”--(J. H. P.)

In 1185 an earthquake injured the Cathedral; and so, when Hugh of Avalon
became Bishop of Lincoln in 1186, he began to collect money for repairs
and rebuilding. The eastern end of the original Cathedral was removed,
and in 1192 Bishop Hugh laid the foundations of his very original Choir.
The architect was Geoffrey de Noyers. J. H. Parker, who studied Lincoln
Cathedral for thirty years, considers this work of St. Hugh (A.D.
1192-1200) pure Early English Gothic and the earliest building of that
style in the world.

     “Canterbury was completed in 1184 and in 1185 St. Hugh of Grenoble,
     also called St. Hugh of Burgundy, was appointed Bishop of Lincoln,
     and immediately began to rebuild his cathedral. It is therefore
     plain that this portion of the building was completed before 1200,
     and a careful examination enables us to distinguish clearly the
     work completed in the time of Bishop Hugh, which comprises his
     choir and the eastern transepts with its chapels. The present
     vaults of St. Hugh’s Choir, and of both the transepts, were
     introduced subsequent to the fall of the tower, which occurred in
     1240.

     “The architecture in the north of Lincolnshire and the south of
     Yorkshire appears to have been a little in advance of any other in
     Europe at that period. St. Hugh’s Choir at Lincoln is the earliest
     building of the pure Gothic style free from any mixture of the
     Romanesque that has been hitherto found in Europe, or in the world.
     The Oriental styles are not Gothic, though they helped to lead to
     it. The French Gothic has a strong mixture of the Romanesque with
     it down to a later period than the Choir of Lincoln. St. Hugh of
     Lincoln certainly did not bring the Gothic style with him from his
     own country Dauphiny, or from the Grande Chartreuse where he was
     educated, for nothing of the kind existed there at that period.
     Grenoble (the place from which St. Hugh was brought to England) and
     its neighbourhood was quite half-a-century behind England in the
     character of its buildings, in the time of Henry II. of England and
     of Anjou, in whose time this style was developed.

     “Nothing can well exceed the freedom, delicacy and beauty of this
     work; the original arcade of the time of St. Hugh is of the same
     free and beautiful style as the additions of his successors. The
     crockets, arranged vertically one over the other behind the
     detached marble shafts of the pillars, are a remarkable and not a
     common feature, which seems to have been in use for a few years
     only; it occurs also in the west front of Wells Cathedral, the work
     of Bishop Jocelin, a few years after this at Lincoln; or perhaps
     under him, of Hugh de Wells.”--(J. H. P.)

The eight years during which Hugh carried on the work

     “were busy ones at Lincoln. Contemporary records enable us to
     picture him encouraging the workmen by his presence and example,
     even shewing his zeal by carrying the stones on his own shoulders.
     He did not live to see his work completed, as Remigius had done.
     But he had set the example and given the pattern, and the work was
     continued by his successors until the building was again entire.
     Hugh had already finished the apse, the eastern transept, the
     choir, and part of the western transept (i.e., the whole eastern
     portion of the church) when he fell ill. Finding

[Illustration: LINCOLN: WEST FRONT]

[Illustration: LINCOLN: GREAT WEST DOOR]

     his death approaching, he sent for his architect Geoffrey de
     Noyers, and enjoined him to hasten the completion of the altar of
     St. John the Baptist, his patron. He then gave directions for his
     funeral, and instructions that he was to be buried in the
     mother-church of his diocese dedicated to the Mother of God, near
     the altar of St. John the Baptist. The personality of the great
     bishop comes vividly before us when we read that he also wished his
     tomb to be placed near the wall, in a convenient place, lest it
     should be a stumbling-block to those approaching. On the 16th of
     November, 1200, Hugh breathed his last, lying, as he had wished, on
     the bare ground, on a cross of consecrated ashes. His instructions
     regarding the funeral were carried out; but such a light as Hugh’s
     could not be hid, and within a century we find his remains enclosed
     in a costly golden shrine, borne on the shoulders of kings and
     bishops, and placed at last in a structure erected specially for
     their reception, ‘one of the loveliest of human works,’ the
     celebrated Angel Choir. The original place of Hugh’s burial has
     been somewhat disputed. The _Magna Vita_ tells us that he was
     buried near the altar he had named, _a boreali ipsius aedis
     regione_. On the east side of the eastern transept, Hugh had placed
     four apsidal chapels, two north and two south of the central apse.
     From the words above quoted, it has been considered that the
     northern-most of these chapels was the site of his tomb.”--(A. F.
     K.)

The western transept and the nave were next finished (Thirteenth
Century), and a central tower was built to replace the one that fell in
1237-1239. To this period belongs Bishop Hugh de Wells, brother of
Jocelin (see page 108), who contributed largely to the funds for
building and roofing.

He was succeeded by Roger Bacon’s friend, Robert Grosseteste
(1235-1253). In his time the new nave was completed. The large screen of
the west front, the central gable and the octagonal turrets at the
corners, belong to this period; also the lower part of the central
tower, the Canon’s Vestry at the eastern transept, and the Galilee Porch
at the western transept. The trellis ornament always marks
Grosseteste’s work. He made many changes in the windows.

To the treasurer, John de Welburne (died 1380), the Cathedral is
indebted for its splendid choir-stalls.

The Russell and Longland chantries, the upper parts of the tower, and
many windows date from the Perpendicular period.

John Evelyn, visiting Lincoln in 1654, gives us an idea how the
Cathedral suffered in the Civil Wars:

     “Lincoln is an old confused town, very long, uneven, steep and
     ragged, formerly full of good houses, especially churches and
     abbeys. The minster almost comparable to that of York itself,
     abounding with marble pillars, and having a fair front (here was
     interred Queen Eleanora, the loyal and loving wife who sucked the
     poison out of her husband’s wound); the abbot founder, with rare
     carving in the stone; the great bell, or Tom, as they call it. I
     went up the steeple, from whence is a goodly prospect all over the
     country. The soldiers had lately knocked off most of the brasses
     from the gravestones, so as few inscriptions were left; they told
     us that these men went in with axes and hammers, and shut
     themselves in, till they had rent and torn off some bargeloads of
     metal, not sparing even the monuments of the dead; so hellish an
     avarice possessed them: besides which, they exceedingly ruined the
     city.”

We are now able to analyze the =West Front=, knowing the periods of the
great screen wall, with its Gothic arcading and the octagonal stair
turrets capped by tall pyramids that terminate the ends; the two tall
square towers, Norman below, Perpendicular above; the three great
recesses pierced with windows and doors; the gable above the recess with
seven arches (two pierced with windows and two containing statues) in a
row and one above with angels.

We must note that upon the southern turret stands a statue of St. Hugh;
and The Swineherd of Stow, who contributed a peck of silver pennies
towards building the Cathedral, ornaments the northern one. It is a copy
of the original, now in the Cloisters.

The tracery of the windows in the three recesses is supposed to date
from the end of the Fourteenth Century. The big west window and the
cinquefoil window above were placed there in Grosseteste’s rule
(1235-1253).

The central door and those on either side of it, date from the Twelfth
Century, and give the best possible idea of the Romanesque period just
before it merged into Gothic.

Above the central door are eleven kings, from William the Conqueror to
Edward III. These statues date from 1350 and were originally coloured
and gilt.

The two western towers (Norman) were built in the Twelfth Century. The
arcading (which is not the same in both) shows where they ended and
where the Perpendicular stories were added, carrying them two hundred
feet higher. Like the central tower, they were originally crowned with
tall wooden spires, covered with lead. These spires became unsafe and
were removed in 1807. In the northern, or =St. Mary’s=, hung “Great Tom of
Lincoln” and its successor until 1834. The southern tower, called =St.
Hugh’s=, has a ring of eight bells. Under St. Hugh’s the =Ringers’ Chapel=
is naturally situated; and there is a corresponding chapel under =St.
Mary’s Tower=.

Beneath =St. Mary’s Tower= we find the =Northwest Chapel=; under =St. Hugh’s=,
the =Ringers’ Chapel=. Both chapels are vaulted with stone and date from
the first half of the Thirteenth Century.

The =Nave=, a very characteristic example of the first half of the
Thirteenth Century,

     “exhibits an Early English style in its highest stage of
     development: massive without heaviness, rich in detail without
     exuberance, its parts symmetrically proportioned and carefully
     studied throughout, the foliated carving bold and effective, there
     seems no deficiency in any way to deteriorate from its
     merits.”--(G. G. S.)

There are seven bays. The first bay was converted into a sort of
vestibule by arches constructed in the Eighteenth Century to add
strength to the western towers. The big arch, separating the vestibule
from the nave, dates from about 1730. The vaulting under the western
towers dates from the Fourteenth Century; also the tracery covering the
walls of these compartments.

     “Each pier is surrounded by round shafts of Purbeck marble. The
     arch mouldings, like those of St. Hugh’s choir, were considered
     ‘beautiful specimens’ by Rickman. They are deeply cut, and throw
     good, bold shadows. In the triforium each bay contains two arches,
     supported by clustered columns with foliaged capitals. The
     spandrels are decorated with sunk trefoils or quatrefoils. In most
     cases the arches are each divided into three sub-arches with
     clustered shafts, the tympanum being pierced with quatrefoils. A
     difference is noticeable, however, in the easternmost arch and the
     two westernmost bays (five arches altogether) on both sides. Here
     the sub-arches are only two in number. The narrowness of the two
     western bays accounts for the variation at that end. The clerestory
     is the same throughout its length, having three tall narrow windows
     in each bay, with slender banded shafts. In the nave we have,
     according to Fergusson, ‘a type of the first perfected form of
     English vaulting.’ He calls it ‘very simple and beautiful.’ At the
     junctions of the ribs are elaborate bosses of foliage. The
     compartments are covered with plaster, once decorated in colours
     and gold. In the second bay from the east is the name: W. L.
     PARIS:--evidently intended as a record of some repairs to the
     vault. The springers rest on clusters of three long slender
     vaulting-shafts, rising from foliaged corbels just above the
     capitals of the nave piers.

     “In the aisles, each bay has two lancet windows, except the
     easternmost bay on the south side, which has only one. In the jambs
     are slender Purbeck shafts, twice banded. Just beneath these
     windows, an arcade of trefoiled arches runs along the whole length
     of the nave, being continued on the screen walls to the western
     chapels. The arches are deep, with bold mouldings, and are
     supported by clustered columns. There are five arches in each bay,
     but they are not placed in the same manner on both sides of the
     nave. On the south, the arches are arranged in groups of five, with
     blank spaces of wall between, in front of which pass the
     vaulting-shafts. On the north, the arcade is continuous, and is so
     arranged that each cluster of shafts supporting the vault passes in
     front of an arch. The work on the south side is more elaborate;
     tooth ornament is used, a string-course runs along at the height of
     the capitals, and foliaged bosses are found in the lower corners of
     the spandrels. In addition to the clustered vaulting-shafts already
     mentioned, there is a single vaulting-shaft in the centre of each
     bay, between the windows, rising from a corbel above the
     wall-arcade. On the north side these corbels merely have plain
     mouldings, but on the south side they are foliated. The arrangement
     of the vaulting-ribs is different in the north and south aisles;
     and in the latter it will be noticed that some of the bosses have
     figure-subjects, besides the foliage met with on the north side.
     The _Agnus Dei_ carved on the boss in the fourth bay from the west
     should be noticed. To such minor differences, continually found in
     the corresponding parts of a Gothic edifice, the style undoubtedly
     owes a peculiar charm.”--(A. F. K.)

The great =West Window= was inserted, as we have seen, in Bishop
Grosseteste’s time (1235-1253). Its tracery, however, dates from the
end of the Fourteenth Century and is Early Perpendicular. The upper
lights are filled with fragments of Fourteenth Century glass; but the
glass in the lower lights is modern. The cinquefoil above, of the same
date, contains modern glass also. The central figure represents
Remigius, with his bishop’s staff in one hand and the church in the
other. The rest of the glass in the nave is also modern.

Under the last arch on the north side of the nave we come to a slab
supposed to mark the original burial-place of Remigius. This slab was
discovered in the cloisters and is supposed to date from the time of
that worthy prelate.

The neighbouring =Pulpit= is probably of the Eighteenth Century. On the
other side of the nave stands the black basalt Norman =Font=, reminding us
of the font in Winchester. Around the sides of the square basin a row of
grotesque monsters is carved in low relief.

Now we come to the =Central Tower=. Four massive piers carry the four
arches from which it rises. Foliage decorates the top of each arch. The
spandrels are ornamented by two rows of arcading with slender-clustered
shafts. The vaulting is of the Fourteenth Century. The iron rings on the
piers were placed there for the purpose of fastening the bell-ropes of
the “Lady Bells” that once hung in this tower.

A beautiful stone =Rood-Screen=, Decorated in style and dating from the
end of the Thirteenth Century, fills the eastern tower arch, and marks
the boundary of St. Hugh’s Choir. Traces of colour and gilding reveal
themselves to an earnest scrutiny.

     “On either side of the central doorway are four deep arches
     supported by detached pillars, decorated with grotesque heads and
     small figures of bishops. The wall behind is richly carved with
     diaper designs, shewing much freedom and variety. This screen was
     once decorated with colours and gilding, traces of which are still
     visible. It appears to have suffered a good deal at the hands of
     iconoclasts; many statues have doubtless been removed, and one must
     be very cautious with regard to the decoration which remains, as it
     was considerably restored by a mason named James Pink during the
     second half of last century. The screen now carries the organ
     erected in 1826.

     “The two side doorways leading into the north and south aisles of
     the choir are somewhat earlier than the screen between them. They
     are beautiful examples of carving, dating from the end of the Early
     English period. The exquisite openwork foliage which runs round the
     arch is executed with the utmost skill and care, and is without the
     laboured effect of so much of our later stone-work. The injured
     parts were carefully restored about 1770 by James Pink, who was
     also employed by Essex on the canopy of the reredos. The doorways
     have modern iron gates.”--(A. F. K.)

The =Choir= now includes St. Hugh’s Choir and two bays of the Angel Choir
beyond.

=St. Hugh’s Choir= is the earliest example of pure Gothic in the world.
People are frequently disappointed in it because of its low vault and
squat arches; but it must be remembered that the fall of the central
tower in 1237-1239 greatly damaged this part of the building. In order
to strengthen the choir some heavy columns without capitals replaced the
original slender shafts. The arches were also partly reconstructed.
Arcaded screens between the piers divide the choir from the aisles north
and south, and aid in the support.

     “The foliage of the capitals is exquisitely beautiful, and though
     distinguished technically by the name of _stiff-leaf foliage_,
     because there are stiff stalks to the leaves rising from the ring
     of the capital, the leaves themselves curl over in the most
     graceful manner, with a freedom and elegance not exceeded at any
     subsequent period. The mouldings are also as bold and as deep as
     possible, and there is scarcely a vestige of Norman character
     remaining in any part of the work.”--(R.)

Viollet-le-Duc, who fixes the date of St. Hugh’s Choir at 1220 or 1210
at the earliest, says:

     “We have in Normandy, especially in the cathedral of Rouen and the
     church of Eu, architecture of the date of 1190; it is purely
     French, that is to say, it corresponds exactly with the
     architecture of the ‘Isle de France’ except in certain details. At
     Eu, at the cathedral of Le Mans, at Seez, we have architecture
     which resembles that of the choir of Lincoln, but that architecture
     is from 1210 to 1220, it is the Norman school of the Thirteenth
     Century. There is, indeed, at Lincoln, an effort at, a tendency to
     originality, a style of ornament which attempts to emancipate
     itself; nevertheless the character is purely Anglo-Norman.

     “The construction is English, the profiles of the mouldings are
     English, the ornaments are English, the execution of the work
     belongs to the English school of workmen of the beginning of the
     Thirteenth Century.

     “On the exterior the choir of the Cathedral of Lincoln is
     thoroughly English or Norman, if you will; one can perceive all the
     Norman influence; arches acutely pointed, blank windows in the
     clerestory, reminding one of the basilica covered with a wooden
     roof; a low triforium; each bay of the aisles divided into two by a
     small buttress; shafts banded. In the interior vaults which have
     not at all the same construction as the French vaults of the end of
     the Twelfth Century; arch-mouldings, slender and deeply undercut;
     the abacus round; the tooth-ornament; which do not at all resemble
     the ornaments which we find at Paris, Sens, St. Denis, etc.”

The =Choir-Stalls=, dating from the Fourteenth Century, are among the
finest in England. Pugin considered them quite the best.

     “The stalls are in two rows, the upper of 62 seats, and the lower
     of 46; the former number has now been increased by six and the
     latter by two. The upper stalls have elaborate trefoiled canopies,
     surmounted by an intricate maze of buttresses and pinnacles, rising
     to a height of 24 feet 6 inches above the choir floor. The niches
     above the canopies have recently been filled with statues of saints
     in the Anglican Calendar. The stalls in both rows are provided with
     hinged seats or _misereres_, intended to serve as supports in the
     long services during which the occupants of the stalls were
     required to stand. These seats, as well as the elbow-rests and
     finials, are richly carved with those grotesque subjects in which
     the Mediæval artist so greatly delighted. The carver has given full
     scope to a most fertile imagination. Scriptural subjects do
     certainly occur on some of the _misereres_ in the upper row, but
     others are of a playful character. The fox is seen preaching to
     birds and beasts, and then running riot among them; monkeys are at
     play, or occupied in the more serious business of hanging one of
     their number and burying him afterwards; we also find men fighting
     with wild animals; the labours of husbandry; kings, knights,
     ladies, dragons, griffins, lions, hogs, and wyverns. Whether there
     is a hidden meaning in any of these quaint subjects, it is perhaps
     difficult now to say, but the preaching fox is certainly
     suggestive.”--(A. F. K.)

At the east end of the stalls on the south side rises the =Bishop’s
Throne= with tall Gothic canopy. It was designed by James Essex in 1778,
and carved by Lumby. Opposite is Sir Gilbert Scott’s =Pulpit= of carved
oak (1863-1864).

The brass chandelier of sixteen lights, suspended from the vault, is
dated 1698; and the brass eagle lectern, 1667.

The stone =Reredos= is a mixture of work of the Thirteenth Century and
that of James Essex in the Eighteenth Century. James Pink carved the
central canopy in 1769 after designs by Essex.

The =Eastern Transept= was also the work of St. Hugh. He joined the ends
by means of an apse, which extended to the second bay of the Angel
Choir. Some historians say that he was buried in the northern of the
four chapels that he built along the apse.

St. Hugh died in London in 1200. When his body arrived in Lincoln it was
met by King John and carried on the shoulders of archbishops and bishops
to the Choir that he had erected. He was buried on November 24; and,
according to an old ballad:

    “A’ the bells o’ merrie Lincoln
       Without men’s hands were rung,
     And a’ the books o’ merrie Lincoln
       Were read without man’s tongue;
     And ne’er was such a burial
       Sin’ Adam’s days begun.”

Pilgrims came in such numbers to his shrine that it was deemed necessary
to make his tomb more important, and the apse was removed for the famous
=Angel Choir=, which, like the Choir of St. Hugh, marks a new period in
the history of architecture.

     “Thus the Angel Choir of Lincoln was erected to contain the shrine
     of one of Lincoln’s noblest bishops and one of England’s greatest
     saints, whose lowly tomb, placed in a corner at his own desire for
     fear of its being in the way, had become the resort of such a vast
     concourse of pilgrims as to require the transformation of the
     eastern arm of the minster. In 1255, license was obtained from
     Henry III. for the removal of part of the eastern city wall, which
     stood in the way, and in the next year the Angel Choir was probably
     begun. The work was carried on so rapidly that within a quarter of
     a century the translation took place. The choir was not, however,
     fully completed till the Fourteenth Century was well on its way.

     “The 6th October, 1280, was the proudest day in the

[Illustration: LINCOLN: ANGEL CHOIR]

[Illustration: LINCOLN: CHOIR, EAST]

     history of the city. Perhaps never, before or since, has such an
     august assembly gathered within her walls. The body of the Saint of
     Lincoln was to be translated to the costly shrine in the centre of
     the Angel Choir. The ceremony was magnificent. Edward himself was
     present, and supported on his own shoulder the saint’s remains as
     they were carried to their new resting-place; with him was his
     beloved queen Eleanor, whose effigy was so soon to be placed
     beneath the same roof. The king and queen were accompanied by
     Edmund, Earl of Kent, brother of Edward, and his wife; the Earls of
     Gloucester and Warwick; the Archbishop of Canterbury; the bishops
     of Lincoln, Bath, Ely, Norwich, Worcester, Llandaff, Bangor, and
     St. Asaph; the bishop-elect of Exeter; and two hundred and fifty
     knights. The shrine, ornamented with gold and silver and precious
     stones, was raised on a lofty stone pedestal, and about thirty
     years after was protected by an iron grille, wrought by Simon the
     Smith. It is recorded that the fastenings of the grille were still
     to be seen in the pavement at the middle of the last century, but
     all traces have now entirely disappeared. It must have been soon
     after the translation that the head was removed from the body, and
     enclosed in a metal case, enriched with gold and silver and
     precious stones. A keeper was appointed to guard the precious relic
     during the day, and two had this charge at night. Yet, in spite of
     all such precautions, it was stolen from the church in the year
     1364; the head was thrown into a field, and the case sold in London
     for twenty marks. The thieves were robbed of their ill-gotten gains
     on their way back, and were afterwards convicted of the crime, and
     hanged at Lincoln. The head was found and restored to the
     cathedral. The treasurer, John de Welburne (d. 1380), either
     restored the old shrine or made a new one of the same
     materials.”--(A. F. K.)

Fergusson called the Angel Choir “the most beautiful presbytery in
England.” It dates from 1256 to 1280, when the Early English was merging
into the Decorated. The sculptural angels that ornament the spandrels of
the triforium account for the name.

     “It is in five bays carried eastward at a uniform height and
     breadth with the choir of St. Hugh. Lincoln stone is used
     throughout, relieved with shafts and capitals of Purbeck marble.
     The spandrels of the great arches, which are plain in other parts
     of the building are here decorated with sunk geometrical forms.
     Each bay of the triforium is divided, as elsewhere, into two
     arches, both of which enclose two sub-arches; but the details are
     richer than in the earlier parts of the minster. The clerestory has
     one window of four lights in each bay, with an eight-foil and two
     trefoils in the head. The compartments of the vault were originally
     coated with plaster, which has been scraped away so as to shew the
     stone surface underneath. It is a question whether it does not now
     look better than with the old plaster, and the gaudy colouring
     which once, most probably, decorated it. The springers of the
     vaulting are supported by slender shafts, which rest on elaborately
     foliaged corbels in the spandrels of the great arches. The
     beautiful foliaged bosses along the ridge rib are best seen from
     the triforium or the clerestory.”--(A. F. K.)

In olden times the Angel Choir contained the Shrine of St. Hugh and a
monument to Queen Eleanor, of which the one now standing in Westminster
Abbey is probably a copy. It was an altar-monument of marble with the
Queen’s effigy in gilded brass, and was destroyed during the Civil Wars
in the Seventeenth Century. Eleanor died not far from Lincoln, from
which city the funeral procession started to London. A modern stone
monument, with a brass effigy of Queen Eleanor, was placed under the
East Window in 1891.

Just behind the reredos there is a row of four table-tombs. The north
one was placed there by Bishop Fuller, to mark the resting place of =St.
Hugh=; next comes =Bishop Fuller= himself (died 1675); next, =Bishop
Gardiner= (died 1705); and next, =Subdean Gardiner= and his daughter,
Susanna (died 1731 and 1732). Near the latter stands the alabaster and
red marble monument to =Dean Butler= (died 1894). In corresponding
position and next to St. Hugh’s tomb we see =Bishop Wordsworth’s= effigy
under a tall ornate Gothic canopy. This Bishop of Lincoln (died 1885),
was a nephew of William Wordsworth. Nearer the East Window we find a
group of Fourteenth Century monuments to the =Burghersh= family, one of
whom was Bishop of Lincoln (1320-1340), and another, a hero of Crécy,
and Constable of Dover, and Warden of the Cinque Ports. Opposite is the
monument to =Nicholas de Cantelupe= (died 1355), a mutilated effigy under
a Gothic canopy. Near it lies =Prior Wimbische=. His effigy, also
headless, lies under a canopy.

Leland, writing in the time of Henry VIII., mentions two mutilated
tombs: =Catherine Swynford=, the third wife of John of Gaunt, made Earl of
Lincoln in 1362, and that of her daughter, Joan Beaufort, who married
the Earl of Westmoreland.

On the north side of the choir is the =Easter Sepulchre=, a fine piece of
Thirteenth Century carving, in the Decorated style. It consists of four
canopies with trefoiled arches. Three sleeping soldiers ornament three
of the panels.

On a spandrel on the north side, under a corbel above the most easterly
pier, sits the =Lincoln Imp=--one of those grotesques that the Mediæval
carvers delighted in creating; and here he has been sitting with crossed
leg and grinning grimly for centuries. He is of the same family as =The
Devil Looking over Lincoln= (see page 309).

In the =South Aisle= of the choir we pause again before another spot,
sacred in Mediæval days. Here stood until the Seventeenth Century the
=Shrine of= =Little St. Hugh=, a child said to have been crucified by the
Jews in 1255. According to the ballads the ball of the eight-year-old
boy fell into a Jew’s garden; and when he ran in to get it, the Jews
murdered him.

The canons of Lincoln obtained the body and buried it in the Cathedral.
Hugh became a local saint; and the Jews of Lincoln were promptly
persecuted. When the stone coffin was opened in 1791, the skeleton of a
child three feet long, encased in lead, was found.

=Henry of Huntingdon= (died about 1155), the chronicler of Lincoln, was
also buried in this aisle.

On the north and south of the Angel Choir is a small chantry. That on
the north is the =Fleming Chantry=, built by Richard Fleming, Bishop of
Lincoln in 1419-1431, and the corresponding one the =Russell Chantry=,
built by John Russell, who held the See from 1480 to 1494. This is
similar to the Fleming Chantry, Perpendicular in style. Very similar is
the =Longland Chantry=, on the other side of the south door, or Bishop’s
Porch. This chantry was built by John Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, in
1521-1547.

There is no Lady-Chapel.

The great =East Window= is the finest specimen of its kind in England. It
is formed of eight lights; and the great wheel of the head is composed
of a six-foil, surrounded by six quatrefoils.

     “Bar-tracery being fully developed, the general appearance of ‘the
     window is rather Decorated than Early English, but the mouldings
     still belong to the earlier style.’ ‘This window ... together with
     the whole of that part of the choir is singularly and beautifully
     accommodated to the style of the rest of the building.’”--(R.)

The glass is modern and deals with scenes from the life of Christ, and
the Old Testament.

     “The aisle windows are each of three lights, with three circles in
     the head, two filled with cinquefoils and one with a quatrefoil.
     The two east windows of the aisles are similar to the others. The
     wall below the windows is decorated all round with arcading of a
     richer design than that in the nave. Two trefoiled arches are
     included in a larger arch, with a quatrefoil within a circle
     filling the head. The spandrels have sunk trefoils. The bosses of
     the stone vaults to the aisles are carved with sacred subjects,
     foliage, and grotesque figures.

     “The east windows of the north and south aisles are filled with
     beautiful stained glass of the Early English period. The subjects
     are arranged within medallions, and, though somewhat difficult to
     decipher, appear to represent scenes in the lives of two saints
     whose story has many points of resemblance--St. Thomas of
     Canterbury and St. Hugh of Lincoln. The glass is said to have been
     moved about the end of the last century from the windows of the
     nave aisles. The date of the medallions may be placed towards the
     middle of the Thirteenth Century, about the time of the erection of
     the nave, and, of course, earlier than the windows which they now
     occupy. The _grisaille_ into which they are now reglazed, is
     considered by Westlake to be the earliest in England.”--(A. F. K.)

One of St. Hugh’s characteristics was the peculiar double arcading on
his walls. We find it in the choir and transepts.

The =Western Transept= was begun by St. Hugh; and his work is thought to
end at the walls of the six chapels that run along the eastern side.
These are dedicated to St. Nicholas, St. Denis, St. James, St. Edward
the Martyr, St. John the Evangelist and St. Giles, and are separated
from the transept by screens placed between the piers. Four of these
screens are of carved oak and date from the Fifteenth Century; but the
one of carved stone is of the Fourteenth. The western transept is famed
for its two large circular windows in each end. As one looked upon the
Deanery and the other upon the Bishop’s Palace, they were called
respectively the Dean’s Eye and the Bishop’s Eye. These nicknames appear
in the _Metrical Life of St. Hugh_, written between 1220 and 1225.

The =Dean’s Eye=, in the north end, dates from about 1220. Here we have
not only exquisite tracery, but splendid glass of the Thirteenth
Century.

     “It represents the Church on Earth and the Church in Heaven. In the
     centre is our Saviour seated in the midst of the Blessed in Heaven.
     Around are four large compartments, containing portions of
     different subjects, which do not appear to have all originally
     belonged to their present positions. The most interesting is that
     shewing the translation of the relics of St. Hugh, represented as
     borne on the shoulders of crowned and mitred personages. Of the
     sixteen outer circles, the topmost represents our Saviour seated on
     a rainbow; on either side are angels with the instruments of the
     Passion; in the next circles St. Peter and other saints are
     conducting holy persons to heaven; below these is the general
     Resurrection; the lowest five circles each contain the figure of an
     archbishop or bishop. The subjects can be best seen from the
     neighbouring triforium or from the passage which runs just beneath
     the window; it will be noticed that the glass in some of the
     compartments is much mutilated, as might naturally be expected,
     considering its antiquity. From below, the subjects are confused
     and not easy to distinguish, but the rich and harmonious blending
     of the colours can be seen to the fullest advantage, and the
     general effect is much finer. Rickman believes the form of the
     tracery to be quite unique in England, but states that there is a
     window exactly similar at Laon.”--(A. F. K.)

An arcade of seven lancet arches runs beneath the window. The wall
behind is pierced with windows filled with fragments of old glass. Two
larger lancet windows brighten each side of the doorway. They contain
fragments of old glass. The western one represents angels playing
musical instruments in the midst of foliage. The other window is filled
with geometrical patterns. The doorway leads into the Dean’s Porch.

The =Bishop’s Eye=, at the south and opposite end, is about a hundred
years later than its companion. It is Fourteenth Century and Decorated.

     “It is filled with delicate and beautiful flowing tracery, which
     has been compared to the fibres of a leaf. Rickman considers it to
     be the richest remaining example of its period. It is enclosed
     within a kind of arch formed by two rows of openwork quatrefoils;
     an open frame-work of a similar nature is often to be seen round
     circular windows in French cathedrals. The glass consists of
     fragments from other windows, chiefly of the Early English period.
     Although the pieces are placed quite at random, forming no subject
     whatever, yet the effect of the colouring is good, especially when
     seen from the opposite end of the transept. Of all the modern
     windows in the minster, with their elaborate subjects, it may
     safely be said that not one can be compared in effect with this
     mass of glowing colour.”--(A. F. K.)

The four lancet windows below contain Early English glass, collected
from various parts of the Cathedral.

Near the Bishop’s Eye =John de Dalderby’s= shrine was situated. This was
of “massey silver” incrusted with diamonds and rubies. John de Dalderby,
Bishop of Lincoln from 1300 to 1320, was reverenced as a local saint.
Henry VIII. removed his altar-tomb, fragments of which may be seen near
the =Galilee Porch=, situated at the corner of the south arm of the
western transept, different in position to the Galilees of both Durham
and Ely. Lincoln’s was built about 1230 for the bishop’s state entrance.
The south and west ends are open; and it may, therefore, be entered from
either. Two enormous oak doors open from the east side into the
transept. The porch is vaulted and ornamented profusely with the
dog-tooth. The Perpendicular parapet running along the top of the porch
is, of course, a later addition.

Retracing our steps--no great hardship in a place of such beauty and
interest--we walk up the south-choir-aisle to the =Eastern Transept=,
where we have two semicircular chapels on the right hand, and on the
left the =Dean’s Chapel=. We are now at St. Hugh’s earliest work; and his
double arcading is again seen in the north wall leading to the
cloisters. Here also we find on two of the columns crockets that were
novelties at this period. They occur at Wells, the work of Jocelin. The
name of Dean’s Chapel is a misnomer--no one knows what it was used for
originally. It has been suggested that it was the original burial-place
of St. Hugh.

Two semicircular chapels also border the eastern side of the south end
of this transept, and the =Choristers’ Vestry= occupies the corresponding
corner to the Dean’s Chapel. A stone screen (Decorated) separates it
from the south aisle of St. Hugh’s Choir. The double arcading and
sculptured angels are constantly seen. Two other vestries lie beyond,
towards the south wall.

By means of an oak doorway, leading from the north wall of the eastern
transept, we enter a long, narrow passageway, with stone vaulting and
windows filled with tracery and glass. This takes us into the Cloisters,
for at Lincoln these secluded

[Illustration: LINCOLN: EAST WINDOW]

[Illustration: SOUTHWELL FROM NORTH-WEST]

walks lie on the north instead of the usual south side of the Cathedral.

Only three walks remain of the original constructions dating from the
end of the Thirteenth Century. The fourth walk (north) was replaced by a
colonnade, designed by Sir Christopher Wren, in 1674, whose uncle was
Bishop of Lincoln at that time.

From the east walk of the Cloister we enter the =Chapter-House=, which
dates from the early Thirteenth Century. It is a decagon, with two
lancet windows in each bay. First, on entering, we note the massive
central column with its ten Purbeck marble shafts banded together in the
middle. The Chapter-House has been restored, but it has not suffered.
The glass in the windows is modern. The arcade running below the windows
is ornamented with shafts of Purbeck marble, foliaged capitals, and a
great display of the dog-tooth. The stone vault is later than the rest
of the room and is very graceful.

Many fine views can be had of the East Front. The splendid Decorated
window is always the most conspicuous object. The window above it is
also Decorated and nearly fills the gable. In the trefoil over the top
circle is a figure of the Virgin. The richly crocketed pyramids of the
turrets on either side make a beautiful effect. The aisle windows are
separated from the big window by bold buttresses. Around the base runs
the arcade that we constantly find at Lincoln. The Chapter-House with
its sharply-pointed pyramidal roof groups beautifully with the rest of
the Cathedral.

Next we look at the =Angel Choir=, with its crocketed gables and
pinnacles, its elaborate tracery, and panelled buttresses that divide
it into five bays. Grotesque figures project from all of these gables.
One represents an =Imp on the back of a Witch=. Large windows with rich
tracery fill the wall spaces here.

Next we reach the beautiful =South Doorway= with the =Russell= and =Longland
chantries= (Perpendicular) on either side.

     “It was probably constructed, like the Galilee doorway, as a state
     entrance for the bishop. The porch fills the third bay, and
     projects as far as the buttresses; its sides recede inwards to the
     pair of doors giving access to the Angel Choir. Although the
     doorways of our cathedrals, as a rule, cannot in any way be
     compared with the magnificent portals to be seen in France, yet
     this single example of Lincoln would be quite enough to prove that
     English architects were capable of designing a really magnificent
     doorway. In the tympanum is the subject of the Last Judgment in
     relief. The archivolt is richly decorated with sculpture. In the
     inner band is a row of niches with twelve seated figures,
     apparently kings and queens: next a double band of delicate
     open-work foliage; outside this a row of sixteen slender standing
     figures enclosed by interlacing stems, richly decorated with
     foliage. The doorway is formed of two cinquefoiled arches,
     separated by a central pillar having the canopy and base for a
     figure of the Virgin, which has been removed. On either side of the
     doorway is a triple canopy for statues, and behind this a row of
     slender columns with foliated capitals.”--(A. F. K.)

Next come St. Hugh’s two semicircular chapels, and then St. Hugh’s
transept, slender and filled with so many windows that the wall space is
nearly taken up by them. On top of each of the two turrets, surmounted
by pyramidal roofs, stands an angel. Next comes the =Canon’s Vestry= and
then the western transept with the conspicuous =Bishop’s Eye=. We pause to
admire this beautiful window from the outside and then look above it at
the horizontal band of seven elaborately carved quatrefoils. Above this
again is a Fourteenth Century window with flowing tracery. Around the
gable runs a border of open Gothic tracery. The peak bears a cross.

Next comes the =Nave=, the seven bays of which are separated by
buttresses. Over the roof of the aisle flying buttresses are thrown. A
slender buttress also separates the windows of the aisle. The clerestory
windows are in groups of three. Over the clerestory is a wavy parapet of
the Fourteenth Century, where stand canopied niches for statues.
Grotesque figures project from their bases. Grotesque figures also
project from the crocketed roofs of the pinnacles of the great transept.

The chapel, used as the Consistory Court, follows with two windows
facing south and two east. On the east end of the latter, in front of
the windows, our eyes are arrested by the grotesque =Devil Looking over
Lincoln=. The sculptured figures near by are pilgrims. Next comes =St.
Hugh’s Chapel=, or the Ringers’ Chapel, with one window facing the south.

From the road at the north-east corner we get a good general view of the
Cathedral and the Chapter-House. St. Hugh’s transept is hidden, but we
can see the end of the western transept with the =Dean’s Eye=--the large
quatrefoil encircled by sixteen small circles. The lancet window of five
lights in the gable above it is also visible.

The second bay on the north side of the Angel Choir contains the =Fleming
Chantry=, on which the two chapels on the south side were modelled. Then
we come to the north doorway of the =Angel= =Choir=, corresponding to the
more ornate entrance on the south.

We have now completed our survey of the Cathedral and have not yet
noticed the =Central Tower=, considered by many critics the finest tower
in England. It rises to a height of 271 feet. Two lofty windows adorn
each side of the upper story with their crocketed pillars and canopied
heads. Octagonal panelled turrets, surmounted by pinnacles, ornament the
four corners. Grosseteste’s lattice-work pattern covers the lower part
within and without. The tower in its present state dates from 1775, when
James Essex built the parapet and advised battlements and pinnacles
instead of a spire. The tall spire of timber, coated with lead, that
completed the tower of 1311, was blown down in 1547, carrying the
parapet with it; and again in 1715 three of the pinnacles were blown
down and replaced in 1728. In 1883 the western side was damaged by a
storm, but was repaired. Here “Great Tom of Lincoln,” the fourth largest
bell in England (5 tons, 8 cwt.), seven feet in diameter, hangs. Too
large to ring, the hours are struck on it with a hammer.

The original =Great Tom= hung in the north-west tower.

     “It is not known how it was acquired; some say it was a gift,
     others say it was stolen from the Abbey of Beauchief, Derbyshire,
     or from Peterborough. The origin of its name, too, has been a
     subject of dispute. Stukeley considered it possible that it had
     been consecrated to St. Thomas of Canterbury. Others think it took
     its name from that of the old bell of Christ Church, Oxford, which
     bore the curious inscription, _In Thomae laude, resono Bim Bom sine
     fraude_. It should be remembered that Oxford was in the diocese of
     Lincoln in olden days, and that several Bishops of Lincoln were
     chancellors of Oxford. Wherever the first ‘Great Tom’ came from,
     it was recast in the minster yard by two bell founders from
     Nottingham and Leicester early in the Seventeenth Century, when the
     weight was increased from 8,743 pounds to 9,894½ pounds. ‘The
     bell was cast and hung upp and upon Sonday the xxvij of this month
     [January, 1611] ronge owte and all safe and well.’ It was tolled
     until 1802, when it was found that this process shook the tower too
     much. The following extract from the _Stamford Mercury_ of the 6th
     August, 1802, is given by North in his ‘Church Bells of
     Lincolnshire’:--‘Great Tom o’ Lincoln is to be rung no more! The
     full swing of four tons and a half is found to injure the tower
     where he hangs. He has therefore been chained and riveted down; so
     that instead of the full mouthful he has been used to send forth,
     he is enjoined in future merely to wag his tongue.’ Towards the end
     of the year 1827 experienced ears detected that something was
     wrong, and by Christmas it became plainly evident that the bell was
     cracked. It was finally decided to have it recast in a larger size.
     For this purpose it was broken to pieces with its own clapper, and
     sent to London. To provide the extra metal, the six Lady Bells were
     unfortunately sacrificed. The cathedral thus lost the distinction
     of being the only one in the kingdom possessed of two rings of
     bells. ‘Great Tom’ was recast by Thomas Mears at the Whitechapel
     Bell foundry on the 15th November, 1834. It was taken by road to
     Lincoln, drawn by eight horses, and raised to its new position in
     the central tower. Two new quarter bells, cast at the same time,
     were also hung in this tower. The number of quarter bells was
     increased in 1880 to four.”--(A. F. K.)

The six “Lady Bells,” referred to above, hung in this central tower (see
page 294). When they were removed in 1834 it was seen that four were
dated 1593; one, 1633; and one, 1737.

In the Thirteenth Century the =Minster Yard=, as many still call the
Cathedral Close, was enclosed by a wall. Several massive gates formed
the entrances. Of these the =Exchequer=, a large archway, with a postern
on each side and an upper story, remains at the western end. =Pottergate
Arch=, at the top of the new road, shows us what an early Fourteenth
Century single gate was like. Near it the =Grecian Stairs= lead up to the
Close.




SOUTHWELL

DEDICATION: ST. MARY.

CHIEF FEATURE: CHAPTER-HOUSE.


For many centuries the Church of St. Mary, Southwell, was under the
dominion of York. The clergy had many privileges, held property, lived
in their own houses, like country gentlemen, and hunted in the forests
which Robin Hood and his merry men had made romantic; for Southwell is
not far from legendary Sherwood.

The church became a Cathedral in 1884. It dates in the main from the
Twelfth Century, though a few fragments are older. It is supposed that
the first Saxon church was destroyed by the Danes; the next is said to
have been built by King Edgar in 960; and in the time of Henry I. was
rebuilt in the Norman style. Walter de Grey, Archbishop of York (see
page 264), rebuilt the nave of Southwell, and was assisted by John
Romeyn, subdean (see page 264).

     “In the Curvilinear Period (1315-1360) was erected quite the
     loveliest choir-screen in England; next comes that of Lincoln,
     evidently by the same hand. Eastern and western sides are entirely
     different in design; on the western side the artist parts
     reluctantly with the beautiful geometrical design of the Thirteenth
     Century; on the eastern side he accepts unreservedly the reign of
     the ogee arch. Magnificent sedilia and stone stalls of similar
     character were erected, which only survive in part. Very beautiful,
     too, is the cusping of the reticulated windows inserted in the
     north transept chapel. The upper parts of the Chapter-House and the
     north transept chapel also were remodelled in the Curvilinear
     Period. For two hundred years and more, the highest and best of
     Mediæval art found cultivated and wealthy patrons in the canons of
     Southwell. Norman, Lancet, Geometrical, Curvilinear work are all
     seen here at their best. Few of our cathedrals, from the point of
     view either of architectural design or sculptural detail, can be
     mentioned in the same breath with Southwell. It is one of the
     greatest delights of Southwell that this lovely minster is little
     known and almost unvisited: one feels as if one were ‘the first
     that ever burst into the silent sea’!”--(F. B.)

The general appearance of the Cathedral is Norman.

     “The WEST FRONT has been altered in character from its original
     Norman work. We see a huge Perpendicular window with an embattled
     parapet over it, an alteration made in the Fifteenth Century. The
     windows in the lower stages of the towers are modern imitations of
     Norman work. The towers have seven stages and the sixth is enriched
     with fine arcading composed of intersecting arches. The present
     spires are modern imitations of the originals destroyed by fire in
     1711. These were immediately restored but removed in 1802, and have
     now again been replaced. The old Norman doorway is remarkably fine.
     It has five orders, the zigzag and the filleted edge roll being the
     chief mouldings.

     “Passing to the south side we see the walls of the nave pierced by
     apparent Norman windows, but these are modern imitations. The most
     western window in the north side is the only original Norman
     window; the rest are copied from it, and were erected in 1847. Four
     Perpendicular windows were inserted in the Fifteenth Century. There
     is a row of small square windows above which light the triforium,
     and the clerestory has a curious series of circular windows which
     are unique in this country. The roof is high-pitched, having been
     erected in modern times by the architect Christian, and the
     parapets are Perpendicular in style. The south doorway should be
     noticed, of Norman workmanship with zigzag string-course over
     it.”--(P. H. D.)

The Choir is Early English and much resembles that of Lincoln. The
dog-tooth is very evident. The windows are lancet. The two
flying-buttresses on the south were added in the Decorated period.

The Chapter-House is on the north, and its similarity to that of York
will strike every one who has seen the _flos florum_ of the great
Minster of the north. It is supposed the same architect (probably John
Romeyn) designed both. This is octagonal. The windows are of three
lights, with trefoil and circular ones in the heads. The roof is modern.

The North porch is much admired. The inner doorway has a zigzag and
beak-head moulding. In the parvise above (very unusual in a porch of
this date), the wife of William Clay, a hunted Royalist, was hidden
during the Civil War. Here her child was born.

We enter by the west door and gain a view of the =Nave=.

     “Looking down the nave (1110-1150) we are impressed by the massive
     appearance of the interior. The piers are rather short, only 19
     feet high, six on each side, with square bases and round capitals.
     The triforium is large, and above is the clerestory with its unique
     plain circular windows. The Norman mouldings, zigzag, billet,
     hatchet, etc., are easily recognized. The present roof was erected
     in 1881. The Font, erected in 1661, is a poor substitute for the
     one destroyed by the soldiers of Cromwell. The Pulpit is modern.
     The second pillar from the east on the south side is called Pike’s
     Pillar, and retains faint traces of a mural painting of the
     Annunciation; the nave aisles have some good vaulting. A plain
     stone bench runs along the walls. This was common in old churches
     and was the origin of the saying ‘Let the weakest go to the wall,’
     where they could sit and rest, as the days of pews were not yet.
     The only original Norman window which remains is at the west end of
     the north aisle.”--(P. H. D.)

The =Transepts= are Norman. At the east end of each the original plan
included an apsidal chapel. The south transept still retains the arch
with its zigzag and cable mouldings that connected it with the transept.
The chapel at the east end of the north transept has also gone, but here
we find on its site a Late Early English construction, with still later
windows (Decorated). In the upper floor the Library is situated.

The =Tower= is Norman, built in 1150. A cable moulding runs around the
four large arches. It contains a peal of bells.

     “A stone screen of rich Decorated work separates the transept from
     the choir, over which is now the organ (a modern instrument). The
     screen is richly ornamented, and a noble specimen of the work of
     the period. There are three arches opening to the space beneath the
     tower, separated by slight piers of clustered shafts, the capitals
     carved with foliage of a Late Decorated character. The walls of the
     screen support the old rood-loft, access to which is gained by two
     staircases.

     “Entering the Choir we see on each side of the doorway three
     prebendal stalls with _misereres_, on which are carved some
     foliage. The Bishop’s Stall was once occupied by Cardinal Wolsey.
     The choir was built by Archbishop Grey in Early English style
     (1230-1250). There are six arches, with piers of eight clustered
     shafts. The dogtooth moulding is conspicuous in the arches and on
     the vaulting of the roof. It will be noticed that the triforium and
     clerestory are blended together. The east window consists of two
     rows of lancets, the lower ones containing old glass brought from
     Paris in 1815, where it was formerly in the Chapel of the Knights
     Templar. The Baptism of Our Lord; Raising of Lazarus (Francis I. is
     to be seen in a crimson cap); Christ entering Jerusalem (Luther is
     near Our Lord, Louis XI. and the Duke of Orleans); the Mocking of
     Our Lord (the figure of Dante appears).

     “The Sedilia were erected in 1350 and are good Decorated

[Illustration: SOUTHWELL: CHAPTER-HOUSE AND DOOR]

[Illustration: PETERBOROUGH: WEST FRONT]

     work. They have the unusual number of five seats on the same level.
     The arches are ogee-shaped and are richly carved. The sculptured
     figures are remarkable, and represent the Creation and the
     Redemption. Beginning at the east we see the Father holding the
     world (two groups uncertain), Joseph’s Dream, the Nativity and
     Flight into Egypt.

     “The Lectern belonged to the monks of Newstead Abbey, who threw it
     into the lake to hide it from the commissioners of Henry VIII. Its
     date is about 1500.”--(P. H. D.)

Entering a beautiful doorway in the north-choir-aisle we pass through a
vestibule into the =Chapter-House=.

     “The transition between the Early English work of the choir and the
     Decorated style of the Chapter-House is very gradual. The doorway,
     with its two arches and shafts of Purbeck marble, is remarkably
     fine. There is a small cloister court, with a stone-covered well.
     In the vestibule we see the walls covered with beautiful arcading
     of lancet arches of an Early English character. The capitals are
     beautifully carved with foliage. There is a curious boss of
     sculpture representing a secular priest shaking the regular monk by
     the hair, which figuratively depicts the supremacy of the former in
     the church of Southwell.

     “The Chapter-House (1285-1300) is described by Ruskin as ‘the gem
     of English architecture,’ and all architects agree in singing the
     praises of this noble building. It much resembles that of York, but
     is smaller and perhaps more beautiful. It is octagonal, has no
     central pillar, and is remarkable for its fine sculpture. The
     historian of Southwell says: ‘The foliage everywhere is most
     beautiful: the oak, the vine, the maple, the white-thorn, the rose,
     with a vast variety of other plants, are sculptured with exquisite
     freedom and delicacy; and no two capitals, or bosses or spandrels
     are found alike. Everywhere we meet, in ever-changing and
     ever-charming variety, with some fresh object of interest and
     admiration. Figures are introduced amid the foliage, heads with
     branches issuing out of their mouths, birds and lizard-like
     monsters. In the capitals a man reclines beneath a tree, puffing
     lustily at a horn, or a goat is gnawing the leaves, or a bird
     pecking the berries, or a pair of pigs are grunting up the acorns,
     or a brace of hounds just grabbing a hare. All this is the work of
     no mere chiseller of stone, but of a consummate artist; than whom
     it may be doubted whether any sculptor of any age or country ever
     produced anything more life-like and exquisitely graceful.’ The
     entrance doorway is remarkably fine and is worthy of close study.
     The main arch is divided into two by a slender shaft, and over them
     is a quatrefoiled circle of beautiful design. The leaf ornament is
     largely used, both in the smaller arches and in the main arch.
     Filleted rounds and hollows are the other mouldings used.”--(P. H.
     D.)




PETERBOROUGH

DEDICATION: ST. PETER. CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.

SPECIAL FEATURES: THE WEST FRONT; THE NEW BUILDING.


The great fenland monastery of St. Peter, the holy house of
Medeshampstead, attracting houses around it, grew into a borough, and
finally into a city--Peterborough. The village was first called
Medeshampstead--homestead in the meadows. For centuries the settlement
had no interests outside the monastery. In the Seventh Century Penda,
King of Mercia, and his family were converted to Christianity, and it
was his son Penda who founded the monastery here in 654. The first
monastery was destroyed by the Danes in 870. It lay in ruins for a
hundred years. With the religious revival under Duncan and King Edgar,
the holy house of Medeshampstead was rebuilt by Bishop Ethelwold, of
Winchester, and henceforth known as the Burgh.

The foundations of the old Saxon church still remain under the east wall
of the south transept. It is related that when King Edgar visited the
monastery and saw some old deeds he wept for joy on reading the
privileges of the place and granted a new charter renewing and
confirming these. The church seems to have been, even in those days,
dedicated to St. Peter. The Abbey flourished for a time; then it was
plundered by Hereward, the Saxon leader, and suffered also from fire
while the monks were carousing. In the time of Henry I. a great fire
destroyed the whole building. The picturesque imagination of the period
attributed it to a servant, who, trying unsuccessfully to light a fire
in the bakehouse, lost his temper and called upon Satan for aid, crying
“_Veni, Diabole, et insuffla ignem._”

John de Sais, who was then Abbot (1114-1125), began the building of a
new minster, the one that we now see. As usual the work was begun at the
east end. The choir was finished with an apse. A small apse also
terminated each choir-aisle. The whole church was in progress of
building for eighty years. This was all Norman work of course.

The western transept, dating from the close of the Twelfth and beginning
of the Thirteenth Century, shows a change.

     “The Norman style was giving place to the lighter and more elegant
     architecture of the Early English period, the round arch was
     beginning to be superseded by the pointed arch, and the massive
     ornamentation which marks the earlier style was displaced by the
     conventional foliage that soon came to be very generally employed.
     Most wisely, however, the Peterborough builders made their work at
     the west end of the nave intentionally uniform with what was
     already built. Very numerous indications of this can be seen by
     careful observers. The bases of the western pillars, the change in
     the depth of the mouldings, characteristic changes in the capitals
     in the triforium range, and especially the grand arches below the
     transept towers, which are pointed but enriched with ornamentation
     of pronounced Norman character, all point to the later date of this
     western transept.

     “At the west wall of the church all trace of Norman work
     disappears. The arcade near the ground, the large round arch above
     the door, the great west window and its adjacent arches (not, of
     course, including the late tracery), are all of distinct Early
     English character. The whole of this wall may be held to be an
     integral part of the west front, and not of the transept which it
     bounds.

     “When we come to the most distinctive feature of the cathedral, the
     glorious west front, we find we have no help whatever from the
     chronicles. Nowhere is there the smallest reference to its
     building. Other works raised by the Abbots of the period are named,
     but the noble western portico is never once mentioned.”--(W. D. S.)

According to Matthew Paris the church was dedicated in 1238 by the
Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Grosseteste.

In the Thirteenth Century many changes were made. The bell-tower was
built, and bells from London, called _Les Londreis_, were hung in it.
The Lady-Chapel (now destroyed) was built in 1272 at the east of the
north transept (as at Ely).

In the Fourteenth Century the great round east and west arches of the
central tower were changed into pointed ones, perhaps because the tower
at Ely had fallen in 1321 and the monks wanted to strengthen theirs.
Then they began to change all the triforium windows in the nave and
choir from Norman to Decorated. Next, the central porch was added to the
west front. During the Perpendicular period all the Norman windows that
had not been altered were now filled with Perpendicular tracery; the
great west window was also brought up to date, the battlements were
added to the corner turrets, and the New Building tacked on to the East
End of the choir.

A popular story related that Henry VIII. spared the church because his
queen, Katherine of Aragon, was buried there. At any rate, he made
Peterborough a cathedral in 1541, when he suppressed the monasteries.

The great historical event in connection with Peterborough was the
burial of Mary, Queen of Scots, in 1587.

Cromwell’s soldiers made sad havoc. Dean Patrick informs us that

     “The next day after their arrival, early in the morning they break
     open the church doors, pull down the organs of which there were two
     pair.

     “Then the soldiers enter the quire, and their first business was to
     tear in pieces all the common prayer-books that could be found.
     Next they break down all the seats, stalls and wainscot that was
     behind them, being adorned with several historical passages out of
     the Old Testament.

     “Now behind the communion-table there stood a curious piece of
     stone-work, admired much by strangers and travellers: a stately
     skreen it was, well wrought, painted and gilt, which rose up as
     high almost as the roof of the church, in a row of three lofty
     spires, with other lesser spires growing out of them. This now had
     no imagery work upon it, or anything else that might justly give
     offence, and yet because it bore the name of the high altar, was
     pulled down with ropes, lay’d low and level with the ground.

     “Over this place, in the roof of the church, in a large oval yet to
     be seen, was the picture of Our Saviour seated on a throne; one
     hand erected and holding a globe in the other, attended with the
     four Evangelists and saints on each side, with crowns in their
     hands, intended, I suppose, for a representation of Our Saviour’s
     coming to judgment. This was defaced and spoilt by the discharge of
     muskets.

     “Then they rob and rifle the tombs and violate the monuments of the
     dead....

     “When they had thus demolished the chief monuments, at length the
     very gravestones and marbles on the floor did not escape their
     sacrilegious hands. For where there was anything on them of
     sculptures or inscriptions in brass, these they force and tear off.

     “Having thus done their work on the floor below, they are now at
     leisure to look up at the windows above.

     “Now the windows of this church were very fair, being adorned and
     beautified with several historical passages out of Scripture and
     ecclesiastical story; such were those in the body of the church, in
     the aisles, in the New Building, and elsewhere. But the cloister
     windows were most famed of all, for their great art and pleasing
     variety. One side of the quadrangle containing the history of the
     Old Testament; another, that of the New; a third, the founding and
     founders of the church; a fourth, all the kings of England
     downwards from the first Saxon king. All which notwithstanding were
     most shamefully broken and destroyed. Yea, to encourage them the
     more in this trade of breaking and battering windows down, Cromwell
     himself (as ’twas reported) espying a little crucifix in a window
     aloft, which none perhaps before had scarce observed, gets a ladder
     and breaks it down zealously with his own hand.

     “Thus, in a short time, a fair and goodly structure was quite
     stript of all its ornamental beauty, and made a ruthful spectacle,
     a very chaos of desolation and confusion, nothing scarce remaining
     but only bare walls, broken seats and shattr’d windows on every
     side.”--(P.)

The old story of neglect--“scarce any cathedral in England is more
neglected,” wrote Browne Willis in 1742--is told of Peterborough in the
Eighteenth Century; but in 1764-1791 Dean Tarrant collected all the
fragments of stained glass and inserted them in the two central windows
of the apse. They deal chiefly with scenes in the life of St. Peter. The
late history of the Cathedral is only that of repairs, restorations, and
gifts.

We enter the Minster Precincts by the western gateway, built by Abbot
Benedict, in the Norman style, in the Twelfth Century. It was altered at
the end of the Fourteenth Century. The approach is monastic in the
extreme. The room over the gate was once the Chapel of St. Nicholas.
After passing through this gate, on the left hand we see all that
remains of the Chapel of St. Thomas of Canterbury (Fourteenth Century).
The various gateways, doors, arcades, and remains of ancient buildings
harmonize well with the venerable and elegant Cathedral.

     “A fine view of the best feature of Peterborough, the west front,
     is immediately opened with a foreground of smooth turf. The great
     portico, with its three arches, eighty feet high, of pure Early
     English style, is unlike anything else in England, and inspires
     universal surprise and admiration. It was built on the old Norman
     church, but does not actually touch the western walls.

     “The spires of the portico are of different sizes and designs. The
     northern does not group well with the transeptal tower behind it,
     and there is a certain confusion to the eye when so many towers are
     in our view. The southern transeptal tower was never carried above
     the roof. The central tower over the choir after being repeatedly
     repaired and restored, fell in 1884, destroying the interior
     fittings and stalls, but, on the whole, doing less damage than
     might have been expected. The tower has been rebuilt, but not to
     the old pattern, and the four corner turrets have
     disappeared.”--(W. J. L.)

The =West Front=, with its three magnificent doorways and original wooden
doors, was the work of Abbots Zachary and Robert of Lindsay (about 1200
to 1222).

     “Immediately before us we see the noble West Front ‘the pride and
     glory of Peterborough,’ the finest portico in Europe. With the
     exception of the porch, the style is pure Early English. On the
     north and south are two lofty turrets, flanked at the angles with
     clustered shafts, and crowned with spires. Between these are three
     pointed arches, supported by clustered shafts, six on each side
     with foliated capitals. The central arch is narrower than the rest,
     but its mouldings are ornamented with crockets and dog-tooth. A
     string-course runs along the top of the arches, and the spandrels
     have trefoils, quatrefoils and niches with statues. Above the
     string-course is a series of trefoiled arches, some of which have
     statues. Between the three gables are pinnacles much ornamented.
     The gables have circular windows of beautiful design and a cross
     on the apex; they are ornamented with dog-tooth and have niches
     with statues--St. Peter in the centre, with SS. John and Andrew on
     either side. The turrets on the north and south have six stages
     panelled with arches. The spires are good examples of the
     difference between those of the Early Decorated and Perpendicular
     periods. The south spire is connected with the pinnacles of the
     tower by clustered pinnacles springing from an arch; these are
     decorated with crockets, and the spire belongs to the early
     Fourteenth Century; whereas the spire on the north has no such
     connection and is Early Perpendicular.

     “We now notice the Porch with the parvise over it. This was built
     late in the Fourteenth Century in order to give additional strength
     to the west front and act as a kind of buttress to the piers of the
     central arch. The design is very beautiful. The entrance has an
     obtuse arch, and above a Perpendicular window with elliptical arch.
     Buttresses empanelled with niches stand on each side. It has a
     stone vault of good design. One boss is curious, representing the
     Trinity. The attitude of the Saviour shows that the figure was
     designed by a freemason, and bears witness to the antiquity of that
     fraternity. The parvise is now a library.”--(P. H. D.)

In the latter years of the Fourteenth Century the central porch, with
its upper room, =Parvise=, was added between the two middle piers of the
west front. It has been regarded by some critics as a blemish and by
others as an improvement, but it was probably a necessity for the
purpose of extra stability.

     “The construction of this elegant little edifice is extremely
     scientific, especially in the matter in which the thrust is
     distributed through the medium of the side turrets so as to fall
     upon the buttresses in front. These turrets being erected against
     one side of the triangular columns, on the right and the left hand,
     support them in two directions at once, viz., from collapsing
     towards each other, and from falling forward. The latter pressure
     is thrown wholly upon the buttresses in front, which project seven
     feet beyond the base of the great pillars.”--(F. A. P.)

Turning now to a description:

     “It is vaulted in two bays, the first being of the same dimensions
     as the inner width of the portico; the western bay (of the same
     size) thus reaches beyond the two great piers and the corner
     turrets and buttresses in all project about seven feet. This gives
     a very substantial support to the piers. The whole composition is
     very fine, and quite worthy of the great portico to which it is an
     adjunct. It must be left to each spectator to decide for himself if
     it improves or diminishes the effect of the whole. It is of late
     Decorated date, highly enriched with profuse carving. The staircase
     turrets, as well as the great window, are embattled. The spaces
     north and south, and within the portico, have tracery on the walls
     similar to the window. The groining is very fine. One of the
     central bosses has a representation of the Trinity. The Father is
     represented as the Ancient of Days, with a Dove for the Holy Spirit
     above the shoulder and the figure of the Saviour on the Cross in
     front. Freemasons are recommended to look for a special symbol
     which they alone can understand and appreciate. The floor of the
     portico is paved with gravestones, some apparently in their
     original position. The place was at one time appropriated as a
     burial-place for the Minor Canons.”--(W. D. S.)

This porch hides the fine central doorway, which is divided by a central
pillar. A Benedictine monk tortured by demons--probably a hint to the
brothers--is carved upon it.

     “With a few exceptions, the whole of the interior of the Cathedral
     is in the Norman style, and many judge it to be the most perfect
     specimen in England. The plan consists of a nave of ten bays, with
     aisles and a western transept; transepts of four bays, terminating
     in an apse, nearly semicircular, with aisles; and beyond the apse a
     large square-ended addition for more chapels having a groined
     stone-roof of fan-tracery, now known as the New Building. The
     ritual choir, as distinguished from the architectural choir,
     extends two bays into the nave. This arrangement is a return to the
     ancient one used by the Benedictines, the choir in Dean Monk’s
     alterations having been limited to the position east of the central
     tower.

     “As we enter at the west door we see at a glance the entire length
     and the whole beauty of the admirable proportion of the several
     parts. While many may wish that the great arches of the tower which
     can be seen from the west end had never been altered from the round
     form of the Norman builders, few will regret that the Decorated
     arches which took their place were retained when the tower was
     rebuilt, instead of having new arches in the Norman style
     substituted. The want of colour which is so marked a defect in many
     English cathedrals is not so conspicuous here, because of the
     painted ceiling.”--(W. D. S.)

There is no Norman work at the west wall. The great doorway has a round
arch, but the arcade at the base consists of pointed arches. The
mouldings here are Early English; and it is inside an Early English arch
that the =West Window= of Perpendicular tracery is set. We may note that
the glass is modern and a memorial to officers and soldiers who were
killed in the South African War.

The =West Transept= extends beyond the aisles. The enormous pointed arches
have Norman mouldings. In the south end is a =Font= of the Thirteenth
Century; the north end is a vestry.

     “As we enter we notice the distinctive character of the Norman work
     of which this Cathedral is a notable and excellent example. In the
     extreme west there is a blending of the two styles of Norman and
     Early English, but the monks of Peterborough clung tenaciously to
     their old ideas and to Norman and Romanesque models, and right up
     to the end of the Twelfth Century built in this style, not from any
     desire to imitate the work of their predecessors (as some writers
     assert), but from an obstinate adherence to conservative tradition.
     Even when the glorious tide of English Gothic was rising, and they
     could no longer resist the flood, they clung to the old zigzag
     mouldings. It is evident from the construction of the third column
     that they intended to end their church there; but happily the
     Thirteenth Century brethren decided to rear the noble twin-towered
     front and the perfect portico. Some of the later columns show
     Transition work; on one side we see a Norman base or capital, on
     the other an Early English.

     “There is a grand uninterrupted view of the whole length of the
     Cathedral from west to east. It will be observed that the lower
     arch is Decorated, and this adds to the beauty of this view. Before
     leaving the west we notice some dog-tooth carved in wood, which is
     somewhat rare.”--(P. H. D.)

The =Nave= consists of ten bays, with Norman arches. The triforium arches
are Norman; the clerestory windows are Perpendicular. The ceiling is
very peculiar and very interesting, and is, moreover, original Norman.

     “All agree that the style of the painting is perfectly
     characteristic of the period. The divisions are of the lozenge
     shape; in each lozenge of the central line is a figure, and in each
     alternate one of the sides. The middle set has more elongated
     lozenges than the others. The borders are black and white, with
     some coloured lines, in odd zigzag patterns. The figures, which are
     mostly seated, are very quaint and strange. Some are sacred, some
     grotesque. We can see St. Peter with the keys, kings, queens and
     minstrels; we find also a head with two faces, a monkey riding
     backwards on a goat, a human figure with head and hoof of an ass, a
     horse playing a harp, a winged dragon, a dancing lion, an eagle,
     and other curious devices.”--(W. D. S.)

The =Choir= begins with the two east bays of the nave (the same
arrangement occurs at Norwich), and runs through the space under the
tower and

[Illustration: PETERBOROUGH: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: PETERBOROUGH: SOUTH]

takes up four bays east of the tower. The piers are alternately round
and polygonal.

     “This portion was the earliest part of the Cathedral, and was
     constructed by Abbot de Sais (1114-1125). The hatchet moulding is
     conspicuous. The triforium arches are double like the nave, and the
     clerestory has triple arches, the centre one being the highest. The
     apse is particularly fine. The Decorated style is evident in the
     windows, which were inserted in the Fourteenth Century instead of
     the old Norman ones, and the hanging tracery of graceful design was
     then added. The roof of the choir is late Fourteenth Century work
     except at the east end where the roof is flat. Here Cromwell’s
     soldiers discharged their muskets at the figure of our Lord in
     glory, which they deemed to be an idol. This ceiling was decorated
     in 1884 by Sir Gilbert Scott. The bosses of the rest of the roof
     are curious. Nearly all the old glass was destroyed in the Puritan
     desecration; the remaining fragments have been placed in the two
     highest east windows. The fittings of the choir are modern except
     an ancient lectern of Fifteenth Century date, given by Abbot Ramsay
     and Prior Malden, as the inscription testifies, though it is now
     scarcely legible. The choir-stalls are remarkably fine. The carved
     figures contain a history of the Cathedral written in wood.”--(P.
     H. D.)

Passing behind the High Altar we come to the Retro-Choir, or =New
Building=:

     “The New Building built beyond the apse is a very noble specimen of
     late Perpendicular work. It was begun by Abbot Richard Ashton
     (1438-1471) and completed by Abbot Robert Kirton (1496-1528): the
     works seem to have been suspended between these periods. The roof
     has the beautiful fan tracery, very similar on a small scale to
     that at King’s College Chapel at Cambridge. The building is of the
     width of the choir and aisles together.

     “The junction of this addition with the original Norman apse is
     admirable, and should be specially noticed. Parts of the original
     external string-course of the apse can be seen. The ornamentation
     on the bosses of the roof and in the cavetto below the windows, and
     round the great arches from the choir aisles, is very varied.

     “It must be sufficient here to indicate some of the designs. Most
     need little explanation, but a few are hard to understand. On the
     roof may be seen the three lions of England, a cross between four
     martlets, three crowns each pierced by an arrow, and another
     design. The smaller designs include four-leaved flowers, Tudor
     roses, fleur-de-lys, the portcullis, some undescribable creatures,
     crossed keys, crossed swords, crossed crosiers, crosses, crowns,
     crowns pierced with arrows, crowned female head, an eagle, the head
     of the Baptist in a charger, an angel, mitres, three feathers
     rising from a crown, St. Andrew’s cross, and perhaps others. There
     are also some rebuses and some lettering. On the north wall, in six
     several scrolls, the letters AR before a church and a bird on a tun
     occur more than once. This certainly refers to Abbot Robert Kirton;
     but what the bird means is not clear. In the moulding over the
     large arch to the south choir are four sets of letters. They form
     the last verse of the psalter. The words are contracted: they stand
     for _Omnis spiritus laudet Dominum_.”--(W. D. S.)

The relic of greatest interest in the New Building is the famous =Monks’
Stone=, which, according to tradition, was constructed in commemoration
of the massacre of Abbot Hedda and his monks by the Danes in 870.
Critics are divided in opinion. Some think it Norman, but many accept
the theory that it is Saxon work. In 1887 remains were found of the
original Saxon church, which was sacked by the Danes, rebuilt and
visited by King Edgar and Dunstan. Traces of the fire that destroyed it
were also found. The east wall stood at the piers of the present south
transept.

Queen Katherine of Aragon was buried in the north-choir-aisle outside
the most eastern arch (1535). This was violated by the Puritans. Dean
Patrick says: “First they demolish Queen Katherine’s tomb; they break
down the rails that enclosed the place and take away the black velvet
pall which covered the hearse; overthrow the hearse itself, displace the
gravestone that lay over her body, and have left nothing now remaining
of that tomb, but only a monument of their own shame and villainy.” A
few slabs were recently found beneath the floor; and a marble stone
bearing coats-of-arms and inscription has lately been placed over this
spot.

In the south-choir-aisle a tablet tells us that here Mary Stuart was
buried in 1587, just within the choir. The body was removed to
Westminster Abbey in 1612. Remains of the hearse between the pillars
were seen as late as 1800. These royal arms and escutcheons were also
defaced and torn by the Puritans.

The =Transepts= are Norman, and characteristic Norman mouldings are
universal. A Perpendicular screen in each separates the transept from a
sort of eastern aisle, divided by pillars into chapels. In the =North
Transept= the two chapels of St. John and St. James have been thrown into
one--now the =Morning Chapel=. Some old Saxon coffin lids are preserved
here.

The chapels of St. Oswald, St. Benedict, and St. Kyneburga and St.
Kyneswitha still remain in the =South Transept=. West of the South
Transept we come to the old =Chapter-House= (very small), now a music
room. It is late Norman, but it has a Perpendicular doorway.

At the north-east corner of the close we come to the =Deanery Gateway=,
leading to the Deanery. It is a fine specimen of Late Perpendicular, and
was erected by Abbot Kirton (Kirkton), whose rebus (a church on a tun)
appears over the side-door. It has a Tudor arch, with the arms of the
See in spandrels, and is also ornamented with the Tudor rose and
portcullis and the Prince of Wales’s feathers. We gain here a very good
view of the north side of the Cathedral.

The north side is very fine. The arcading on the side of the tower is
identical with that on the west front. Next we must notice the big
windows of the western transept, early and fine specimens of cusped and
traceried windows. The jambs are very peculiar because one side is
Norman with square capitals, and the other side Early English. The arch
of the window reaches as high as those of the triforium. Above is a
round-headed window, and the gable, surmounted by a cross and bordered
with the wavy ornament, contains a rose-window. Pinnacles, resembling
those on the west front, adorn the sides of this west transept. The nave
rises in five stages: a tier of small lights separates the triforium
from the aisle.

The =Dean’s Door= on this side of the nave is Norman. The three shafts on
either side, with their cushion capitals, carry round arches with
characteristic and different mouldings. There are ten windows, very
broad, of five lights each, under depressed arches. They were inserted
in the Thirteenth Century. The parapet at the top is Early English.

The north transept has seven stages of windows (Perpendicular), and
blind arcades and a battlemented gable, flanked by octagonal turrets.

Here we gain a view of the lantern tower, rebuilt in 1884. Then we come
to the choir, and lastly to the =New Building=. The Decorated windows of
the apse are particularly fine.

     “The east end of Peterborough is rather peculiar. There remains the
     old Norman apse with Decorated windows inserted, and this is
     surrounded by what is called the New Building, though it is 400
     years old, formed by extending the walls of the choir and building
     a square end to the Cathedral. This was erected by Abbot Kirton.
     His work possesses the best features of Perpendicular style. It is
     richly ornamented and when we examine his work we cannot say that
     the glories of Gothic achievement had quite departed. We see the
     twelve buttresses, each terminated with a seated figure, usually
     said to be one of the Apostles.”--(P. H. D.)

Turning round the east end we come to the ruins of the Infirmary,
erected about 1260. Some fine arcading is still to be seen. Afterwards
we come to the =Slype=, once vaulted, but now open to the sky, which
formerly connected the Refectory with the Chapter-House, on the east
side of the =Cloister=. Only the south and west walls of the =Cloister
Court= remain. This is always called =Laurel Court=, though the origin is
unknown.

The south side of the Cathedral is more beautiful than the north, from
which it differs by having two doorways into the nave from the
cloisters, and a very fine south-west spire, early Fourteenth Century
work. A beautiful view of this spire and the bell-tower is obtained from
=Laurel Court=.




ELY

     DEDICATION: ST. ETHELREDA. CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: THE OCTAGON; GALILEE PORCH; LADY-CHAPEL; BISHOP
     ALCOCK’S CHAPEL; BISHOP WEST’S CHAPEL; MONK’S DOOR.


Ely is perhaps the most singular and beautiful of English cathedrals,
when seen from a distance; for the massive building, with its turrets,
buttresses, and pinnacles, rises with splendid majesty from the green
meads that make a perfect foreground.

     “The first glimpse of Ely overwhelms us, not only by its
     stateliness and variety of its outline, but by its utter
     strangeness, its unlikeness to anything else. Ely, with its vast
     single western tower, with its central octagon unlike anything else
     in the whole world, has an outline altogether peculiar to
     itself.”--(E. A. F.)

About 655 Etheldreda, daughter of the King of East Anglia, went to live
in the fen-land district, known as the Isle of Ely, that had come into
her possession according to the terms of her marriage settlement with
Tonbert, one of the noblemen of her father’s court. The civil government
of her territory she gave to a steward named Ovin, while she devoted
herself to good works. She was induced to marry Egfrid, son of Oswy,
King of Northumberland, who became king in 670. Etheldreda, wearied of
court life, became a nun; and when Egfrid determined to force her to
return to court she fled from Coldingham to the Isle of Ely, where she
established a religious house. She began to build in 673. The monastery
over which Etheldreda presided as abbess was a mixed community. Bede
calls it a nunnery. Etheldreda died in 679 and was buried, according to
her own request, in the nuns’ graveyard. Her body was, however, removed
into the church on October 17, 695. When the body was placed in a marble
sarcophagus it was found in perfect preservation, and miracles took
place. Two hundred years later the Danes ravaged Ely and destroyed the
monastery (870), which was rebuilt in 970 by King Edgar and Bishop
Ethelwold, of Winchester. The prior of Winchester, Brithnoth (970-981),
was appointed its first abbot. There were no nuns in the new monastery.

The monks of Ely educated Edward the Confessor, who had been offered on
this altar in infancy by his parents. After he became king he continued
his “favourable regard to the place.” His brother, Alfred, whose eyes
were put out by Earl Godwin, died and was buried in Ely. Ely was the
last stronghold of Hereward; and it took the monks a long time to make
their peace with the Conqueror. In order to raise enough money to
purchase forgiveness they were forced to sell almost every article of
gold and silver that they owned. Thurston, the last Saxon abbot
(1066-1072), remained in charge of the monastery until his death. When
Simeon, prior of Winchester, and brother of Walkelyn, Bishop of
Winchester, was made abbot in 1081, it was deemed necessary to build a
more sumptuous church. Simeon contributed a great part of his large
fortune. He began with the transepts; and built the central tower, often
called “Simeon’s Tower.”

Richard (1100-1107), a Norman, and relative of the king, finished the
east end in 1106. Two bays of the nave next to the tower were also his
work, and he continued Simeon’s Tower. During Richard’s rule the remains
of St. Etheldreda, St. Sexburga, St. Ermenilda, and St. Withburga, the
first four abbesses, were re-buried before the high altar.

In 1109 Ely was made a cathedral; but nothing seems to have been done to
the building until Bishop Riddell (1174-1189) “carried on the new work
and Tower at the west end of the church, almost to the top.”

Eustache (1198-1215), one of the bishops appointed to excommunicate King
John, built the celebrated =Galilee Porch= at the west end. He contributed
large sums out of his private fortune.

Hugh Norwold, or Northwold (1229-1254), built the six eastern bays of
the presbytery, and the palace. Again were the remains of St.
Etheldreda, St. Sexburga, St. Ermenilda, and St. Withburga removed to
this part of the church, and the Cathedral was dedicated in 1252. King
Henry III. and Prince Edward were present. When Bishop Norwold died
(1254), he was buried at the feet of St. Etheldreda. His monument was
removed to the north side of the presbytery, third arch from the east.

John Hotham (1316-1337) built the choir. It was during his bishopric
that the Tower fell, and he provided for the building of the wrecked
western bays.

The Fourteenth Century brings us to the greatest of all the Ely
builders, the supreme artist and architect, Alan de Walsingham,
sub-prior, sacrist, and finally prior. In 1321 he began the =Lady-Chapel=,
which was finished in 1349. Its position is

[Illustration: ELY: WEST TOWERS]

[Illustration: ELY: CHOIR, EAST]

peculiar--north-east of the north transept. Its site was chosen in all
probability because St. Etheldreda’s shrine occupied the sacred east
end. Walsingham’s great work, however, is the celebrated =Octagon=.

On the eve of St. Ermenilda’s Day, February 12, 1322, just after the
monks had finished matins, the central tower fell and destroyed three
bays of the choir. There was no wicked king in this case to blame for
the calamity, as was the case with the similar tower built by Simeon’s
brother at Winchester (see pages 55-56).

     “No one could possibly have been found in the whole kingdom better
     qualified to cope with the great disaster that took place at Ely in
     1322 than the officer of the house who had the special custody of
     the fabric. The originality and skill with which he designed and
     carried out the noble work that takes the place of the central
     tower, which is without a rival in the architecture of the whole
     world, are beyond all praise. The exquisite work in the Lady-Chapel
     would in itself have been sufficient to establish Walsingham’s
     reputation as an architect of the very highest order of merit; but
     it would have revealed nothing, if it stood alone, of the
     consummate constructive genius which he displayed in the conception
     of the octagon.

     “The building was begun as soon as the space was cleared. The
     stonework was finished in 1328, little more than six years after
     the tower fell. The woodwork of the vaulting and lantern took
     longer time; but this also was quite complete in 1342. Walsingham
     had become prior in the previous year. The weight of the lantern,
     it need hardly be said, is not borne, though it looks like it from
     below, by the vaulting that we see. There is a perfect forest of
     oak hidden from sight, the eight great angle posts being no less
     than 3 feet 4 inches by 2 feet 8 inches in section.

     “With such a man as Walsingham on the spot we cannot be wrong in
     assigning to him the authorship of all the architectural designs
     that were carried out in his lifetime. It is believed--for the
     date is not exactly known--that he died in 1364. Besides the
     Lady-Chapel and Octagon, he must have designed the singularly
     beautiful bays of the presbytery between the Octagon and
     Northwold’s work. The exquisite way in which the main
     characteristics of the Early English work are adapted to the
     Decorated style demands our highest admiration. The arrangement of
     the three western bays on each side is exactly like Northwold’s
     work, while the additional grace and beauty of ornamentation mark
     the advance in taste that distinguished the Decorated period.
     Bishop Hotham undertook the whole expense of rebuilding this
     portion of the cathedral. He did not live to see it completed, as
     he died in 1337, but he left money for the purpose.”--(W. D. S.)

Walsingham, though elected bishop by the monks, was not confirmed by the
Pope. However, when they placed the brass over his resting-place in
front of the choir they represented “The Flower of Craftsmen” (_Flos
operatorum_ was his epitaph), with mitre and crozier.

Ely suffered less than many churches during the Puritan wars.

The most important work of late years has been the restoration of the
octagon and lantern, as originally designed by Alan de Walsingham.

The great =West Tower= (Early English and Decorated) was built before the
Galilee Porch, about the last year of the Twelfth Century. It is
surmounted by an octagon with a window of three lights in each face. An
octagonal turret ornaments each corner. Windows and arcades mark each
story. A fine view of it is obtained from the south side.

The =Galilee Porch= is one of the finest examples of Early English in
existence and is only surpassed by Bishop Hugh’s Choir at Lincoln.

     “Each side externally, is covered with lancet arcading in four
     tiers. In the upper tier the lancets are trefoiled with dog-tooth
     in the moulding; in the next lower tier the lancets are
     cinquefoiled, with two sets of dog-tooth. The lancets in the west
     face are all cinquefoiled, and the three lower tiers have trefoils
     in the spandrels. Nearly all are highly enriched with dog-tooth;
     while the mouldings of the west door have conventional foliage as
     well. The lancets here are deeper than on the sides of the porch,
     and were probably designed to hold figures. Of the three large
     lancets in the west window the central one is slightly more lofty
     than the others.

     “The interior of the porch is even more beautiful; the profusion of
     ornamentation on the inner doorway and the exceeding gracefulness
     of the double arcades in the sides are quite unsurpassed. Both
     doorways are divided by a shaft and both have open tracery of
     exceptional beauty above.”--(W. D. S.)

In addition to this feature, Ely has the unique =Octagon=, a good view of
which is obtained from the north-west. It is beautifully proportioned
and beautifully decorated with windows of exquisite tracery.

     “The way in which the octagon and lantern combine in producing a
     perfectly harmonious composition is in great part due to two points
     of difference, points which very few observers detect. These are,
     firstly, that the lantern is a regular octagon, having all its
     sides equal, in this respect being unlike the stone octagon beneath
     it; and, secondly, that the eight faces of the lantern are not
     parallel to the eight faces of the octagon. The new windows of the
     lantern are similar to the large ones below, but are not mere
     copies of them. The upper stage of the lantern, above the roof as
     seen from within, was once a bell-chamber; its lights are not, and
     never have been, glazed. The whole of the lantern is of wood,
     covered with lead. Two flying-buttresses rise from the corners of
     the nave and transept aisles to the corbel table of the clerestory
     range. There are also eight elegant flying-buttresses, one to each
     of the angles of the lantern. These are part of the new work, the
     originals having long disappeared.”--(W. D. S.)

The north-western part of the north transept fell in 1699, and was
rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren, nephew of Bishop Wren, then in office.
The north end of the transept contains Norman windows, and above them
are two Perpendicular windows, each of three lights. In the east wall of
the transept the lower lights are Decorated; the upper windows are the
original Norman.

Next we come to the =Lady-Chapel=, the east window of which (seven lights)
was inserted by Bishop Barnet (1366-1373), who also “beautified five of
the windows in the presbytery.” The west window (eight lights) is of a
little later date. In the side walls of the Lady-Chapel are five large
windows, the tracery of which is very beautiful.

The =East End= is a superb illustration of Early English, although
slightly altered from its original state by the introduction of the
windows in the chapels of Alcock and West, and a plain wall for the
original windows in the south aisle.

Flying-buttresses support the roof of the presbytery and choir. The
Perpendicular window of seven lights attracts our notice in the south
end of the south transept.

The entrance to the Cathedral from the south opens from the eastern end
of the cloisters and is called the =Monks’ Door=.

The ornamentation is very rich. One spiral column is especially fine.
The arch is trefoiled with cusps, having circular terminations with star
ornament, and in the spandrels are quaint, crouching monks, each
holding a pastoral staff. Two twisted dragons writhe above.

At the west end of the north alley of the cloisters we come to the
=Prior’s Door=, a fine specimen of late Norman. In the tympanum is a
carving in high relief of the Saviour.

Entering through the West we have a full view of the Cathedral, the
vista fortunately not broken, for the open screen permits the gaze to
wander the whole length to the east end. The massive Perpendicular
arches here were built beneath the Norman ones to secure stability for
the big tower that we have just examined.

The =Nave= is one of the most perfect specimens of late Norman. It is very
similar to that of Peterborough. Ely, however, offers no suggestion of
the transition of the next style, as does Peterborough. The Ely nave is
supposed to have been finished before 1173, a little before
Peterborough’s, and after that of Norwich. It contains twelve bays and
measures 208 feet. The piers are of alternate design. In front of each a
shaft runs up to the roof. As we follow this with our eyes we see that
the ceiling is painted with Biblical subjects; but these pictures need
not detain us, as they are modern. The billet moulding decorates the
string-course above the main arcade. Most of the capitals are cushion.

The =Octagon= is the gem of the whole Cathedral.

     “Few visitors will perhaps be disposed to examine any of the
     objects of interest in the cathedral before an inspection of the
     beauties of this magnificent erection, the first sight of which,
     from one of the smaller arches towards the aisles, is a thing never
     to be forgotten. There is not one of the many able artists and
     architects who have written about the Octagon that has not spoken
     of it as being without rival in the whole world; and the admiration
     that was expressed fifty and more years ago would have been far
     greater, and the enthusiasm more profound, had the writers seen it
     in its present state of perfect restoration. No description can do
     adequate justice to the grandeur of the conception or to the
     brilliancy of the execution of this renowned work.

     “The four great arches rise to the full height of the roof; that to
     the east, indeed, is higher than the vaulted roof of the choir and
     presbytery, the intervening space being occupied with tracery of
     woodwork on painted boards, the Saviour on the Cross being painted
     in the middle. The wooden vaulting of the Octagon springs from the
     capitals on the same level as those of the great arches. The four
     small arches to the aisles are of course no higher than the roofs
     of the aisles: above these, on each side, are three figures of
     apostles, under canopies with crockets. The figures are seated, and
     each holds an emblem, by which it can be seen for whom the figure
     is intended. It may be noticed (in the central figure on the
     south-west side) that St. Paul, not St. Matthias, is put in the
     place of Iscariot. The hood-moulds of the arches are terminated by
     heads, of which six are portraits. King Edward III. and Queen
     Philippa are at the north-east, Bishop Hotham and Prior Crauden at
     the south-east, Walsingham and his master-mason (so it is believed)
     at the north-west; those to the south-west are mere grotesques.
     Above the seated figures on each side is a window of four broad
     lights, filled with stained glass. The eight chief vaulting shafts
     rise from the ground as slight triple shafts; they support, a
     little above the spring of the side arches, large corbels, which
     form bases for exquisitely designed niches, and through these
     spring more shafts reaching to the vault. On each of the corbels is
     a boldly carved scene from the career of St. Etheldreda; they
     commence at the north-west arch. The subjects (two to each arch)
     are as follows:

     “North-west arch: St. Etheldreda’s second marriage. Her taking the
     veil at Coldingham.

     “North-east arch: Her staff taking root. Her preservation in the
     flood at St. Abb’s Head.

     “South-east arch: Her installation as Abbess of Ely. Her death and
     burial (two scenes).

     “South-west arch: One of her miracles. Her translation.

     “In order to understand these wonderful sculptures more fully we
     refer to the _Liber Eliensis_ which describes Etheldreda as
     hurrying away from Coldingham with two ladies, Sewenna and Sewara,
     and as reaching a rocky place on the coast where they were
     overtaken by the king, but the three ladies crossed the Humber and
     proceeded south, dressed as pilgrims. One night, while the queen
     slept, her staff, placed in the ground, burst into leaf and flower.
     On this spot a church was built and dedicated to St. Etheldreda.
     When the three pilgrims arrived in the Isle of Ely, they were
     joined by Wilfrid, the archbishop of York, who induced Etheldreda
     to take the veil. The miracle referred to in the south-west arch
     shows St. Etheldreda and St. Benedict appearing to a monk named
     Brytstan, who was charged with seeking refuge in a monastery in
     order to escape punishment for robberies of which he had been
     guilty. The miracle was told to Queen Matilda, who freed
     Brytstan.”--(W. D. S.)

The =Screen= separating the choir from the Octagon was designed by Scott.
It is of oak, delicately carved in geometric patterns, and bearing a
cross on the cresting that runs along the top. The gates are brass.

The first three bays of the choir were begun about 1240; the last six,
forming the presbytery, were finished in 1340. The space of a hundred
years thus lies between them.

     “In the juxtaposition of these two magnificent specimens of the
     Early English and Decorated periods of architecture there is an
     opportunity of comparison which on such a scale occurs nowhere
     else. It is to be remembered that in neither case is the treatment
     of the upper part quite in accordance with the usual practice of
     the period. When the presbytery was being built there were still
     standing east of the central tower the four original bays of the
     Norman choir. These, it may be assumed, were very similar in
     character to those in the nave. There would, beyond question, have
     been in each bay large triforium arches, each with a couple of
     subordinate arches; and a single window in the clerestory with a
     blank arch on each side. Bishop Northwold’s work was purposely made
     to correspond with these bays as far as Early English work could do
     so; and when after the fall of the tower it became necessary to
     rebuild the choir, Bishop Hotham in like manner made his Decorated
     work correspond with the Early English presbytery. The choir is, as
     would be expected, richer in detail as well as more elaborate in
     design; and it would be difficult to find in England anything to
     surpass the tracery of the clerestory windows and triforium arches,
     the beautiful cusped inner arches of the clerestory range, the open
     parapets at the base of the two stages, or the long corbels,
     covered with foliage, that support the vaulting shafts. In the
     choir the clerestory windows have four lights each; in the
     presbytery are triplets. The old colouring has been renewed
     throughout. On the north side of the choir the three bays are
     precisely alike; but on the south there is a variation in the
     tracery of the western triforium arch. There are also shields of
     arms (of the See of Ely and of Bishop Hotham) in the spandrels of
     the triforium and arch below; and the shaft between this arch and
     the next is enlarged at the top into a base for a statue (probably
     of St. Etheldreda); while level with the string above is a very
     fine large canopy (called by the workmen ‘the table’), which is
     like nothing else in the cathedral. The clerestory windows also on
     the south have different tracery.

     “The difference between the two styles of architecture is well
     marked in the groining of the roof, the Decorated portion being
     much more elaborate. Some of the bosses are very remarkable: one
     has St. Etheldreda with pastoral staff; one has the coronation of
     the Virgin Mary; one has the foundress bearing the model of a
     church, in which (as Dean Stubbs has pointed out) both arms of the
     western transept are represented, so that it is a fair inference
     that at the time this roof was constructed the whole of the western
     transept was standing.

     “Between the choir and presbytery there rise the massive Norman
     piers built as the entrance to the apse; and these are the only
     remains of the Norman church east of the octagon.”--(W. D. S.)

The magnificent =Choir-Stalls=, with their beautiful canopies, are thought
to be Walsingham’s work. They are considered the finest Decorated stalls
in existence. The misereres show wonderful carvings.

The =Reredos=, of alabaster, designed by Scott, stands in the centre of
the screen of stone that runs along the whole of the presbytery, the
lower part of which is a diaper pattern and the upper portion an open
arcade of six arches (Early Decorated style).

     “The east end of Ely is the grandest example of the grouping of
     lancets.... Ely is also undoubtedly the head of all east ends and
     eastern limbs of that class in which the main body of the church is
     of the same height throughout, and in which the aisles are brought
     out to the full length of the building.”--(E. A. F.)

At the end of the north-choir-aisle we come to the =Chapel of Bishop
Alcock= (died 1500), Bishop of Ely from 1486 to 1500. He was a great
architect, built the great hall in the Bishop’s palace at Ely and also
this very ornate chapel. It dates from 1488. The roof is composed of
fan-tracery, with a large pendant; and the walls are covered with
canopies, tabernacles, crockets, niches, panels and other decorations
with lavish display. The figures have gone from the niches. A cock on a
globe--Alcock’s rebus--occurs on the stone-work very frequently.

At the end of the south-choir-aisle we find the corresponding =Chapel of
Bishop West= (died 1533). This is similar in style to the Alcock chapel,
but less ornate.

Several bishops are buried in this chapel. Though we may care little or
nothing for the careers of the dignitaries who lie there, or who are
perpetuated by monuments, we find among the tombs some fine examples of
sculpture and ornament of the past.

For instance, that of =Bishop Louth= (died 1298), under the first arch of
the presbytery in the south-choir-aisle, is a fine example of Early
Decorated.

In the last arch, before reaching Bishop West’s Chapel, the tomb of
=Bishop Hotham= (died 1337) calls for attention.

Under the four arches of the presbytery on the north, between the stalls
and the altar, is that of =Bishop Redman= (died 1505), a very fine
specimen of enriched Perpendicular work.

Next is the effigy of =Bishop Kilkenny= (died 1256), a fine example of
Early English.

In the next arch a large Decorated structure of two stories, believed by
Scott to have been built by Walsingham as the base for the =Shrine of St.
Etheldreda=, was formerly known as Bishop Hotham’s shrine.

In the arch north of the altar is the tomb of the builder of the
presbytery, =Bishop Northwold= (died 1254), who is represented in full
vestments.

It is only natural that the transepts should show similarity with those
of Winchester, consecrated in 1093, seven years before Simeon of
Winchester came to Ely. He began his work, as we have seen, here, and
got up as far as the triforium. The clerestory was added by his
successor. Alterations took place at later periods, and now both
triforium and clerestory are almost identical with those in the nave.

In the south transept Perpendicular windows of

[Illustration: ELY: EAST END AND LADY-CHAPEL]

[Illustration: ELY: LADY-CHAPEL]

three lights have replaced the western windows of the triforium. Two
large Perpendicular windows ornament the north end and a curious window
of seven lights adorns the south. Galleries, arches, and arcades afford
exceedingly interesting study.

On the east of the north transept are three chapels, one of which has
been restored for private devotion. Old paintings of the Martyrdom of
St. Edmund on the roof have given it the name of =St. Edmund’s Chapel=.
The screen in front dates from about 1350.

From the north transept we enter the =Lady-Chapel=.

     “Notwithstanding the cruel mutilation of the sculpture all round
     this chapel, it can be seen that for perfection of exquisite work
     there is no building of the size in this country worthy for one
     moment to be compared with this in its unmutilated state. Its
     single defect strikes the beholder at once: the span of the roof is
     too broad and the vaulting too depressed for the size of the
     chapel. The windows on the north have been restored. The end
     windows, which are of great size, are of later date; that to the
     east has a look of Transition work about it. The building was
     finished in 1349, and the east window was inserted by Bishop
     Barnet, _circa_ 1373. The great beauty of the interior consists in
     the series of tabernacle work and canopies that run round all the
     four sides below and between the windows. The heads of the canopies
     project. In the tracery beneath, at the head of the mullion, was a
     statue. The delicate carving of the cusps and other tracery is
     varied throughout. On the spandrels were incidents connected with
     the history of the Virgin Mary (mainly legendary) and of Julian the
     Apostate; and though in no single instance is a perfect uninjured
     specimen left, yet enough remains, in all but a few cases, for the
     original subjects to be identified. All was once enriched with
     colour, and many traces remain; and in various parts of the windows
     there are fragments of stained glass. Most of the monumental
     tablets which once disfigured the arcade below the windows have
     been happily removed into the vestibule. The arches and canopies at
     the east end are arranged differently from those on the sides. In
     the roof, which reminds us of the contemporary roof in the choir,
     are some carved bosses, not large, but singularly good. Among the
     subjects can be recognised a Crucifixion, with half-figures beside
     the cross; Adam and Eve; the Virgin Mary and Elizabeth, holding
     between them a book inscribed ‘Magnificat’; the Annunciation, with
     ‘Ave Maria Gratia plena’; the Ascension, indicated by the skirt and
     feet of the Saviour and five heads of apostles; the Coronation of
     the Virgin; and the Virgin in an aureole.”--(W. D. S.)




NORWICH

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY TRINITY. CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.


This Cathedral was begun in 1096 by Herbert de Losinga, the bishop
appointed by William Rufus, who had received his education in Normandy,
and who became prior of Fécamp. No earlier church stood on the site. It
was dedicated to the Holy Trinity.

     “The characteristics of the cathedral are--its long nave, which is
     typical of the Norman church; its glorious apsidal termination,
     encircled by a procession path, which recalls the plan of a French
     cathedral; and the form of this, with the remains of its old
     bishops’ chair centrally placed, and with the westward position, of
     the throne at Torcello and other Italian churches, of the basilican
     type of plan.

     “It is interesting to note that Herbert’s early French training
     influenced him in the planning of the beautiful eastern termination
     to his cathedral, and the grand sweep of the procession path.
     Similar apsidal terminations, of slightly later date, once existed
     at Ely, and still remain in a modified form at Peterborough and St.
     Bartholomew’s.

     “It is probable, and the more generally accredited supposition,
     that Herbert built the presbytery with its encircling procession
     path and the original trefoil of Norman chapel radiating
     therefrom;--the choir and transepts with the two chapels projecting
     eastwards and the first two bays of the nave. Harrod advances a
     theory that he completely finished the whole of the cathedral
     church, as well as the offices for the housing of the sixty monks
     who were placed therein, in 1101.”--(C. H. B. Q.)

Norwich acquired its chief saint in the Twelfth Century, and a saint,
moreover, that much resembled Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln. A young
boy, William, the child of simple country people, was murdered by the
Jews in the city. Immediately after his death miracles took place. The
monks placed his altar near the ante-choir, and raked in the offerings.

The Cathedral suffered from fires, and the tower was struck by lightning
in 1271. There was also a terrible riot between the people and the monks
in the Thirteenth Century, when the Cathedral was besieged. The
monastery and the Cathedral were burned, and many monks were killed.
Some citizens of Norwich were hanged, drawn and quartered, and the city
had to repair the church. The monks were compelled to erect new gates
and entrances, one of which, St. Ethelbert’s Gate, still exists (see
page 351).

About 1361 the spire and parts of the tower were blown down, and the
presbytery was damaged. Therefore, the clerestory was rebuilt, and in
the transitional style from Decorated to Perpendicular. The Cloisters
date from about this time, and so does the Erpingham Gate. In the middle
of the Fifteenth Century the nave vault was constructed; and it was
under the two rules of Bishop Lyhart and Bishop Goldwell that the
Cathedral was practically completed as we see it to-day. Dean Gardiner
pulled down the Lady-Chapel and the Chapter-House in the Sixteenth
Century, and in the Seventeenth Century Cromwell’s soldiers took
possession.

Bishop Hall tells us how they behaved:

     “Lord, what work was here, what clattering of glasses, what beating
     down the Walls, what tearing up of Monuments, what pulling down of
     Seats, what wresting out of Irons and Brass from the Windows and
     Graves! What defacing of Armes, what demolishing of curious stone
     work, that had not any representation in the World, but only of the
     cost of the Founder and skill of the Mason, what toting and piping
     upon the destroyed Organ pipes, and what a hideous triumph on the
     Market day before all the Countrey, when, in a kind of Sacrilegious
     and profane procession, all the Organ pipes, Vestments, both Copes
     and Surplices, together with the Leaden Crosse which had been newly
     sawne down from over the Green-Yard Pulpit, and the Service books
     and singing books that could be had, were carried to the fire in
     the publick Market place; A leud wretch walking before the Train,
     in his Cope trailing in the dirt, with a Service book in his hand,
     imitating in an impious scorne the tune, and usurping the words of
     the Letany; neer the Publick Crosse, all these monuments of
     Idolatry must be sacrificed to the fire, not without much
     Ostentation of a zealous joy.”

The Precincts are, like those of all English cathedrals, lovely, and
these are fortunate enough to be entered by several ancient gates. The
one on the south, =St. Ethelbert’s Gate= (Early Decorated), was built in
the Thirteenth Century, after the riots and fire of 1272. The =Gate House=
(Perpendicular), on the north, is the entrance to the Bishop’s Palace.

Opposite the west front we find the =Erpingham Gate=, built about 1420, by
Sir Thomas Erpingham, whose figure stands in the niche over the wide
arch. It is a greatly admired piece of Perpendicular work.

The =West Front= (Perpendicular) clearly defines the width of the nave and
the aisles on either side. Over the centre door is the large west window
of nine lights, often compared to the window of Westminster Hall. Above
is a gable, surmounted by a cross. The doors date from 1436, and the
west window from Bishop Lyhart’s time (1446-1472). There are no towers
here; for the pinnacles placed on the side turrets in 1875 are not
deserving of this name.

     “The Tower and Spire stand at the intersection of the choir and
     transepts, covered with vertical shafts on the face of each. The
     tower is Norman buttress, which is finished by a crocketed
     pinnacle. Between these buttresses are horizontal bands of design:
     the lowest, a Norman arcade of nine arches, three of which are
     pierced as windows; then, above this, a smaller wall arcade with
     interlaced arches; and then, above again, the principal feature, an
     arcading of nine arches, three pierced for windows, and the others
     filled with wall tracery of diamonds and circles; then, between
     this last and the battlemented parapet, occur five vertical panels,
     each comprising two circles, the upper pierced for a window. Above,
     soaring upward, rises the later crocketed spire. The rest of the
     tower was finished during the reign of Henry I., and is a beautiful
     specimen of the work of that time; the stonework was almost
     entirely refaced in 1856. The tower was crowned by a wooden spire
     from 1297; this was blown down in 1361, damaging the presbytery so
     badly that the clerestory had to be rebuilt. The wooden spire was
     constructed probably at the same time, and the present Early
     Perpendicular turrets were added. The spire was again in 1463
     struck by lightning, and again falling eastward, went through the
     presbytery roof. The present spire was then constructed in stone by
     Bishop Lyhart (1446-72), and was finished by his successor, Bishop
     Goldwell (1472-99), who added the battlements.

     “It will hardly be necessary to enlarge on the beauty of this spire
     of Norwich, as the dominant feature, seen from the south-east,
     rising above the curved sweep of the apse, and strongly buttressed
     by the south transept, it stands up, clearly defined against the
     western sky, and points upward, significant and symbolical at once
     of the ends and aspirations of the church below.

     “The eastern arm, or presbytery, takes its history from the tower.
     Here, as in the nave, the original triforium windows are blocked
     up, and a range of Perpendicular work superimposed on the old.
     Above and beyond this, supported between each bay by
     flying-buttresses, comes the transitional Decorated to
     Perpendicular clerestory, higher than the original Norman
     clerestory remaining to the nave. At the base of each
     flying-buttress are figures of saints. The roof and Norman
     clerestory were damaged by the falling tower in 1361, but were
     rebuilt by Bishop Percy, 1355-69. This work is transitional
     Decorated to Perpendicular. The presbytery was then re-roofed with
     a framed timber construction, which was consumed by the falling of
     the burning spire, struck by lightning in 1463. The present stone
     vault was added in its place by Bishop Goldwell, 1472-99. This
     necessitated the addition as well of flying-buttresses to take the
     thrust of the vault.

     “The battlementing to the presbytery also was added at the same
     time as the flying-buttresses.

     “It will also be noted that here, as in the nave, an addition was
     made in the way of a range of later ‘Perpendicular’ windows
     superimposed over the original Norman triforium, which was blocked
     up.”--(C. H. B. Q.)

The south transept projects under the central tower.

Next follows the =Chapel of St. Mary the Less= (Fourteenth Century)
projecting southward, then the circular =Chapel of St. Luke= (Norman),
very peculiar in form, with two rows of arcading.

The north side is well viewed from the =Bishop’s Gardens=. It differs
little from the south side, except in the fact that it has been less
restored. The chapel corresponding with the Chapel of St. Luke is the
=Jesus Chapel=, and is also circular. Here we find Perpendicular windows
inserted in the Norman work.

     “The nave on the south side can be seen well either from the upper
     or lower Close, and can be better examined in detail from the
     interior of the cloisters. Its elevation consists of fourteen bays
     divided by flat Norman buttresses. In height it is composed of
     what, at first sight, appears a bewildering confusion of arches,
     arcades and windows. Over the aisle windows, hidden by the north
     walk of cloisters, comes a Norman wall arcading; and over this the
     Norman triforium windows blocked up, and again, above the later
     Perpendicular triforium, superimposed on the old, and finished with
     a battlemented parapet. Behind this come the triforium roof, and
     then beyond the original Norman clerestory, each bay with a triple
     arch formation, the centre arch pierced for a window. And then
     above all, the lead roof over the nave vault.

     “The radical changes that have taken place since the nave was built
     by Bishop Eborard (1121-45) consist of the insertion in the aisles
     of later ‘Decorated’ traceried windows in place of the original
     Norman ones, and of the superimposition, before referred to, at
     triforium level, of a whole range of ‘Perpendicular’ windows over
     the old Norman work, which were blocked up at this period. The
     battlementing, too, over the clerestory to the nave is later work,
     to correspond with battlementing over the triforium windows. It
     will be noticed that the two bays next the transept in the
     triforium are higher than the others, in order to throw additional
     light into the choir.

     “Also on this same south side, in the seventh and eighth bays from
     the west end, two very late windows occur, inserted in the Norman
     arcading under the original triforium windows; these were inserted
     by Bishop Nykke to light the chapel he built in two bays of the
     south aisle of the nave.

     “The curious raking of the lead rolls to the nave roof is
     noticeable; the mediæval builders did this with a view of
     counteracting the ‘crawl’ of the lead.”--(C. H. B. Q.)

Norwich Cathedral is famous for its magnificent interior. A noble view
is obtained on entering, for the great =Nave= reaches 200 feet to the
choir-screen; and if the organ on the latter were removed, the view
would be longer, for the extreme length of the Cathedral is 407 feet.
The perspective is splendid, as it is, and very largely is it so because
of the lierne vault of Perpendicular days, which relieves the severity
of the Norman work below.

The nave consists of seven double bays (fourteen compartments) from the
west end to the transepts. The main piers are, of course, large, and the
arcade arches are ornamented with the billet. The triforium arches are
decorated with a chevron or zigzag. Over it is the typical Norman
clerestory and above all spreads the handsome lierne vault
(Perpendicular). This splendid vault (72 feet), built by Bishop Lyhart
(1446-1472), after the Norman roof had been destroyed by fire in 1463,
is of great value to the student. There are 328 carved bosses at the
intersection of the ribs, the subjects of which are taken from Biblical
history.

     “The vault is of Perpendicular design, and known as _lierne_; such
     vaults may be distinguished by the fact that between the main ribs,
     springing from the vaulting shafts, are placed cross ribs forming a
     pattern, as it were, and bracing the main ribs, but not in any
     great measure structural. This vault at Norwich may be taken as
     typical of the last legitimate development of the stone roof; it
     was the precursor of the later fan-vaulting, such as we find in
     Henry VII.’s chapel at Westminster, where legitimate construction
     was replaced by ostentatious ingenuity and the accumulation of
     needless ornament and detail.

     “To all those who take an interest in early stone-cutting, this
     vault of Norwich is a store of inexhaustible treasure; the bosses,
     rudely cut as they are, tell their own tales with singular truth
     and directness. Their sculpture may not display the anatomical
     knowledge of the work of the Renaissance; yet it has a distinct
     decorative value that has been seldom equalled in the later
     decadent period. The fourteen large central bosses on the main
     longitudinal ribs present in themselves an epitome not only of
     Bible history, but of the connecting incidents forming the theme of
     Christian teaching. In the tenth bay, on the longitudinal rib,
     there is, in place of a boss, a circular hole through the vault.
     It is supposed to have been formed to allow a thurible to be
     suspended therefrom into the church below. Harrod, quoting from
     Lambard’s ‘Topographical Dictionary,’ says: ‘I myself, being a
     child, once saw in Poule’s Church at London, at a feast of
     Whitsontide, wheare the comyng down of the Holy Gost was set forth
     by a white pigeon that was let to fly _out of a hole that is yet to
     be seen in the mydst of the roof of the great ile_, and by a long
     censer which, descending out of the same place almost to the very
     ground, was swinged up and down at such a length that it reached at
     one swepe _almost to the west gate of the church, and with the
     other to the queer [quire] stairs of the same_, breathing out over
     the whole church and companie a most pleasant perfume of such sweet
     things as burned therein.’

     “It is probable that the hole in the nave vault at Norwich was used
     for a similar purpose; and its position would seem to agree with
     such use, situated as it is about midway between the west end and
     where the front of the mediæval rood loft occurred.”--(C. H. B. Q.)

In the aisles we find Decorated windows, and in the triforium,
Perpendicular windows.

The =Choir-Screen= was erected by Bishop Lyhart in 1446-1472, but only the
lower part survived the fury of the Puritan mob. The organ was placed in
its present position in 1833. Immediately under the organ loft is a
single compartment, blocked off from the north and south aisles by
screens that originally belonged to one old screen (Perpendicular). This
=ante-chapel= was formerly the chapel of Our Lady of Pity.

The =Choir= extends a little into the nave, and, therefore, beyond the
tower and transepts. There are sixty splendid =Choir-stalls= of the
Fifteenth Century, with ornate _misereres_. The Bishop’s Throne and
Pulpit are modern. The old Pelican Lectern, in the Decorated style,
should be noticed.

[Illustration: NORWICH: EAST]

[Illustration: NORWICH: CHOIR]

The =Presbytery= is the earliest part of the cathedral. It consists of
four compartments, or bays, and terminates in a semicircular apse of
five compartments. We find here Perpendicular arches, a lofty Norman
triforium, and clerestory windows of the transitional period from
Decorated to Perpendicular. The whole effect is Norman and noble.
Unfortunately the old glass of the windows has perished.

The aisles of the presbytery are also called the =Processional Path=, and
consist of four bays, and five around the apse. A door in the north
aisle opens into the gardens of the Bishop’s Palace; and in this aisle,
at the fourth bay east of the tower, there is a very peculiar
bridge-chapel that spans the aisle. Critics say that it formed the
ante-chapel to the reliquary chapel projecting northward from the outer
wall of the Cathedral, and that it was probably built as a bridge for
exhibiting relics as the processions passed along underneath.

On the south side of the presbytery (third bay) is the =Chapel of St.
Mary the Less=, or =Bauchon Chapel= (Fourteenth Century). It projects
beyond the wall. The vault is Fifteenth Century, and the bosses
represent the Life, Death and Assumption of the Virgin. This is now the
Consistory Court.

The =north transept= is without aisles or triforium. Arcading decorates
the wall up to the clerestory. Above is a lierne vault of later date, of
course, than the transept. The old apsidal chapel on the east (dedicated
to St. Anne) is now used as a storeroom.

A staircase in the east wall of the north transept leads to the
tower-galleries and walks, very interesting in themselves and affording
glimpses through their openings into the nave, presbytery and transepts
below.

Between the south aisle of the presbytery and the =south transept= a
beautiful screen of late Perpendicular tracery fills the Norman arch.
The roof, like that of the north transept, originally of wood, was
destroyed by fire in 1509, and a new vault added in Perpendicular times.

Of the three chapels grouped around the presbytery the =Jesus Chapel= on
the north and the chapel on the south, =St. Luke’s=, remain. The
=Lady-Chapel=, at the extreme east, has perished.

The Norman Lady-Chapel was partly destroyed by the fire of 1169, and was
succeeded by an Early English chapel of the Thirteenth Century. This was
destroyed in the Sixteenth Century; but the finely proportioned entrance
arches still remain. They are ornamented with the dog-tooth.

It is not often that ancient altar-pieces are found in the English
cathedrals; but Norwich possesses a =Retable=, supposed to be the work of
an Italian painter of the Fourteenth Century. It is in five panels--The
Scourging, Bearing the Cross, Crucifixion, Resurrection and Ascension.
It was formerly in the Jesus Chapel.

The =Cloisters= are in their usual position--on the south. Originally
these were Norman, and perished by fire in 1272. The present ones were
133 years in building, and so they reveal the developments of
architecture during 1297-1430. The cloister garth is about 145 feet
square.

     “The arches are filled with open tracery carried by two mullions.

     “On the east side it is geometrical in character, the work being
     transitional between Early English and Decorated; on the south
     side the tracery is more flowing and has advanced to Decorated; on
     the west side again, we get the transitional style between
     Decorated and Perpendicular, with some _flamboyant_ or flame-like
     detail; while on the north and latest side it is frankly
     Perpendicular.”--(C. H. B. Q.)

They are entered from the south side of the nave, of course. The =Monk’s
Door=, opening into the East Walk, is an ornate specimen of
Perpendicular; and the =Prior’s Door=, opening into the West Walk, a fine
specimen of Early Decorated.




ST. ALBANS

     DEDICATION: ST. ALBAN. CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.


When Sir Gilbert Scott began to restore and repair the old abbey church
of St. Albans, in 1870, he found it in a very dilapidated condition.
Among other base uses to which various parts of the Cathedral had been
put, the Lady-Chapel had been converted into a grammar-school, and a
thoroughfare had been made through the retro-choir. After Scott’s death,
in 1878, Lord Grimthorpe, who had been diligent and liberal for years
regarding restorations, succeeded in getting control of the entire work.
He made various changes and additions, and inserted windows at his own
pleasure, not always with judgment, nor in the best taste. The
consequence is that St. Albans is open to much criticism. Yet it remains
an interesting old pile in many respects.

St. Albans did not become a cathedral until 1877. It was a famous old
abbey church, dating back to the days of Offa II., King of the Mercians,
who founded a Benedictine monastery here about 793. From this time until
the suppression of the monasteries by Henry VIII., the Abbey of St.
Albans was of the greatest importance. Its Abbot had a seat in the House
of Lords, and took precedence of all the abbots in the kingdom.
Naturally, therefore, the list of abbots is notable. Some of them were
related to the royal family. Among those especially distinguished were:
Paul of Caen, John de Cella, William of Trumpington, John of Hertford,
Roger of Norton, Hugh of Eversden, Richard of Wallingford, Thomas de la
Mare, John de la Moote, John of Wheathampstead, and Thomas Wolsey, the
great cardinal.

Royalty was entertained in the Abbey on many occasions as both guest and
prisoner. When the Abbey was consecrated in 1115 by the Archbishop of
Rouen, Henry I. and his queen, Matilda, with their courtiers, were
entertained from December 27 until January 6; Richard II. stayed here
for eight days after Wat Tyler’s rebellion had subsided; and here the
conspiracy against him was planned, when the Duke of Gloucester and the
Prior of Westminster were dining with the abbot, John de la Moote. In
1399 John of Gaunt’s body rested here; and Richard II., and Henry, Duke
of Lancaster (Henry IV.) were here in the same year. During the Wars of
the Roses the Abbey of St. Albans was frequently used as a prison. In
the first battle of St. Albans (May 23, 1455), when the White Roses were
victorious, Henry was confined in the monastery; but in the second
battle (February 17, 1461), the king, having been captured, was set at
liberty by his brave wife, Margaret of Anjou, who marched from Wakefield
with 18,000 men. The royal party went to the Abbey, where the monks
chanted thanksgiving and in every way received them with delight. The
undisciplined horde of soldiers unfortunately ran wild in the town and
plundered the Abbey. Their behaviour was such that Abbot John Stokes
changed his politics, and became an ardent Yorkist.

Among the celebrated monks of St. Albans Matthew Paris takes the lead,
the great historian whose book begins with the creation and continues to
1259.

St. Albans for a long period received “Peter’s Pence.” This was first
levied by the King of the West Saxons in 727, and was a tax of one penny
on each family owning lands. The receipt amounted to thirty pence a year
and went to the support of a Saxon College at Rome; and because it was
collected on August 1 (the day of St. Peter ad Vincula) it was called
“Peter’s Pence.” Offa induced the Pope to give it to the Abbey of St.
Albans.

The monastic buildings have all perished, and the only remnant of the
Abbey is the =Great Gate=, built in the days of Thomas de la Mare, about
1365. Over the archway there is a large room in which sessions used to
be held, and below the road the curious may inspect the dungeons. This
Gateway was a law-court and prison; and, as the Abbot of St. Albans had
civil jurisdiction over all the town, as well as his monastery, many
offenders were tried and condemned here. In the days of Wat Tyler’s
rebellion John Ball and his seventeen companions were tried here and
spent their last days in the dungeons. Another scene that we can picture
is that of the monks bringing out ale and wine to quell the fury of the
mob that stormed the Gatehouse before the news of Wat Tyler’s death
arrived.

St. Albans was a favorite place of pilgrimage, for it sheltered the
remains of the first Christian martyr in Britain. Alban, or Albans, was
a young soldier, who, during the persecution of the Christians in the
Fourth Century, befriended a deacon named Amphibalus by receiving him in
his house. Amphibalus converted him. Alban exchanged clothing with him
so that he might escape. Amphibalus was captured, however, and executed
near Verulamium. Alban was also beheaded; and a few years after his
death a church was built over the spot where his blood had been shed.
The north transept of the existing church is said to cover this place.

Matthew Paris states that the body of St. Alban was, during an invasion,
removed from the church for safety, and afterward placed in its original
grave. Offa II. found the coffin containing the remains of the martyr
and laid them in a splendid reliquary, taking care first to place a
golden band around the head with the inscription “_Hoc est caput Sancti
Albani_.” Offa also had the martyr canonized. With a miracle-working
shrine, the richly-endowed monastery continued to flourish.

The Abbey Church was deemed quite large enough until Paul of Caen
(1077-1093) was appointed abbot by William the Conqueror. In about
eleven years only (1077-1088) he rebuilt St. Albans, using many of the
Roman bricks from the ruins of the neighbouring Verulamium and timber
already collected. His was an enormous Norman edifice (460 feet), longer
even than Canterbury (290 feet).

After a hundred years or so, Abbot John de Cella (1195-1214) made
various changes. Money was raised in various ways for the purpose, and
among them the abbot persuaded his monks to do without wine for fifteen
years and contribute the savings to the fund for building.

After him came William of Trumpington (1214-1235), who continued the
work of building. He also constructed the cloister. Let us see exactly
in what their work consisted:

     “Abbot John de Cella (1195-1214) pulled down the west front and
     began to build a new one in its place. He laid the foundation of
     the whole front, but then went on with the north side first. The
     north porch was nearly finished in his time; the central porch was
     carried up as far as the spring of the arch; the southern porch was
     carried hardly any way up from the foundations. The porches are
     described by those who saw them before Lord Grimthorpe swept away
     the whole west front as some of the choicest specimens of
     Thirteenth Century work in England. The mouldings were of great
     delicacy, and were enriched with dog-tooth ornament. It is said
     that Abbot John was not a good man of business, and that he was
     sorely robbed and cheated by his builders, and so had not money
     enough to finish the work that he had planned. To his successor,
     William of Trumpington, it therefore fell to carry on the work. He
     was a man of a more practical character, though not equal to his
     predecessor in matters of taste. He finished the main part of the
     western front. Oddly enough no dog-tooth ornament was used in the
     central and southern porches, and the character of the carved
     foliage differs also from that of the north porch. In Abbot John’s
     undoubted work the curling leaves overlap, and have strongly
     defined stems resembling the foliage of Lincoln choir, while that
     of Abbot William’s time had the ordinary character of the Early
     English style. There is evidence to show that he intended to vault
     the church with a stone roof; this may be seen from the marble
     vaulting-shafts on the north side of the nave between the arches of
     the main arcade, which, however, are not carried higher than the
     string-course below the triforium. The idea of a stone vault was,
     however, abandoned before the two eastern Early English bays on the
     south side were built, for no preparation for vaulting shafts
     exists there.

     “Abbot John de Cella had begun to build afresh the western towers,
     or, according to some authorities, to build the first western
     towers that the church ever had; we have no record of their
     completion, and it is said that Abbot William abandoned the idea.
     We have only the foundations by which we can determine their size.
     William of Trumpington transformed the windows of the aisles into
     Early English ones. He also added a wooden lantern to the tower,
     somewhat in the style of the wooden octagon on the central tower of
     Ely.”--(T. P.)

The next changes were made in the east end. These were begun in the last
half of the Thirteenth Century. The walls of the presbytery were raised;
the Saint’s Chapel built; then the retro-choir; and then the Lady-Chapel
(1326).

Then Hugh of Eversden (1308-1326) became abbot and had to rebuild the
part of the nave that fell in 1323. His work was continued by Richard of
Wallingford (1326-1335) and completed by Michael of Mentmore in 1345.

John de Wheathampstead, who was twice abbot (1420-1440, and 1451-1464),
rebuilt the upper part of the west front, made changes in the roofs,
inserted Perpendicular windows in the ends of the transept, and also
converted the Norman triforium arches into windows by filling them with
Perpendicular tracery. His chantry was built after his death. William of
Wallingford (1476-1484) contributed the gorgeous screen.

The exterior has no interest for the student of architecture. The
enormous church is plain, and Lord Grimthorpe has been at work
everywhere. The only feature that has any real beauty is the fine Norman
tower.

     “It is 144 feet high and is not quite square in plan, measuring 47
     feet from east to west, and two feet less from north to south. The
     walls are about seven feet thick; in the thickness, however,
     passages are cut. It has three stages above the ridges of the roof.
     The lower stage has plain windows in each face, lighting the church
     below; the next stage, or ringing room, has two pairs of double
     windows; and the upper or belfry stage, two double windows of large
     size, furnished with louvre boards. The parapet is battlemented,
     and of course of later work than the tower itself. The tower is
     flanked by pilaster buttresses, which merge into cylindrical
     turrets in the upper story. For simple dignity the tower stands
     unrivalled in this country. It must have been splendidly built to
     have stood as it has done so many centuries without accident.
     Winchester tower fell not long after its building, Peterborough
     tower has been rebuilt in modern days; but Paul of Caen did not
     scamp his work as the monks of Peterborough did, and no evil-living
     king was buried below the tower, as was the case at Winchester,
     thus, according to the beliefs of the time, leading to its
     downfall. Tewkesbury tower alone can vie with that of St. Albans,
     and the Seventeenth Century pinnacles on that tower spoil the
     general effect, so that the foremost place among central Norman
     towers as we see them to-day may safely be claimed for that at St.
     Albans. Few more beautiful architectural objects can be seen than
     this tower of Roman brick, especially when the warmth of its colour
     is accentuated by the ruddy flush thrown over it by the rays of a
     setting sun.”--(T. P.)

The pilgrims to St. Alban’s shrine used to enter by the =North Door of
the Transept=, carrying the candles that they had bought at the Waxhouse
Gate. This Norman doorway, with a Norman window on each side (modern
glass), still exists. The upper part of the north wall with the wheel
window was rebuilt by Lord Grimthorpe.

The nave is immensely long--about a tenth of a mile. It is Norman, grim,
and cold, but impressive.

     “As we stand just inside the west door of the church we are struck
     by the length of ritual nave, about 200 feet, the flatness of the
     roofs, and the massiveness of the arcading dividing the nave from
     the aisles; for, though the four western bays on the north side and
     five on the south are Early English in date, there is none of that
     lightness and grace that we are accustomed to associate with work
     of this period, no detached shafts of Purbeck marble such as we see
     at Salisbury, no exquisitely carved capitals such

[Illustration: ST. ALBANS: NORTH]

[Illustration: ST. ALBANS: NAVE, EAST]

     as we meet with at Wells. William of Trumpington seems to have
     aimed at making his work harmonize with the Norman work that he
     left untouched; and when the rest of the main arcade on the south
     side was rebuilt in the next century, it was made to differ but
     little in general appearance and dimensions from Abbot William’s.

     “On entering by the west door a peculiarity will at once be
     noticed. About fifteen feet from the inner side of the west wall
     there is a rise of five steps which stretch right across the church
     from north to south. The floor to the east of these steps slopes
     imperceptibly upwards for eight bays, when a rise of three more
     steps is met with. On this higher level stands the altar, which is
     backed up by the rood screen. There is another step to be ascended
     to the level of the choir, and another to reach the space below the
     tower. Five steps lead from this into the presbytery; there is
     another step at the high altar rails, and four more lead up to the
     platform on which the high altar will stand. From the space below
     the tower one step leads up into the north aisle and two more into
     the north arm of the transept. From the level of the south choir
     aisle and south transept two steps lead up into the south aisle of
     the presbytery; from this aisle there is a rise of four steps into
     the aisle south of the Saint’s Chapel, and from this into the
     chapel itself a rise of four more. So that the floor of this chapel
     is, with the exception of the high altar platform, which is one
     step higher, the highest in the whole church, or nineteen steps
     above the floor just inside the west door. From the aisle of the
     Saint’s Chapel one step leads into the retro-choir, and two more
     into the Lady-Chapel; hence the floor of the Lady-Chapel is one
     step lower than that of the Saint’s Chapel. If we take seven inches
     as the average height of a step, it would appear that the floor of
     the Lady-Chapel is about ten feet higher than the floor at the west
     end of the nave.”--(T. P.)

The nave is blocked behind the altar with a =Rood screen=, of Fourteenth
Century work, much restored. It is pierced by two doors (also Fourteenth
Century), through which processions passed into the choir. Upon it the
organ is placed.

The eastern part of the nave was rebuilt after the calamity that
happened on St. Paulinus’s Day (October 10), 1323. Mass had just been
celebrated, and the church was still crowded with men, women and
children, when two of the great piers of the main arcade on the south
side fell outwards, crushing the south wall of the aisle and cloisters.
Soon the wooden roof of the nave also fell. Strange to relate nobody was
injured; and although the shrine of St. Amphibalus was damaged, still
the chest that contained his relics suffered no harm.

All this part of the church had to be rebuilt; and, of course, the south
arcade differs from the northern one.

A massive pier, either the original Norman or one rebuilt in the Norman
style, divides the five Early English bays on the west from the
Decorated ones on the east. West we find the characteristic tooth
ornament; and east, the characteristic ball-flower.

When the pestilence was raging in London (only twenty miles away) in
1543, 1589, and 1593, courts of justice were held in this nave. On the
north side a pier bears an inscription to the memory of Sir John
Mandeville, the famous traveller, who was born at St. Albans in the
Fourteenth Century and educated in the monastery school.

The massive piers were coated with plaster and then painted. Each has
traces of the same picture of the Crucifixion, with a second subject
below it. This subject differs on every column. The soffits of the
arches were also bright with colour, so that the severity and plainness
that we now feel were originally missing.

     “Although in the four western bays of the main arcade the Early
     English work is very plain, yet the triforium is ornate. The
     arcading consists of two pointed arches in each bay, each
     comprising two sub-arches; the supporting columns are slender and
     enriched with dog-tooth mouldings, with which also the
     string-course below the triforium is decorated. The shafts, which
     probably were intended to support a stone vault over the nave,
     should be noticed.

     “The triforium over the Norman main arcade consists of large,
     wide-splayed, round-headed openings, in which the tracery and
     glazing introduced in the Fifteenth Century, when the aisle roof
     was lowered in pitch so as to expose the north side of the
     triforium to the sky, still remains. One of the triforium arches,
     namely, the third from the tower, was simply walled up at this
     time, and so retains its original form. The clerestory in this part
     of the church consists of plain, round-headed openings. Between
     each bay the outer southern face of each Norman pier is continued
     in the form of the flat pilaster buttress up to the roof.”--(T. P.)

The piers of the choir, like those of the nave, were originally painted.
So was the ceiling. Wall-paintings were likewise discovered between the
clerestory windows in 1875. The choir-stalls and Bishop’s Throne are
modern. In the south-choir-aisle the tomb of =Roger and Sigar=, two local
hermits, was once a place of pious pilgrimage.

The arches of the =Tower= are fifty-five feet high. The four inside faces
of the lantern contain windows above the arcade, and the ceiling of the
lantern (102 feet from the floor) is painted with the red and white
roses of Lancaster and York, and various coats-of-arms. The effect of
the tower is impressive. The peal consists of eight bells, cast in
London in 1699. Some of the bells have been recast.

Beneath the =Presbytery= notable abbots, monks and laymen were given
burial. The presbytery is divided from the aisles by solid walls, broken
by the Ramryge and Wheathampstead chantries, and two doorways: it is
closed in on the east side by a magnificent screen, constructed during
William of Wallingford’s rule (1476-1484), and generally known as the
=Wallingford Screen=. It is hard to realize that the lace-like canopies,
of which it is composed, are made of stone. The material is clunch, a
hard stone from the lower chalk formation. This great reredos has been
restored of late years and filled with statues. There are no records to
describe or even name the original figures; but those now occupying the
niches, by Mr. H. Hems, of Exeter, are, beginning on the left and
reading downwards: (1) St. Titus, St. Timothy, St. Barnabas, Angel
Gabriel; (2) King Edmund, St. Cuthbert, St. Augustine; (3) St. Oswyn,
St. Giles, St. Cecilia, St. Boniface, St. Katherine, St. David; (4) King
Offa, St. Helen, oak door; (5) St. Ethelbert, St. Leonard, St. Agnes,
St. Nicholas, St. Frideswide, St. Chad; (6) Edward the Confessor, St.
Benedict, St. Alban; (7) Angel, Angel, Angel; (8) Angel, Blessed Virgin
Mary; (9) Crucifix; (10) Angel, St. John; (11) Angel, Angel, Angel; (12)
St. Hugh of Lincoln, St. Patrick, St. Amphibalus; (13) Edward King of
West Saxons, St. Lawrence, St. Lucy, St. Wolfstan, St. Osyth, St.
Alphege; (14) Pope Adrian IV., St. Etheldreda, oak door; (15) St.
George, St. Benedict, Biscop, St. Ethelberga, St. Richard; (17) The
Venerable Bede, St. Germain, St. Erkenwald, St. Margaret, St. Ælfric;
(18) St. Paul, St. Luke, St. Mark, St. Mary the Virgin. Below the
Crucifix stands a row of smaller statues representing Christ and the
Twelve Apostles. On Christ’s right: St. James Minor, St. Philip, St.
John, St. James Major, St. Andrew, St. Peter; and on his left: St.
Thomas, St. Bartholomew, St. Matthew, St. Simon, St. Matthias and St.
Jude.

On the right and left of the altar are chantries. The south one is that
of =John of Wheathampstead=, who was twice Abbot (1420-1440, and
1451-1464). His effigy is robed in full vestments, carries a pastoral
staff and wears a mitre. His rebus--three ears of wheat--and his
motto--_Valles habundabunt_--appear in various places.

On the other side of the steps the handsomer =Ramryge Chantry=
commemorates Abbot Thomas Ramryge, who also has a rebus--a ram wearing a
collar with the letters R. Y. G. E. upon it. He entered office in 1492,
and, strange to relate, no details of his rule are known. The date of
his death is also a blank. Yet here is his fine monument in the
Perpendicular style.

Behind the Wallingford Screen lies the =Saint’s Chapel=, with the =Shrine
of St. Alban= in the centre.

     “The bones of St. Alban were of course counted as the chief
     treasure of the Abbey, in some respects the most valuable relics in
     the kingdom, since they were the bones of the first Christian
     martyr in the island. It was meet and fitting, then, that the most
     splendid resting-place should be chosen for them. The bones
     themselves were enclosed in an outer and an inner case; the inner
     was the work of the sixteenth Abbot, Geoffrey of Gorham
     (1119-1149), and the outer of the nineteenth Abbot, Symeon
     (1167-1183). These coffers were of special metal encrusted with
     rich gems. It is recorded that the reliquary was so heavy that it
     required four men to carry it, which they probably did by two
     poles, each passing through two rings on either side of the coffer.
     It is said to have been placed in a lofty position by Abbot Symeon;
     but the pedestal of which we see the reconstruction to-day was
     erected during the early part of the Fourteenth Century, in the
     time of the twenty-sixth Abbot, John de Marinis (1302-1308). This
     was built of Purbeck marble and consists of a basement 2 feet 6
     inches high, 8 feet 6 inches long, and 3 feet 2 inches wide, above
     which were four canopied niches at each side and one at each end;
     these were richly painted and probably contained other relics; in
     the spandrels were carved figures, at the corners angels censing.
     At the west end was a representation of St. Alban’s martyrdom; on
     the south side in the centre was, and still is, a figure of King
     Offa holding the model of a church; in the next spandrel to the
     east the figure of another king; on the east side a representation
     of the scourging of St. Alban, and on the north other figures, of
     which the only one remaining is that of a bishop or mitred abbot.
     In the pediments or gables were carvings of foliage, and round the
     top of the pedestal ran a richly-carved cornice; round the base
     stood fourteen detached shafts, on which perhaps the movable canopy
     rested, and outside three other shafts of twisted pattern on each
     side, which carried six huge candles, probably kept burning day and
     night, certainly during the night, to light the chamber holding the
     shrine. On this lofty pedestal, 8 feet 3 inches high, the glorious
     shrine rested. It was rendered still more ornate than it was in
     Abbot Symeon’s time by the addition of a silver-gilt turret, on the
     lower part of which was a representation of the Resurrection with
     two angels and four knights (suggested by the guard of Roman
     soldiers) keeping the tomb. A silver-gilt eagle of cunning
     craftsmanship stood on the shrine. All these additions were given
     by Abbot Thomas de la Mare (1349-1396). A certain monk also gave
     two representations of the sun in solid gold, surrounded by rays of
     silver tipped with precious stones. Over all was a canopy which,
     like many modern font-covers, was probably suspended by a rope
     running over a pulley in the roof, by which it might be raised.
     There is a mark in the roof remaining, possibly caused by the
     fastening of the pulley. An altar, dedicated to St. Alban, stood at
     the west end of the pedestal.

     “Such a precious thing as this jewelled shrine and the still more
     precious bones within it could not be left for a moment unguarded
     and unwatched, for stealing relics, when a favourable opportunity
     arose, was a temptation too great to be resisted by any monks,
     however holy. So on the south side of the shrine was erected a
     watching loft; the one that remains was constructed probably during
     the reign of Richard II., and his badge appears on it, but, no
     doubt, from the first there was some such place provided for the
     purpose of keeping guard. The chamber had two stories: the lower
     contained cupboards, in which vestments and relics were kept, these
     are now filled with various antiquarian curiosities, Roman pottery
     from Verulamium, architectural fragments, etc. An oaken staircase
     leads up into the chamber where the ‘custos feretri’ sat watching
     the shrine day and night, guard of course being changed at
     intervals. It must have been trying work watching there during the
     night-time in frosty weather, but monks were accustomed to bear
     cold. The watching chamber was built of oak and was richly carved.
     On the south side of the cornice are angels, the hart--badge of
     Richard II., the martyrdom of St. Alban, Time the reaper, and the
     seasons; on the north the months of the year are represented.”--(T.
     P.)

On the south side is buried =Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester=, son of Henry
IV., brother of Henry V., and uncle of Henry VI. He died in 1447. The
handsome tomb was probably erected by the Abbot Wheathampstead, who was
a great friend of Duke Humphrey’s.

In the north aisle of the Saint’s Chapel we come to the pedestal of the
=Shrine of St. Amphibalus= (see page 362). It stood in the centre of the
retro-choir until Lord Grimthorpe removed it to its present position.

An oak screen separates the Saint’s Chapel from the =Retro-Choir=. This is
Lord Grimthorpe’s work, and through it we pass. The Retro-Choir dates
from the end of the Thirteenth Century, and has been greatly restored.
In the centre once stood the shrine of St. Amphibalus (now removed to
the north aisle of the Saint’s Chapel), and there were several altars:
to Our Lady of the Four Tapers; to St. Michael; to St. Edmund, King and
Martyr; to St. Peter; and to St. Amphibalus.

The =Lady-Chapel=, greatly restored, dates from the latter part of the
Thirteenth and early part of the Fourteenth Centuries. Several changes
of style may be noted. The side windows are fine examples of the
Decorated, and the statuettes ornamenting the jambs and mullions still
remain. The eastern window of five lights is a strange combination of
tracery and tabernacle work. Originally the Lady-Chapel was separated
from the retro-choir by a screen. The glass in the windows is modern,
and the stone vaulting is also modern. Historical associations are
numerous.

Beneath the floor lie the hated Edmund Beaufort, Duke of Somerset,
grandson of John of Gaunt; Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, son of
the famous Hotspur; and Thomas, Lord Clifford: whose bodies were found
lying dead in the streets of St. Albans, after the first battle in 1455,
in which they fell fighting for the Red Rose party.

Beyond the eastern bay on the south side was built the =Chapel of the
Transfiguration=, dedicated in 1430. Of late years this addition was
rebuilt for a vestry. The walls were made lower than the original ones,
so as to show the fine window above that consists of a traceried arch
within a curvilinear triangle, beneath which is a row of niches. Beneath
these is a very fine row of _sedilia_ and _piscinœ_. The carving in the
new chapel is very naturalistic, and represents the poppy, buttercup,
primrose, gooseberry, rose, blackberry, pansy, ivy, maple, and
convolvulus and other local flowers and leaves.




OXFORD

     DEDICATION: THE HOLY TRINITY, ST. MARY AND ST. FRIDESWIDE.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CEILING IN CHOIR; WINDOWS; SHRINE OF ST.
     FRIDESWIDE.


This Cathedral is peculiar in being almost hidden from sight in a series
of college buildings, gardens and quadrangles. It is the chapel of
Christ Church, as well as a cathedral; and to enter it we have to pass
through the gateway of the famous =Tom Tower=, and across the great
quadrangle, familiarly known as =Tom Quad=.

The big bell =Tom= gives its name to the tower and quadrangle, is seven
feet one inch in diameter, and weighs 17,000 tons. It was brought from
Oseney Abbey with the other bells, the “merry Christ Church bells,” that
now hang in the bell-tower above the =hall staircase=. Tom was recast in
1680.

The lower story of Tom Tower was built by Cardinal Wolsey. The cupola
was added by Sir Christopher Wren. Three sides of the quadrangle were
built by Wolsey, and the north side by Bishop Fell. As we pass through
Tom Tower we note that a statue of Cardinal Wolsey faces St. Aldgate’s,
and a statue of Queen Anne faces the quadrangle.

=Christ Church= is the largest college in the University of Oxford, and
stands on the site of the ancient priory of St. Frideswide.

In 1524 Cardinal Wolsey obtained authority from Henry VIII. and Clement
VIII. to suppress a number of religious houses in various parts of
England, and to appropriate their revenues to the building and endowing
of a College. After he had made considerable progress in the building of
Christ Church he fell into disgrace with the King, who seized the
property and distributed it among his courtiers. At a later period Henry
VIII. refounded the establishment, and added to it the Abbey of Oseney,
which was then the Cathedral of the See of Oxford. Christ Church (the
present Cathedral) was at that time called the College of Henry VIII.,
and was a Collegiate Church. In 1546, on the suppression of Oseney
Abbey, St. Frideswide became the Cathedral Church of Oxford. Oseney is
depicted in the King window (see page 391).

The foundation was converted into one of secular canons in the Eighth or
Ninth Century; and these were in turn succeeded by the regular canons,
who built their chapter-house, dormitory, refectory and cloisters. In
1158 they began the present Cathedral, which was completed in 1180,
having swept away the Saxon church rebuilt by King Ethelred in 1004,
according to some critics, while other antiquaries think that much of
the present Cathedral is St. Ethelred’s. The church was dedicated to the
Holy Trinity, St. Mary, and St. Frideswide, and was somewhat peculiar
for the Twelfth Century, in being more elegant than was usual at that
time. Cramped for room the south transept was cut off for the sake of
the cloisters; and aisles were given to the north transept. There was no
room for a Lady-Chapel at the east end; and, consequently, an additional
aisle north of the north aisle of the choir was built. The same
arrangement occurs at Ripon; the Elder Lady Chapel at Bristol holds a
similar position.

     “St. Frideswide Church, now Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford, is a
     fine example of late Norman and transitional work of early
     character. It was consecrated in 1180, and was probably building
     for about twenty years previously: the confirmation, by Pope
     Hadrian IV. (Breakspeare, the only English Pope), of the charters
     granting the Saxon monastery of St. Frideswide to the Norman monks
     was not obtained until 1158, and it is not probable that they began
     to rebuild their church until their property was secured. The Prior
     at this period was Robert of Cricklade, called Canutus, a man of
     considerable eminence, some of whose writings were in existence in
     the time of Leland. Under his superintendence the church was
     entirely rebuilt from the foundations, and without doubt on a
     larger scale than before, as the Saxon church does not appear to
     have been destroyed until this period.

     “The design of the present structure is very remarkable; the lofty
     arched recesses, which are carried up over the actual arches and
     the triforium, giving the idea of a subsequent work carried over
     the older work; but an examination of the construction shows that
     this is not the case, that it was all built at one time, and that
     none of it is earlier than about 1160. In this church the central
     tower is not square, the nave and choir being wider than the
     transepts, and consequently the east and west arches are
     round-headed, while the north and south are pointed: this would not
     in itself be any proof of transition, but the whole character of
     the work is late, though very rich and good, and the clerestory
     windows of the nave are pointed without any necessity for it, which
     is then a mark of transition.”--(J. H. P.)

St. Frideswide (Bond of Peace), or “the Lady,” as she was called in
Oxford, lived early in the Eighth Century, when Ethelbald was king of
Mercia. Her father, Didan, was a prince who lived in the city of Oxford
about 727, where Frideswide was born. Of her early piety, her refusal of
marriage, her foundation of this nunnery at Oxford, her miracles of
healing and her “glorious death,” there are many pretty stories.

St. Frideswide’s Church was burned in 1002, when Ethelred the Unready
ordained the Massacre of the Danes.

Ethelred afterwards made a vow that he would rebuild St. Frideswide’s
Church; and in 1004 he began the splendid edifice, of unusual
magnificence for the period.

Robert of Cricklade, prior from 1141 to 1180, seems to have restored
Ethelred’s church; and in that year the relics of St. Frideswide were
translated to a more conspicuous place in the church.

Many distinguished noblemen and prelates were present:

     “After they were meet, and injoyned fasting and prayers were past,
     as also those ceremonies that are used at such times was with all
     decency performed, then those bishops that were appointed,
     accompanied with Alexio, the pope’s legat for Scotland, went to the
     place where she was buried, and opening the sepulchre, took out
     with great devotion the remainder of her body that was left after
     it had rested there 480 yeares, and with all the sweet odours and
     spices imaginable to the great rejoycing of the multitude then
     present mingled them amongst her bones and laid them up in a rich
     gilt coffer made and consecrated for that purpose, and placed it on
     the north side of the quire, somewhat distant from the ground, and
     inclosed it with a partition from the sight hereafter of the
     vulgar.”--(A.-à-W.)

In 1289 these relics were again translated and placed in the position of
the old shrine, probably in the north-choir-aisle, where the marble base
recently discovered now stands (see page 385).

     “In the Lancet period (1190-1245) the works went on apace. An upper
     stage was added to the tower and on that the spire was built--the
     first large stone spire in England. It is a Broach spire, i.e., the
     cardinal sides of the spire are built right out to the eaves, so
     that there is no parapet. On the other hand, instead of having
     broaches at the angle it has pinnacles. Moreover, to bring down the
     thrusts more vertically, heavy dormer windows are inserted at the
     foot of each of the cardinal sides of the spire,--altogether a very
     logical and scientific piece of engineering, much more common in
     the early spires of Northern France than in England.”--(F. B.)

About the Thirteenth Century the monks built the Chapter-House now
standing; then the Lady-Chapel; altered the Norman windows to Decorated;
and in the Fifteenth Century made many changes in the new Perpendicular
style.

Wolsey destroyed half of the nave in order to build Tom Quad. His idea
was to erect a magnificent church on a large scale; but in the meantime
his fall occurred. In 1546 St. Frideswide’s was made, as already noted,
the Cathedral Church of Oxford.

In the Seventeenth Century the tracery of many windows was altered for
the sake of glass by the Dutchman Abraham Van Ling, for which old
windows depicting scenes from St. Frideswide’s life and ancient arms
were sacrificed. In later times some of Van Ling’s windows suffered the
same fate, for modern work. One of his windows, however, remains (see
page 382). Some of the windows were smashed during the Puritan wars; but
on the whole the Cathedral escaped damage.

Christ Church being a royal college, during the Civil War a University
regiment of Cavaliers was drilled in Tom Quad; and when Charles I.
occupied Oxford, after Edgehill, he held court in Christ Church.

The Cathedral went through the fate of all English cathedrals in the
Nineteenth Century; and finally, in 1870, a thorough restoration was
undertaken by Dean Liddell and Sir Gilbert Scott, whose conservative
alterations and restorations of windows, etc., have brought all the
parts of the Cathedral into harmony. The windows of Burne-Jones are a
great addition to the charm of the interior.

     “The whole church is exceedingly interesting. It fills a niche in
     the history of English architecture all by itself. It is not the
     early and rude Traditional work of the Cistercians. On the other
     hand, it has not yet the lightness and grace of Ripon; still less
     the charm of the Canterbury choir, Chichester presbytery, Wells and
     Abbey Dore--Gothic in all but name. In spite of a pointed arch here
     and there, it is a Romanesque design.

     “The work commenced, as usual, at the east, as is shown by the
     gradual improvement westward in the designs of the capitals. The
     evidence of the vaulting, too, points in the same direction. In the
     choir-aisle the ribs are massive and heavy; in the western aisle of
     the north transept they are lighted; in the south aisle of the nave
     they are pointed and filleted.”--(F. B.)

Owing to its secluded position it is almost impossible to get a view of
the Cathedral; but the tower and spire can be seen from the cloisters.

The =Cloisters= line three sides of the square only, for the west side was
destroyed by Wolsey for the hall staircase, which is surmounted by the
=Bell Tower=, in which the bells from the Abbey of Oseney hang.

     “From the same position at the west of the cloister one can enjoy
     the best view of the tower and spire of the church. One is close
     enough to see all the detail and yet from this angle nothing is
     lost of the general effect. On a moonlit evening the effect is
     particularly solemn and beautiful. From this point also should be
     noticed the difference in the masonry of the south transept. The
     lower story is entirely rubble, while the upper story is partly of
     good ashlar work.

     “On the south side of the cloister is the Old Library, as it is now
     called, which was formerly the refectory of the monastery, and is
     all that now remains of the conventual buildings. Its large
     Perpendicular windows, rising like a clerestory above it, look on
     to the cloister, but they were spoilt on the inside by a staircase,
     when the building was turned into undergraduates’ rooms. On the
     other side, facing the meadow buildings, there is a curious little
     oriel window, its lights now walled up, that once contained the
     pulpit whence the lessons were read during meals.”--(P. D.)

We may remember, as we stand here, that Cranmer was unfrocked in this
quadrangle.

Entering through the porch in Tom Quad, cut through one of the canonical
houses, we come into a sort of ante-chapel with the organ screen before
us. Passing under the screen we have an unbroken view of the =Nave=, the
Choir with its wonderful ceiling and the handsome wheel-window rising
above the arcade and two round-headed windows at the east end.

     “Christ Church is the smallest of our cathedrals; for even with the
     new ante-chapel it measures about 175 feet in length. Instead of
     being of the usual cruciform plan, it is now almost square,--in
     fact, the length from the reredos to the organ-screen is 132 feet,
     while the breadth across from the Latin Chapel to St. Lucy’s Chapel
     is 108 feet. The church is made up of the shortened nave with its
     two aisles, and ante-chapel, the central tower, the north transept
     with its one aisle, the south transept, and the eastern half of the
     church, which itself contains no less than six divisions,--the
     choir, with its two aisles, the Lady-Chapel on the north, and the
     Latin Chapel (or St. Catherine’s) on the north again of that, while
     on the south is the small chapel of St. Lucy.

     “If the unusual appearance of the cathedral is partly due to
     Wolsey’s destruction, it is partly due also to its being used as a
     college chapel, and partly to the fact that in general plan, and to
     some extent in detail, it is Ethelred’s design, commenced seventy
     years before the great developments of Norman architecture
     began.”--(P. D.)

We stop at the west end of the north aisle of the nave to examine the
one remaining window designed by Van Ling.

     “There are various opinions about this window, which represents
     Jonah sitting under his gourd, and the town of Nineveh in the
     distance. We must confess to a great admiration for it; the foliage
     is fine and rich, and if it is a little over-strong in its green,
     that only makes it more characteristic of its age. And, however
     that may be, there cannot be two opinions as to beauty of the town
     in the background, which reminds one irresistibly of Dürer; and,
     with its rich brown houses, bluish roofs, touches of greenery, and
     fair purple hills beyond, makes the right-hand light of the window
     a picture of which one never wearies. The whole is leaded in
     rectangular panes, like Bishop King’s window.”--(P. D.)

We now cross to the west end of the south aisle of the nave to see
Burne-Jones’s =Faith, Hope and Charity= window, a memorial to Edward
Denison (died 1870), son of the Bishop of Salisbury, and a pioneer
worker in the East End of London.

     “The figure of Hope has a greyish-blue drapery, varied in tint and
     diapered with the pattern of a flower in stain. The scarf floating
     round the figure is sky-blue in tone and lighter than the dress.
     The figure of Charity has a ruby over-mantle, with a white dress
     underneath; while the figure of Faith has a blue dress beautifully
     and richly diapered, the upper portion with a sumptuous Venetian
     design familiar on the brocades of the Sixteenth Century, and the
     lower portion with a sprig of foliage. The tone of the backgrounds
     is a rich, warm green, and is very carefully painted with foliage,
     and the contrast yielded by

[Illustration: OXFORD: TOWER AND ENTRANCE]

[Illustration: OXFORD: CHOIR, EAST]

     the pale blue of the drapery, and the rich, warm green of the
     background in the two outside windows, is most harmonious and
     striking. The detail in this window is very elaborate, and every
     part of it bears traces of care and thought.”--(P. D.)

The =Choir= consists of four bays, with the presbytery beyond.
Perpendicular alterations are noticeable in the upper part. The
triforium is late Norman. The pillars are larger than those in the nave
and their capitals are very fine specimens of stone carving. Some
critics go so far as to say they are Saxon.

The most striking feature of the whole Cathedral is the pendant =ceiling=
of the Choir.

     “Fergusson considers this work to be the most satisfactory attempt
     ever made to surmount the great difficulty presented in all
     fan-tracery by the awkward, flat, central space which is left in
     each bay by the four cones of the vault. At Gloucester, King’s
     College Chapel, Cambridge, Henry VII.’s Chapel, Westminster, and
     other places, various attempts were made to deceive the eye, and
     hide the unmanageable space; in Henry VII.’s Chapel the well-known
     pendants were boldly introduced with this object. None were wholly
     satisfactory, but, says Fergusson:--

     “‘Strange as it may appear from its date, the most satisfactory
     roof of this class is that erected by Cardinal Wolsey over the
     choir of Oxford Cathedral. In this instance the pendants are thrust
     so far forward, and made so important, that the central part of the
     roof is practically quadripartite. The remaining difficulty was
     obviated by abandoning the circular, horizontal outline of true
     fan-tracery, and adopting a polygonal form instead. As the whole is
     done in a constructive manner and with appropriate detail, this
     roof, except in size, is one of the best and most remarkable ever
     executed.’

     “Fan-tracery is a peculiarly English feature, and was invented,
     according to Fergusson, in order to get rid of the endless
     repetition of inverted pyramids which earlier vaulting produced. He
     therefore considers it an improvement on the vaulting of the early
     English and Decorated periods; and, as he thinks the ceiling of
     Christ Church Cathedral to be the best example of fan-tracery, he
     comes near to pronouncing it the finest in the world.”--(P. D.)

The East End is Scott’s restoration in the style of the Twelfth Century.
The large wheel-window (an imitation from Canterbury) and the two
round-headed windows below produce a fine effect.

On the left of the Choir we come to the most curious part of the
Cathedral. Columns and arches mark the divisions of the
north-choir-aisle, the =Lady-Chapel= further north and the =Latin Chapel=
beyond--practically three aisles. The east end of each aisle contains a
beautiful Burne-Jones window. The north transept forms the western
boundary of these three aisles, which are in reality only an extension
of this transept.

     “Here the eye wanders among pillars and arches which branch away in
     so many directions that the grandest churches can scarcely give
     more thoroughly the idea of infinity. And here one stands on the
     site of St. Frideswide’s first little church, with the very arches
     that she had built for her, still standing in all their primitive
     simplicity.

     “At the end of the north-choir-aisle is the St. Cecilia window,
     presented in honour of the patroness of music by Dr. Corfe, a
     former organist, in 1873. In the centre light the saint is
     represented playing her regal or small hand-organ; two angels
     holding other musical instruments, with palms in their hands, stand
     by her. The drapery is wrought in white glass, the angels have
     pale-blue wings, and the flesh tints matted over with red tell warm
     against the drapery. In the lower panels are three scenes from her
     life: ‘Here St. Cecilia teaches her husband,’ ‘Here an angel of the
     Lord teaches St. Cecilia,’ ‘Here St. Cecilia wins a heavenly
     crown;’ the saint’s figure in the last panel is most touchingly
     drawn. These lower panels are richer in colour than the rest, and a
     greater variety of tints is introduced; but the colours are so
     delicate, and so skilfully blended, that they fall in most
     harmoniously with the main parts of the window.”--(P. D.)

In the most eastern arch between the north-choir-aisle and the
Lady-Chapel we stop to examine the =Shrine of St. Frideswide=.

     “The coffer or shrine, which was made for the translation in 1289
     (its base being therefore the most ancient monument in the
     cathedral), was knocked to pieces at the Reformation (1538), and,
     being of wood, must have entirely perished. But gradually, and from
     different places, fragments of the base were brought together:
     first, several pieces of delicately carved marble were discovered
     in the sides of a square well in the yard south-west of the
     cathedral; then a part of the plinth on the south side was found to
     be in use as a step, luckily with the carved portion turned
     inwards; next a spandrel was detected by Mr. Francis, the head
     verger, in the wall of the cemetery; and last of all a piece of the
     plinth was found in a wall in Tom Quad. Though some portions are
     still wanting, it is not impossible that more may yet be found.

     “As the monument stands now, it cannot, of course, impress one as
     it would have done in its perfect state, with the rich
     superstructure crowning it: especially as the restored shafts are
     merely square stone supports of the clumsiest description, so
     studiously careful has the restorer been not to confuse them with
     the original work. Still, though the base of St. Frideswide’s
     shrine is only a collection of fragments, these fragments are of
     remarkable beauty and interest. It is of Forest marble, measuring
     seven feet by three and a half; and consists of an arcade of two
     richly cusped arches at the sides and one at each end. On the top
     of this was fixed the _feretrum_, containing the jewelled casket
     that held the relics themselves. The spandrels are filled with
     wonderfully carved foliage, unusually naturalistic, and preserving
     still the traces of colour and gilding to remind one of its former
     glories. On the south side there is maple in the central spandrel,
     with a wreath of what is probably crow’s-foot in a boss below: the
     two side spandrels contain columbine and the greater celandine. On
     the north side the foliage is mostly oak, with acorns and numerous
     empty cups; sycamore and ivy filling the adjoining spandrels. At
     the east end one of the spandrels contains vine leaves and grapes,
     the other fig-leaves, but without the fruit; the cusp under the
     vine has a leaf which may be that of hog-leaf. At the west end
     there is hawthorn and bryony. The choice of all this foliage was
     doubtless made for symbolical reasons, referring first to St.
     Frideswide’s life in the oak woods near Abingdon, and next to her
     care for the sick and suffering at Thornberrie (now Binsey). And in
     this connection it is pleasant to think that the sculptor, with
     tender fancy, chose plants which were famous for their healing
     virtue.”--(P. D.)

The =Lady-Chapel= (Thirteenth Century and Early English) is sometimes
called the Dormitory, because many canons are buried here.
Characteristic curling foliage decorates the capitals. The shafts are
filleted. Traces of colouring can be observed here and there and also
figures of angels on the roof. The Decorated window (restored) at the
east end contains glass designed by Burne-Jones and made by William
Morris, a memorial to Frederick Vyner, murdered by brigands at Marathon
in 1870.

The figures represent Samuel the Prophet, David, King of Israel, John
the Evangelist, and Timothy the Bishop. In the panels beneath are, Eli
instructing the young Samuel, David slaying Goliath, St. John at the
Last Supper, and Timothy as a little boy learning from his mother.

Here also is the tomb of =Elizabeth Lady Montacute=, who gave Christ
Church Meadow to the Priory for the support of two priests for her
chantry in this Lady-Chapel. Her effigy lies on the top of the tomb, and
portraits of her children appear in the panels below. The whole was
originally brilliantly coloured.

Four arches divide the Lady-Chapel. Under the easternmost one is a
large tomb known as the =Watching Chamber=.

     “Its real nature is still a matter of dispute: some maintaining it
     to have been used as a chantry chapel for the welfare of those who
     were buried below; others, that it served as a ‘watching chamber’
     to protect the gold and jewels which hung about the shrine of St.
     Frideswide.

     “Most elaborately carved and crocketed, the ‘watching chamber’ is a
     beautiful example of full-blown Perpendicular workmanship; ‘most
     lovely English work, both of heart and hand,’ according to Mr.
     Ruskin. It consists of four stories, the two lower, in stone,
     forming an altar tomb and canopy, and the two upper in wood. A door
     from the Latin Chapel leads one up a small and well-worn stone
     staircase into the interior of the little upper chapel, which is
     now a rough wooden room. Its extreme roughness suggests that it was
     once panelled and otherwise adorned, while there are marks at its
     east end, which may be the site of an altar, or of the _feretrum_
     itself.”--(P. D.)

Lastly we come to the =Latin-Chapel= also called =St. Catherine’s=, in
honour of the patron of students of theology.

     “The Decorated vaulting was built when the chapel was enlarged in
     the Fourteenth Century. The foliage of its bosses is very
     beautiful; the water-lilies especially of the third boss, so
     suggestive of Oxford streams, and the roses a little further east,
     are a happy combination of naturalistic treatment with decorative
     restraint. It will be noticed that the vaulting does not run true
     in the third bay, the Decorated work there having been somewhat
     awkwardly joined to the Early English of the second bay.

     “A prominent feature in the Latin-Chapel is the old oak stalling,
     which a second inspection proves to be patchwork. The returned
     stalls at the west end probably belonged to the choir of the
     conventual church, and in that case would have been fitted in here
     when Dean Duppa ‘adorned’ the choir by destroying the old
     wood-work. Near to these is some of the work prepared for Cardinal
     Wolsey’s new chapel. The poppy-heads are good specimens of
     wood-carving, and contain a monogram I.H.S., a heart in a crown of
     thorns, a cardinal’s hat, and other devices. The pulpit, with its
     delicate canopy, an excellent specimen of Seventeenth Century
     wood-work, was formerly the Vice-Chancellor’s seat in another part
     of the church, occupied by him during university sermons. It was
     then used by the Regius Professor of Divinity for his lectures, but
     since the altar was restored six years ago, the chapel has been no
     longer used as a lecture-room.”--(P. D.)

Here we find some of the best glass in the Cathedral. At the east end is
the famous =St. Frideswide window= by Burne-Jones; and the three windows
on the north are beautiful specimens of the Fourteenth Century, replaced
here by Dean Liddell. In the middle of each light is a figure and the
rest of the space is covered with the diamond-shaped pieces of glass
bearing leaves and flowers, technically called “quarries.” Medallions
and borders with various beasts--even monkeys--decorate the spaces in
the tracery. The first window depicts St. Catherine, a Virgin and Child,
and next a figure, probably St. Frideswide; the second window represents
an archbishop and angels; and the third, St. Frideswide with St.
Margaret on one side and St. Catherine on the other. It is very
interesting to compare these with the Burne-Jones’s St. Frideswide at
the east end:

     “Though this is one of the first windows that Burne-Jones ever
     designed it is one of his best. Better suited (as many think) to
     the purpose of a window, at all events in this enclosed chapel,
     than the freer method of the other glass, it carries on the best
     traditions of the craft, in its infinite variety of gem-like colour
     and complexity of detail; while it attains a degree of perfection
     in pictorial effect and figure-drawing which was impossible during
     the great era of mediæval glass-painting. The death of the saint,
     with its lovely effect of light through the latticed window, for
     instance, and the picture of her in the pig-sty, would be perfect
     as finished pictures, and yet do not for an instant outstep the
     convention which is necessary for their function as part of a
     window.

     “The colour is, in spite (or rather because) of its radiant
     variety, not so immediately attractive to every one as that of the
     other Burne-Jones windows; but when one has sat down for five or
     ten minutes and deciphered the various scenes, its unapproachable
     beauty becomes apparent, and each succeeding visit deepens the
     impression of the splendour and poetry of this incomparable work.

     “The scenes depicted are, by the artist’s own account, as
     follows:--

     “_First Light_: St. Frideswide and her companions brought up by St.
     Cecilia and St. Catherine; St. Frideswide founds her first convent;
     A messenger from the King of Mercia demands her in marriage; The
     King comes to take her by force, and the first convent is broken
     up.

     “_Second Light_: Flight of St. Frideswide to Abingdon; The King of
     Mercia and his soldiers in pursuit; The Flight continued; The
     Pursuit continued; St. Frideswide takes refuge in a pig-sty.

     “_Third Light_: Flight of St. Frideswide to Binsey; The King of
     Mercia in pursuit; St. Frideswide founds a new convent at Binsey;
     Her merciful deeds.

     “_Fourth Light_: Return of St. Frideswide to Oxford; The Siege of
     Oxford by the King of Mercia; The Siege continued; The King struck
     blind; The Death of St. Frideswide.

     “In the tracery above are the trees of life and of knowledge, and a
     ship of souls convoyed by angels.”--(P. D.)

Passing into the north transept we note that the eastern aisle has been
merged into the Lady-Chapel and Latin-Chapel of which it forms the
western bays; but that the western aisle remains.

The north window (modern glass) was restored back to its original design
by Sir Gilbert Scott. Beneath it is a panelled tomb of Henry VII.’s
period. It is supposed to be that of a monk named =Zouch= (died 1503),
probably a scribe, because his ink-horn and pen-case appear on the
shields of his tomb. He left a bequest to pay for the vaulting.

The =Tower= is not perfectly square. The nave and choir sides are wider
than those of the transepts, and therefore the north and south arches
are pointed and the east and west arches are round. Foliage decorates
the capitals of the shafts. The lantern is open and is ornamented with
arcades and arches. At the south-east pier the break in the masonry
indicates, in the opinion of some students, the place where the builders
stopped work when Sweyn drove Ethelred out of England.

The fine Jacobean =Pulpit= (1635), elaborately carved with grotesques on
the panels, deserves at least a passing glance.

The south transept has no aisles, for the western aisle was cut off by
the cloisters and the eastern aisle became =St. Lucy’s Chapel=, in the
second bay. Though there are many old royalist tombs the chief interest
here is the beautiful =Window= of three lights, the Flamboyant tracery of
which frames the most splendid glass in the whole cathedral. It dates
from about 1330.

     “In the uppermost compartment of the tracery is a figure of our
     Lord seated in glory; below there are angels with censers, and next
     two Augustinian monks in blue and white robes, kneeling with
     outstretched arms; then come coats-of-arms, and various grotesque
     beasts, all most richly coloured in ruby and blue and green and
     gold. Below, in the principal spaces, are (1) St. Martin on
     horseback giving his coat to the beggar; (2) the martyrdom of St.
     Thomas à Becket: St. Thomas’ head has been knocked out by some
     fanatic, and replaced with white glass; the armour and shields of
     the knights should be noticed; (3) St. Augustine, who holds a
     pastoral staff, is teaching his monks and others. In the next four
     spaces are:--The head of a king; St. Cuthbert, carrying the head
     of St. Oswald, and wearing a green chasuble; St. Blaise, in a
     mulberry-coloured chasuble; the head of a queen. The glass in the
     three main lights was destroyed, and then replaced by some of
     Seventeenth Century work, but this too is now gone, all except a
     portion of the upper part which shows that the design was
     architectural in character and the colour that of fog-smitten
     stone-work.”--(P. D.)

The =South-Choir-Aisle= is of earlier date than the nave and transept
aisles. Scott rebuilt the southern windows in the Norman style. Heads of
men and monkeys decorate the corbels that support the vault. The
original half-flower moulding adorns the Decorated east window
(restored) which contains one of Burne-Jones’s famous designs. It is a
memorial to =Edith Liddell= (1876), whose portrait appears in the central
figure as St. Catherine. In the tracery above angels are playing musical
instruments and in the panels below are scenes from the life and death
of St. Catherine.

The third window in the wall near St. Lucy’s Chapel is of great
interest. It is the only one of the original Romanesque windows that
remains. The old glass shows a portrait of =Bishop King=, Abbot of Oseney
and first Bishop of Oxford. He died in 1557 and was buried in Christ
Church Cathedral.

     “This window, with some others, was taken down during the Civil
     War, buried for safety by a member of the family, and put up again
     at the Restoration. The Bishop is represented standing vested in a
     jewelled cope of cloth of gold, and mitre, a pastoral staff in his
     gloved hand. In the background, among the trees, is a picture of
     Oseney Abbey in its already ruined condition (c. 1630), drawn
     without much feeling for its architecture, but of great value as
     almost the only picture of the place we possess. The western tower
     was the first home of what are now the Christ Church bells. Three
     coats-of-arms (being those of the Bishop, impaled with the Abbey
     of Oseney and the See of Oxford) complete the richness of what is a
     very good example of Seventeenth Century _painted_ glass, in the
     strict sense of the word.”--(P. D.)

South of the South Transept the slype, a vaulted passage including part
of the transept, leads into the Cloisters.

South of the slype lies the =Chapter-House=, deserving a visit because it
is a fine example of Early English. The monks’ heads carved on the
corbels, the bosses of the roof, and the arcade of five arches at the
east end are the chief features of the interior.

[Illustration: OXFORD: LATIN CHAPEL]

[Illustration: ST. PAUL’S: WEST FRONT]




ST. PAUL’S, LONDON

     DEDICATION: ST. PAUL. A CHURCH FORMERLY SERVED BY SECULAR CANONS.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: DOME; CHOIR STALLS; TOMBS AND MONUMENTS.


The present building in the Renaissance style is the third Christian
church erected on this site. It is said that a Roman temple to Diana
stood here; but the earliest church of which records exist was erected
by Ethelbert, King of Kent, in 610, in which he was assisted by Siebert,
King of the East Saxons, his nephew, who founded the monastery of St.
Peter, called Westminster, on Thorney Island. This Cathedral, which owed
much of its prosperity to St. Erkenwald, fourth Bishop of London, to
whose memory a golden shrine was erected here, suffered from fire in 961
and was completely destroyed in 1086. On the ruins a Norman church was
immediately erected, the architect for which was Bishop Maurice. Though
injured by fire in 1193 it was a stately and beautiful building, in the
Norman style. It was cruciform, with two western towers for bells and a
high tower in the centre with a spire. In addition to the high altar
there were seventy or eighty chantries with their own altars, and behind
the high altar the golden shrine containing the body of St. Erkenwald.
The nave contained twelve bays and also the choir rebuilt in 1221. The
Lady-Chapel was added in 1225. It was the largest Cathedral in England.
St. Paul’s was rich in relics and in treasure of all kinds--pictures
and frescoes, vestments, gold, silver and jewels. In 1312 the nave was
paved with marble and in 1315 a new wooden spire 460 feet high was
added.

This great Cathedral became the very centre of the life of the citizens.
Here men met to defend their liberties, summoned by the great bells of
St. Paul’s, from the days of King Stephen until the magnificent
Cathedral perished in the Great Fire.

     “Again and again the tocsin sounded, as St. Paul’s bell rang clear
     and loud, and the citizens seized their weapons and formed their
     battalions beneath the shadow of the great church. Now it was to
     help Simon de Montfort against the King; now to seize the person of
     the obnoxious Queen Eleanor, who was trying to escape by water from
     the Tower to Windsor, and who was rescued from their hands by the
     Bishop of London, and found refuge in his palace. Now the
     favourites of Edward II. excited their rage, especially the Bishop
     of Exeter, the King’s regent, who dared to ask the Lord Mayor for
     the keys of the city and paid for his temerity with his life.[9]

     “The chronicles of the Cathedral tell the story of the troublous
     times of the Wars of the Roses. We see Henry IV. pretending bitter
     sorrow for the death of the murdered Richard, and covering with
     cloth-of-gold the body, which had been exhibited to the people in
     St. Paul’s. We see Henry V. returning in triumph from the French
     wars, riding in state to the Cathedral attended by ‘the mayor and
     brethren of the City companies, wearing red gowns with hoods of red
     and white, well-mounted and gorgeously horsed with rich collars and
     great chains, rejoicing at his victorious return.’ Then came Henry
     VI. attended by bishops, the dean and canons, to make his offering
     at the altar. Here the false Duke of York took his oath on the
     Blessed Sacrament to be loyal to the King. Here the rival houses
     swore to lay aside their differences, and to live at peace. But a
     few years later saw the new King Edward IV., at St. Paul’s,
     attended by great Warwick, the king-maker, with his body-guard of
     800 men-at-arms. Strange were the changes of fortune in those days.
     Soon St. Paul’s saw the exhibition of the dead body of the
     king-maker, and not long afterwards that of the poor dethroned
     Henry, and Richard came in state here amid the shouts of the
     populace. After the defeat of the conspiracy of Lambert Simnel,
     Henry VII. celebrated a joyous thanksgiving in the Cathedral, and
     here, amid much rejoicing, the youthful marriage of Prince Arthur
     with Katherine of Aragon took place, when the conduits of Cheapside
     and on the west of the Cathedral ran with wine, and the bells rang
     joyfully, and all wished happiness to the Royal children whose
     wedded life was destined to be so brief.

     “St. Paul’s became the gathering-place for lords and courtiers and
     professional people, who met every day from eleven till twelve and
     from three till six to discuss the news of the day and to transact
     business.

     “Here lawyers received their clients; here men sought service; here
     usurers met their victims, and the tombs and font were mightily
     convenient for counters for the exchange of money and the
     transaction of bargains, and the rattle of gold and silver was
     constantly heard amidst the loud talking of the crowd. Gallants
     enter the Cathedral wearing spurs, having just left their steeds at
     The Bell and Savage and are immediately besieged by the choristers,
     who have the right of demanding spur money from any one entering
     the building wearing spurs. Nor are the fair sex absent, and Paul’s
     Walk was used as a convenient place for assignations. Old plays are
     full of references to this practice. Later on the nave was nothing
     but a public thoroughfare, where men tramped, carrying baskets of
     bread and fish, flesh and fruit, vessels of ale, sacks of coal, and
     even dead mules and horses and other beasts. Hucksters and peddlers
     sold their wares. Duke Humphrey’s tomb was the great meeting-place
     of all beggars and low rascals, and they euphemistically called
     their gathering ‘a dining with Duke Humphrey.’ Much more could be
     written of this assembly of all sorts and conditions of men, but we
     have said enough to show that the Cathedral had suffered greatly
     from desecration and abuse. Indeed an old writer in 1561 declared
     that the burning of the steeple in that year was a judgment for the
     scenes of profanation which were daily witnessed in old St.
     Paul’s.”--(P. H. D.)

Cromwell’s army demolished shrines and destroyed all the relics and
works of art, and seamstresses and hucksters took up their abode in the
western portico, built by Charles I. after designs by Inigo Jones. At
the Restoration plans to repair and restore the Cathedral were being
made by Wren when the Great Fire destroyed it. Wren had the task of
rebuilding it, and produced a masterpiece that takes rank with St.
Peter’s in Rome and even surpasses it in some of its details.

“The stones of Paul’s,” wrote Evelyn, “flew like granados, the melting
lead running down the streets in a stream and the very pavements glowing
with fiery redness, so as no horse or man was able to tread on them, and
the demolition had stopped all the passages, so that no help could be
applied.”

It took a long time to remove the ruins and to decide upon the plan for
the successor of Old St. Paul’s. Wren made numerous designs and drawings
and there was great delay. At length the royal warrant was obtained and
the first stone was laid June 21, 1675, at the south-east corner of the
choir. The Cathedral was building for thirty-five years. The choir was
finished and service held in it on December 2, 1697. It is sad to
remember that the great architect was a victim of jealousy and intrigue,
and pleasant to know that he lived to see the glorious church that had
taken form in his mind completed. It was finished in 1710.

     “Was there ever known in the history of the world any cathedral
     which suffered from fire like St. Paul’s? The whole career of the
     church was an ordeal by fire. It was injured by fire a hundred
     years before Westminster Hall was built; it was totally destroyed
     by fire in the Eleventh Century and it took nearly two centuries to
     restore it to anything like its former magnificence. ‘Away! we
     lose ourselves in light,’ might have been its motto, for it was all
     but completely destroyed by fire in the Fifteenth Century, and its
     spire, which was then claimed to be the highest in the world, was
     destroyed by fire a century later. Thus we have brought it to the
     terrible days of 1666, when it went under with so much of London to
     accompany it--one of the most tremendous conflagrations recorded in
     the history of great cities. Then came the Commission to rebuild
     it, of which brave John Evelyn was a member, and then Sir
     Christopher Wren raised the monument to his fame which those who
     would question his renown have only to look upon and be
     satisfied.”--(J. McC.)

Coming along from Ludgate Hill we gain a splendid view of the impressive
Dome emerging through the mists in the very heart of the City.

     “St. Paul’s is often called Classical, or Roman, or Italian; it is
     not one of these three: it is English Renaissance. It was, too, a
     distinctly happy thought of Fergusson to suggest that the Cathedral
     takes a like place in English architecture to that which the
     immortal ‘Paradise Lost’ does in English literature. The plan is
     that of a mediæval church; the pilasters and entablature are Roman;
     the round arch is found in both Roman and Romanesque, and that
     commanding feature, the Dome, is the common property of many styles
     and many ages. The general plan resembles the long or Latin Cross,
     with transepts of greater breadth than length; and the uniformity
     is broken by an apse at the east, and the two chapels at the west
     end.”--(A. D.)

Before we begin our tour of the Cathedral let us take a little note of
our surroundings.

     “In olden times St. Paul’s Churchyard was one of the great business
     centres of London. About the church men met to discuss the doings
     of the day, the last piece of news from Flanders, France or Spain,
     or the rumours from the country. Here the citizens gathered angrily
     when there was any talk of an invasion of their cherished
     liberties, grumbled over the benevolence demanded by his Majesty
     for the pay of the troops engaged in the French war, or jeered at
     some poor wretch nailed by his ears in the pillory. Here the
     heralds would proclaim the news of our victories by sea and land;
     here the public newsmen would read out their budgets; vendors of
     infallible nostrums would wax eloquent as to the virtues of their
     wares; and the wives and daughters of the citizens would gather to
     gossip and flirt. It was at once the exchange, the club, and the
     meeting-place of London. Paul’s Cross was the heart of the City;
     here men threw up their bonnets when they heard of Crécy and of
     Agincourt; here they listened to the preachings of the first
     followers of Wycliffe; here they erected their choicest pageants
     when a new sovereign visited the City for the first time, or
     brought his new-made spouse to show her to his lieges; and gathered
     with frowning brows beneath iron caps when London threw in its lot
     with the Parliament, and the train bands marched off to fight the
     King’s forces. The business mart of the City lies now in front of
     the Mansion House, but a great deal of business is still done under
     the shadow of the Cathedral.”--(C. D.)

All the streets bear names that remind us of the vicinity of St.
Paul’s--Creed Lane, Ave Maria Lane, Sermon Lane, Canon Alley, Amen
Corner and Paternoster Row known throughout the world as the
headquarters of the book trade and publishers, while Cheapside, Ludgate
Hill, Fleet Street and St. Paul’s Churchyard swarm with ghosts and
memories of London’s stirring events.

     “The modern passenger through St. Paul’s Churchyard has not only
     the last home of Nelson and others to venerate as he goes by. In
     the ground of the old church were buried, and here therefore
     remains whatever dust may survive them, the gallant Sir Philip
     Sidney (the _beau idéal_ of the age of Elizabeth), and Vandyke, who
     immortalised the youth and beauty of the court of Charles the
     First. One of Elizabeth’s great statesmen also lay
     there--Walsingham--who died so poor that he was buried by stealth
     to prevent his body from being arrested. Another, Sir Christopher
     Hatton, who is supposed to have danced himself into the office of
     Her Majesty’s Chancellor, had a tomb which his contemporaries
     thought too magnificent, and which was accused of ‘shouldering the
     altar.’

     “Old St. Paul’s was much larger than now, and the Churchyard was of
     proportionate dimensions. The wall by which it was bounded ran
     along by the present streets of Ave Maria Lane, Paternoster Row,
     Old Change, Carter Lane and Creed Lane; and therefore included a
     large space and many buildings which are not now considered to be
     within the precincts of the Cathedral. This spacious area had grass
     inside, and contained a variety of appendages to the establishment.
     One of these was the cross of which Stow did not know the
     antiquity. It was called Paul’s Cross, and stood on the north side
     of the church, a little to the east of the entrance of Cannon
     Alley.”--(L. H.)

At first the space around it was used for the meeting of the
populace--the Folkmote--when their magistrates were elected, public
affairs discussed and criminals tried and sentenced. At a later period
=Paul’s Cross= was chiefly used for proclamations, and from the pulpit,
which in Stow’s time was an hexagonal piece of wood “covered with lead,
elevated upon a flight of stone steps and surmounted by a large cross,”
sermons were preached.

In 1879 the foundations of Paul’s Cross were discovered on the
north-east side of the present Choir. A monument is now being erected on
the spot.

If we wish to examine the north and south fronts more particularly we
first go to the former and

     “We note the two-storied constructions, the graceful Corinthian
     pillars, arranged in pairs, with round-headed windows between
     them; the entablature; and then, in the second story, another row
     of beautiful pilasters of the Composite order. Between these are
     niches where one would have expected windows; but this story is
     simply a screen to hide the flying-buttresses supporting the
     clerestory, as Wren thought them a disfigurement. The walls are
     finished with a cornice, which Wren was compelled by hostile
     critics to add, much against his own judgment. There are some
     excellently carved festoons of foliage and birds and cherubs, which
     are well worthy of close observation. The North and South Fronts
     have Corinthian pillars, which support a semicircular entablature.
     Figures of the Apostles adorn the triangular-shaped heads and
     balustrade. The Royal Arms appear on the north side, and a Phœnix
     is the suitable ornament on the south, signifying the resurrection
     of the building from its ashes. The south side is almost similar to
     the north. The east end has an apse.”--(P. H. D.)

On the south-west is the Dean’s yard, leading past the Deanery to the
Choir House in Great Carter Lane where the choir-boys are trained.
Doctors’ Commons, where marriage licenses used to be issued, only
survives in name.

Opposite the north porch of the Cathedral is the Chapter-House and from
this side St. Paul’s Bridge, the plan for which was adopted in 1909,
will start. It will cost no less than £1,600,000, and will cross the
Thames between Blackfriars and Southwark.

Facing Ludgate Hill stands a statue of Queen Anne, a modern replica of
the original statue by Bird. At the foot of the 22 marble steps leading
up to the doorway is a marble slab commemorating the Diamond Jubilee
Thanksgiving (June 22, 1897). From time immemorial national thanksgiving
services have been offered at St. Paul’s. The first in this building was
a special thanksgiving for the Peace of Ryswick. Queen Anne returned
thanks for Marlborough’s victories in the Low Countries and the
destruction of the Spanish fleet at Vigo and for the victory of Blenheim
(1702 and 1704). Here thanks were also offered for the recovery of the
Prince of Wales (Edward VII.) from a serious illness in 1872 and by
Queen Victoria for the sixtieth anniversary of her reign (1897); by King
Edward and Queen Alexandra for the restoration of peace in South Africa
(June 8, 1902); by King Edward on October 18, 1902, for his recovery
from the illness that delayed the Coronation; and by King George and
Queen Mary.

     “The WEST FRONT has a magnificent portico, divided, like the rest
     of the building, into two stories. The lower consists of twelve
     coupled and fluted columns; that, above, has only eight, which bear
     an entablature and pediment of which the tympanum is sculptured in
     bas-relief, representing the conversion of St. Paul. On the apex of
     the pediment is a figure of the Saint himself, and at its
     extremities, on the right and left of St. Paul, are figures of St.
     Peter and St. James. The transepts are terminated upwards by
     pediments, over coupled pilasters at the quoins, and two single
     pilasters in the intermediate space. On each side of the western
     portico a square pedestal rises over the upper order, and on each
     pedestal a steeple, or campanile tower, supported upon triangular
     groups of Corinthian columns finishing in small domes formed by
     curves of contrary flexure very like bells. Lower down in front of
     these campaniles, the Four Evangelists are represented with their
     emblems. In the face of the southern campanile a clock is inserted.
     A flight of steps extending the whole length of the portico forms
     the basement. In the southwest tower is the Great Bell of St.
     Paul’s, cast in 1709 by Richard Phelps and Langley Bradley. It is
     ten feet in diameter, ten inches thick in metal and weighs 11,474
     pounds.”--(M.)

First we will take a general view of the exterior:

     “The form of St. Paul’s is that of the long or Latin cross. Its
     extreme length, including the porch, is 500 feet; the greatest
     breadth, that is to say across the transept but within the doors of
     the porticoes, 250 feet; the width of the nave, 118 feet. There
     are, however, at the foot or western end of the cross, projections
     northward and southward, which make the breadth 190 feet. One of
     these, namely, on the north side, is used as a morning chapel, and
     the other, on the south side, contains the Wellington Monument, but
     was formerly used as the Consistory Court. At the internal angle of
     the cross are small square bastion-like adjuncts, whose real use is
     to strengthen the piers of the dome; but they are inwardly
     serviceable as vestries and a staircase. The height of the
     Cathedral on the south side to the top of the cross is 365 feet.

     “The exterior consists throughout of two orders, the lower being
     Corinthian, the upper composite. It is built externally in two
     stories, in both of which, except at the north and south porticoes
     and at the west front, the whole of the entablatures rest on
     coupled pilasters, between which in the lower order a range of
     circular-headed windows is introduced. But in the order above, the
     corresponding spaces are occupied by dressed niches, standing on
     pedestals pierced with openings to light the passages in the roof
     over the side aisles. The upper order is nothing but a screen to
     hide the flying-buttresses carried across from the outer walls to
     resist the thrust of the great vaulting.”--(M.)

The =Dome=, the great feature of the church, is very beautiful when seen
from a distance, as from one of the bridges, rising with its graceful
curves far above the roofs and other spires.

     “The dome, which is by far the most magnificent and elegant feature
     in the building, rises from the body of the church in great
     majesty. It is 145 feet in outward and 108 feet in inward diameter.
     Twenty feet above the roof of the church is a circular range of
     twenty-two columns, every fourth intercolumniation being filled
     with masonry, so disposed as to form an ornamental niche or recess,
     by which arrangement the projecting buttresses of the cupola are
     concealed. These, which form a peristyle of the Composite Order,
     with an unbroken entablature, enclose the interior order. They
     support a handsome gallery adorned with a balustrade. Above these
     columns is a range of pilasters, with windows between them, forming
     an attic order, and on these the great dome stands. The general
     idea of the cupola, as appears from the _Parentalia_, was taken
     from the Pantheon at Rome. On the summit of the dome, which is
     covered with lead, is a gilt circular balcony, and from its centre
     rises the lantern, adorned with Corinthian columns. The whole is
     terminated by a gilt ball and cross.

     “But with the matchless exterior ceases the superiority, and
     likewise, to a great degree, the responsibility of Wren. His
     designs for the interior were not only carried out, but he was in
     every way thwarted, controlled, baffled in his old age to the
     eternal disgrace of all concerned; the victim of the pitiful
     jealousy of some, the ignorance of others, the ingratitude of
     all.”--(M.)

It is singular to note that when Wren laid the corner-stone on June 11,
1675, there was no solemn ceremonial. The King, the Court, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Mayor of London were all notably
absent, but when he laid the last stone in the lantern of the cupola in
1710

     “all London poured forth for the spectacle, which had been publicly
     announced, and were looking up in wonder to the old man, or his
     son, if not the old man himself, who was, on that wondrous height,
     setting the seal, as it were, to his august labours.

     “When one enters the west door one cannot fail to be struck with
     the vastness of the space enclosed within its massive walls; there
     is no screen to break the view towards the east, and, as one stands
     beneath the dome and looks up into its enormous hollow, the sense
     of overpowering height is felt as in no other church in
     England.”--(T. P.)

Entering through the western door we are struck with the immensity of
the =Nave= and overspreading dome, the effect of the lights, and, if
service is being held, the peculiar beauty of the chants of the
choristers, whose voices seem to come from the dome and float through
the misty light to our ears.

It would be interesting to know if Wagner ever heard the choir-boys of
St. Paul’s and sought to reproduce the effect in _Parsifal_, by
arranging the voices of knights, squires and youths at various stages in
the dome of Montsalvat to sing softly of the “wondrous work of mercy and
salvation.”

     “The interior of the nave is formed by an arcade resting on massive
     pillars and dividing the church into a body and two aisles. The
     eastern piers of the nave serve at the same time for the supports
     of the cupola. They are wider than the other piers, and are flanked
     by pilasters at their angles and have shallow oblong recesses in
     the intercolumniations. The roof over these piers is a boldly
     coffered waggon-vault, which contrasts very effectively with the
     rest of the vaulting.

     “The nave is separated from the choir by the area over which the
     cupola rises. From the centre of this area, the transepts, or
     traverse of the cross, diverge to the north and south, each
     extending one severy, or arch, in length. The choir, which is
     vaulted and domed over, like the nave and transepts, from the top
     of the attic order, is terminated eastward by a semicircular
     tribune, of which the diameter is, in general terms, the same as
     the width of the choir itself. The western end of the choir has
     pillars similar to those at the eastern end of the nave, uniform
     with which there are at its eastern end piers of the same extent
     and form, except that they are pierced for a communication with the
     side aisles. Above the entablature and under the cupola is the
     Whispering Gallery, and in the concave above are representations of
     the principal passages of St. Paul’s life in eight compartments,
     painted by Sir James Thornhill.”--(M.)

We should note that there are three stages--the main arcade, the
triforium and the clerestory. The piers are faced with Corinthian
pilasters that divide off the bays east and west. The arches spring from
an entablature. They are very high. The “triforium belt,” as the “attic”
is termed by those critics who have dropped the Classical nomenclature,
and clerestory above are easily understood at a glance.

     “The great arches overhead divide the vault as the greater
     pilasters and their continuations do the walls. Between these
     arches are the small saucer-shaped domes, 26 feet in diameter. The
     reason for these and their accessories, the pendentives, may best
     be understood from Wren’s own words. He says that his method of
     vaulting is the most geometrical, and ‘_is composed of Hemispheres,
     and their Sections only; and whereas a Sphere may be cut all Manner
     of Ways, and that still into Circles.... I have for just Reasons
     followed this way in the Vaulting of the Church of St. Paul’s....
     It is the lightest Manner, and requires less Butment than the
     Cross-vaulting, as well that it is of an agreeable View....
     Vaulting by Parts of Hemispheres I have therefore followed in the
     Vaultings of St. Paul’s, and with good reason preferred it above
     any other way used by Architects._’ The saucer-shaped domes are
     sections of spheres, as are both the pendentives, and the sides of
     the clerestory windows. The wreaths, garlands, and festoons, and
     the various conventional patterns with which the edges and surfaces
     of the various parts of the vaulting is adorned cannot be estimated
     from the pavement.”--(A. D.)

From the Crypt to the dome the space measures 190 feet.

     “When Wren planned his dome interior he had the difficulty caused
     by the four limbs and their side aisles to overcome. He must have
     turned to his uncle’s cathedral at Ely for enlightenment. In the
     earlier years of the Fourteenth Century the central tower of Ely
     collapsed, and the sacrist Alan de Walsingham, who acted as
     architect, seeing that the breadth of his nave, choir and transepts
     happened to agree, took for his base this common breadth, and
     cutting off the angles, obtained a spacious octagon. The four sides
     terminating the main aisles are longer than the four alternate
     aisles at the angles of the side aisles; but at Ely this presents
     no difficulty, owing to the use of the pointed arch. As you stand
     in the centre of the octagon under the lantern you see eight
     spacious arches of two different widths, all springing from the
     same level and rising to the same height of eighty-five feet, the
     terminal arch of the Norman nave pointed like its opposite
     neighbour of the choir. Amongst Gothic churches the interior of Ely
     reigns unique and supreme, certainly in England if not in Europe.
     Wren was familiar with this cathedral, and even designed some
     restorations for it; and he adopted the eight arches in preference
     to any possible scheme of four great arches of sixty feet: but the
     use of the round arch, as distinct from the pointed, deprived him
     of Sacrist Alan’s liberty, who without incongruity made his
     intermediate arches of the shorter sides, springing from the same
     level, rise to the same height as the others. Wren was compelled to
     make use of some expedient to reconcile his two different spaces
     between piers of forty feet and twenty-six feet, and accordingly
     arched these four smaller intermediate spaces as follows. A smaller
     arch, rising from the architrave of the great pier, spans each
     shorter side of the octagon, and has a ceiling or semi-dome in the
     background, coming down to the terminal arches of the side aisles.
     A blank wall space above is relieved by a section of an ornamental
     arch of larger span, resting on the centre of the cornice; and
     above this a third arch, rising from the level of the triforium
     cornice, rests more upon the _outer_ side of the great supporting
     pier, and thereby obtains the required equal span of forty feet,
     and equal height of eighty-nine feet from the ground. This also has
     a semi-dome; and the platform beneath on a level with the
     clerestory is railed.

     “The reduction of the octagon to the circle is facilitated by
     giving the spandrels between the arches the necessary concave
     surface; and this stage is finished off with a cantilever cornice,
     the work (at least in part) of one Jonathan Maine. The eight great
     keystones of the arches by Caius Gabriel Cibber are seven feet by
     five, and eighteen inches in relief.”--(A. D.)

About a hundred feet from the pavement and the same distance across is
the celebrated =Whispering Gallery=, where a curious effect is obtained.

The attendant whispering across the whole area can be distinctly heard,
an acoustic property seemingly caused by the nearness of the concave
hemisphere above.

The =Cross= is quite 260 feet above us. The gallery projects so that the
lectern steps and the pulpit are underneath.

Now we come to the =Drum=. The actual bend inwards now begins, but for
this part only in straight lines. First comes the plain band or Podium,
panelled and of a height of twenty feet. On this stand thirty-two
pilasters, in reality, as well as in appearance, out of the horizontal.
Three out of each four

     “intervening spaces are pierced with square-headed windows; and
     from them such light as the dome receives, streams down through the
     windows of the exterior colonnade. The alternate fourth recesses,
     apparently nothing more than ornamental niches, conceal the
     supports which bear the weight above. In the recent scheme of
     decoration they have been filled with statues of Early Fathers--the
     four eastern, SS. Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, Basil, and
     Athanasius; and the four western, SS. Ambrose, Augustine of Hippo,
     Jerome, and Gregory.

     “The straight lines bearing inwards give way to the sphere; and
     here, too, the three separate coverings, which constitute the dome,
     begin. The circular opening below the lantern coincides with the
     lower edge of the fluting of the exterior shell, and is about two
     hundred and fifteen feet from the pavement.

     “These upper regions, hidden in an almost perpetual gloom, were
     decorated in monochrome by Sir James Thornhill; but his work has
     failed to resist the chemical action of the surcharged atmosphere.
     In these compartments are scenes from the life of the patronal
     saint: (1) The Conversion, (2) Elymas, (3) Cripple at Lystra, (4)
     Jailer at Philippi, (5) Mars Hill, (6) Burning Books at Ephesus,
     (7) Before Agrippa, (8) Shipwreck. We have all heard the story of
     the painter, on a platform at a great height, who stepped back to
     get a better view of his work. As he did so, an assistant, standing
     by, brush in hand, observed with alarm that the slightest further
     backward step would entail his falling headlong and being dashed to
     pieces. He deliberately daubed the painting; and the artist,
     stepping instinctively forward to prevent this, saved his life. The
     painter is said to be Thornhill: the scene, the giddy height under
     the dome.”--(A. D.)

The beautiful iron-work of the gates is by Tijou, both at the ends of
the aisles and doorways of the reredos arch. The =Choir-stalls= are by
Grinling Gibbons and are very ornate and handsome. The Lord Mayor’s
stall is on the left, or north side, and the Bishop of London’s on the
right, or south. The latter’s throne is near the altar. There are
thirty-one stalls altogether.

     “The exquisite carvings of Grinling Gibbons in the stall-work of
     the choir were not merely in themselves admirable, but in perfect
     harmony with the character of the architecture. They rivalled, if
     they did not surpass, all Mediæval works of their class in grace,
     variety, richness; they kept up an inimitable unison of the lines
     of the building and the decoration. In the words of Walpole ‘there
     is no instance of a man before Gibbons who gave to wood the loose
     and airy lightness of flowers and chained together the various
     productions of the elements with a fine disorder natural to each
     species.’”--(M.)

The =Organ= is one of the finest in the world. It was reconstructed by
Willis in 1897, and still contains parts of the original organ built by
the German, Schmidt, in 1697. It consists of 4,822 pipes and 102 stops
and is divided into two parts, placed on either side of the choir. These
are connected by pneumatic tubes beneath the floor. The keyboard is on
the north side.

The older part of the case with its foliage, figures and architectural
devices was also designed by Grinling Gibbons.

The =Altar= stands between the great eastern piers and is surmounted by a
tall reredos of white marble.

     “The symbolism is expressed in the frieze above the Crucifixion,
     ‘Sic Deus dilexit mundum’ (‘God so loved the world’). The lower
     part is pierced with doors on either side; and ‘Vas Electionis’ (‘A
     chosen vessel’) over the north door refers to St. Paul, and ‘Pasce
     oves meos’ (‘Feed my sheep’) over the other to St. Peter; and here
     are the crossed swords, the arms of the diocese. The section above
     has the Entombment in the centre, and the Nativity and Resurrection
     on either side. A Crucifixion occupies the central position. The
     framework is of Roman design, with pilasters and a round arch; and
     remembering Wren’s conception, it is interesting that the columns
     of Brescia marble, supporting the entablature above, are twisted.
     This is flanked with a colonnade; the figure on the north being the
     Angel Gabriel, and to the south the Virgin. Above the pediment is a
     canopy with the Virgin and Child, and St. Peter and St. Paul to the
     north and south; and above all, and nearly seventy feet from the
     ground, the Risen Christ completes this most reverent design.

     “The altar cross is adorned with precious stones and lapis lazuli;
     and the massive copper candlesticks are imitations of the original
     four said to have been sold during the Protectorate.”--(A. D.)

The apse behind the altar cut off by the reredos is now called the =Jesus
Chapel=. Over the altar here is a copy of Cima de Conegliano’s _Doubting
Thomas_ (in the National Gallery).

The apse and the vaulting and the walls of the choir and ambulatory have
in recent years been decorated by Sir William Richmond with
richly-coloured mosaics. The chief panels of the apse represent our
Lord enthroned, with recording angels on either side. In the choir the
three “saucer domes,” or cupolas, represent three Days of Creation:
Beasts, Fishes and birds. The four pendentives of each bay are decorated
with herald Angels, with extended arms. Mosaics of the Crucifixion,
Entombment, Resurrection and Ascension, also by Sir William Richmond,
adorn the “quarter domes.”

The eight paintings by Thornhill, of scenes from the life of St. Paul,
can be viewed properly only from the Whispering Gallery. In the niches
above this Gallery are statues of the Fathers of the Church. The
spandrels between the great arches are decorated by eight large mosaics
representing apostles and prophets: St. Matthew and St. John are by G.
F. Watts; St. Mark and St. Luke, by A. Brittan; and the four prophets
are the work of Alfred Stevens.

The =Transepts= are of one arch only. The windows are modern and represent
bishops and kings of early days. In the south transept aisle there is a
window commemorating the recovery of the Prince of Wales (Edward VII.)
in 1872; and a bronze tablet by Princess Louise in memory of “4,300 sons
of Britain beyond the seas” who were killed in the South African war of
1899-1901.

To the left of the chief entrance is =St. Dunstan’s Chapel=, sometimes
called the =North-West=, or =Morning Chapel=. It is richly decorated and
contains a Salviati mosaic representing the _Three Marys at the
Sepulchre_.

In the south aisle, opposite, is the =Chapel of the Order of St. Michael
and St. George=, a Colonial order, conferred only for distinguished
services beyond the seas. The Sovereign’s stall is at the western end;
and on each side of it is that of the Grand Master (Prince of Wales) and
the Duke of Connaught. From these diverge the oak stalls of the Knights
Grand Cross of the Order, over each of which is suspended a silk banner
with his personal arms. The richly-gilded ceiling is decorated with the
arms of the King, the Prince of Wales, the late Duke of Cambridge and
Sir Robert Herbert, who were responsible for the scheme. In the south
window is a kneeling figure of the donor, Sir Walter Wilkin. The chapel
was dedicated on June 13, 1906, in the presence of King Edward, the
Prince of Wales and many Knights.

Above this chapel the Library is situated to which the curious
=Geometrical Staircase= leads. This is circular, of a diameter of
twenty-five feet, and each step is supported by the one below it. This
is in the South tower.

St. Paul’s is second only to Westminster Abbey in the number of
Monuments to the celebrated dead. Immediately within the west door
stands a gilt monument to the officers and men of the =Coldstream Guards=
who fell in the South African War. In the north aisle of the nave we
come to monuments of =General Gordon=, a recumbent figure on a sarcophagus
by Sir Joseph Edgar Boehm; =Wellington=, by Alfred Stevens; =Lord Leighton=;
=Lord Melbourne=. In the north transept =Sir Joshua Reynolds=, by Flaxman;
and =Admiral Rodney=, by Rossi; in the south transept =Nelson=, by Flaxman,
who thus describes his work:

     “Britannia is directing the young seamen’s attention to their great
     example, Lord Nelson. On the die of the pedestal which supports
     the hero’s statue are figures in basso-relievo, representing the
     Frozen Ocean, the German Ocean, the Nile, and the Mediterranean. On
     the cornice and in the frieze of laurel wreaths are the words,
     Copenhagen, Nile, Trafalgar. The British Lion sits on the plinth,
     guarding the pedestal.”

In the South transept: =Lord Cornwallis=, by Rossi, commemorates his
Indian career. He appears in his mantle of the Garter, with an
allegorical female figure of the Eastern Empire and a male figure
representing an Indian river.

At the east side of the south transept is the entrance to the =Crypt=,
sombre, dimly lighted and sepulchral. In the centre a circle of pillars
surrounds the tomb of =Nelson=, whose remains lie in a plain tomb under a
black-and-white sarcophagus (Sixteenth Century), which was made for
Cardinal Wolsey’s monument and confiscated with his other possessions.
Through a grating here the dim light from the far-away dome sifts down
upon England’s great admiral. To the left of Nelson lies =Collingwood=,
and, to the right, =Cornwallis=. Not far away we come to the simple tomb
of =Arthur, Duke of Wellington=, a great block of porphyry on a granite
base.

In the east recess of the south-choir-aisle is the grave of Sir
Christopher Wren marked by a plain black marble slab. On the wall is the
celebrated inscription: “_Lector, si monumentum requiris, circumspice_.”
Then comes =Painters’ Corner= with Sir Joshua Reynolds, Benjamin West,
Lawrence, Turner, Landseer, Millais, Leighton and others.

We have yet to make the ascent of St. Paul’s. The way is long and grows
more tedious and steeper as we ascend. It will be well to stop at the
Stone Gallery (200 feet high), for although the Golden Gallery, at the
top of the dome, is a hundred feet higher, the view is not so distinct.
The Stone Gallery is safe, and delightful views are to be had in the
spaces between the balustrades. The view extends from Harrow on the
north-west, to the Crystal Palace, Shooter’s Hill and Greenwich
Observatory in the south-east. The tourist will, however, take more
pleasure in looking over the territory covered by the Great Fire of 1666
and all the Wren steeples (there are thirty at least) that rise through
the mists below us. Here we again think of Sir Christopher’s genius and
remember again his epitaph: “If you wish an estimate of his genius, look
around.” It is interesting, too, to trace Fleet Street, Cheapside and
the other great arteries of traffic and travel, to look at the Thames
and understand its peculiar windings and to view from this height the
grim old Tower half a mile below London Bridge--the oldest building in
England and the most romantic. Without the Tower of London and without
St. Paul’s what would London be? Westminster Abbey is the church of the
King and the government; St. Paul’s is the church of the citizens, the
church that, as we have seen, has been a central point for the stirring
events of the City of London. Whenever the traveller thinks of London,
he sees its majestic dome rising above London Bridge or Ludgate Hill, or
Cheapside, purple in the mists, golden in the sunlight--the emblem of
London’s antiquity and its present immensity.

     “I always endow St. Paul’s Cathedral with life and human nature and
     sympathy. I cannot well explain what early associations and chances
     have made St. Paul’s a more living influence to me than the much
     grander and nobler Westminster Abbey; but so it is and I feel as
     if St. Paul’s were a living influence over all that region of the
     metropolis which is surveyed by its ball and its cross. But in
     another sense it is unlike other buildings to me. It is not one
     long-lived, long-living cathedral; it is rather a generation of
     cathedrals. Westminster Abbey takes us back in unbroken continuity
     of history to the earlier days of England’s budding greatness.
     Westminster itself, nevertheless, was only called so in the
     beginning to distinguish it from the earlier East Minster, which
     was either the existing St. Paul’s or a cathedral standing on Tower
     Hill. It would seem, then, that St. Paul’s rather than Westminster
     Abbey ought to represent the gradual movement of English history
     and English thought and the growth of the metropolis. But observe
     the difference. Westminster Abbey has always since its erection
     been sedately watching over London. It has been reconstructed here
     and there, of course--repaired and renovated, touched up and
     decorated with new adornments in tribute of grateful piety; but it
     is ever and always the same Westminster Abbey. Now observe the
     history of St. Paul’s. St. Paul’s has fallen and died time after
     time, and been revived and restored. It has risen new upon new
     generations. It has perished in flame again and again, like a
     succession of martyrs, and has come up afresh and with new spangled
     ore flamed in the forehead of the morning sky. St. Paul’s is a
     religious or ecclesiastical dynasty rather than a cathedral. It has
     been destroyed so often and risen again in so many different
     shapes, that it seems as if each succeeding age were putting its
     fresh stamp and mint-mark on it and so commending it to the special
     service of each new generation.”--(J. McC.)

[Illustration: ST. PAUL’S: CHOIR, EAST]

[Illustration: ST. SAVIOUR’S, SOUTHWARK]




ST. SAVIOUR’S, SOUTHWARK

     FORMERLY THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH OF ST. SAVIOUR; AND ST. MARY OVERIE,
     SOUTHWARK.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: CENTRAL TOWER; CHOIR-SCREEN; TOMB OF JOHN GOWER;
     HARVARD WINDOW; WINDOWS TO ELIZABETHAN DRAMATISTS.


Although St. Saviour’s, Southwark, is one of the oldest buildings in
London, it is one of the youngest of cathedrals in England, having been
formally inaugurated as a Cathedral by King Edward on July 3, 1905. It
was recently restored at a cost of £40,000. Parts of the Norman nave,
dating from the Twelfth Century, were incorporated by Sir Arthur
Blomfield in the new nave built in 1891-1896.

St. Saviour’s stands on the south or Surrey side of London in the
Borough, a district of very little interest in comparison with London
north of the Thames; but very rich in historical associations. After
crossing London Bridge we find this church on our right on a lower level
than the road, which sunken situation prevents a good view of the
venerable pile. Adjoining the church is the Borough Market for fruit and
vegetables and west of it in Park Street, close to Southwark Bridge, is
Barclay’s Brewery on the site of Shakespeare’s Globe Theatre. Going down
Borough High Street we pass the site of the old _Tabard Inn_, from which
Chaucer’s Canterbury Pilgrims started on their journey; and still lower
down the street, the successor to the _White Hart_, where Mr. Pickwick
found the immortal Sam Weller. In the vicinity the Marshalsea prison
stood until the middle of the Nineteenth Century, within the sound of
St. Saviour’s bells.

St. Saviour’s is now almost the only remaining landmark of “Old
Southwark.”

Its early history is lost in legend. Stow, on the authority of Linstede,
the last of the priors, attributed the building of the original London
Bridge to the profits made by a ferryman here, who left his money to his
daughter Mary. He tells the story as follows:

     “East from the Bishop of Winchester’s house, directly over against
     it, standeth a fair church called St. Mary-over-the-Rie, or Overie;
     that is, over the water. This church, or some other in place
     thereof, was, of old time, long before the Conquest, a house of
     sisters, founded by a maiden named Mary; unto the which house and
     sisters she left, as was left to her by her parents, the oversight
     and profits of a cross ferry, or traverse ferry over the Thames,
     there kept before that any bridge was built. This house of sisters
     was after by Swithun, a noble lady, converted into a college of
     priests, who in place of the ferry built a bridge of timber, and
     from time to time kept the place in good reparations; but lastly,
     the same bridge was built of stone; and then in the year 1106 was
     this church again founded for canons regular by William Pont de la
     Arch, and William Dauncey, Knights, Normans.”

Modern historians have made a few corrections in this statement,
particularly as regards the person who changed the nunnery into a
college of priests. This was not a “noble lady,” but St. Swithun, Bishop
of Winchester (832-856) (see page 46). It became a monastery of the
Augustinian order in 1106, and the Norman knights who aided in its
foundation also built the new Norman nave. After a severe fire that
occurred early in the Thirteenth Century, when much of Southwark was
destroyed, the church suffered greatly. Repairs were, of course,
necessary; and the Bishop of Winchester, who took charge, rebuilt the
nave in the lighter Early English style and also the choir and
retro-choir.

Another fire in the reign of Richard II. occasioned other repairs in the
new Perpendicular style which was continued by Cardinal Beaufort, Bishop
of Winchester (1405-1447), who restored the south transept. The Cardinal
was the son of John of Gaunt and Catherine Swynford. In this church he
married his niece Jane Beaufort to James I. of Scotland in 1423, with
whom the royal poet fell in love during his imprisonment at Windsor.

After the Dissolution of the monasteries in 1536 St. Mary Overy, which
had already been united with St. Mary Magdalene, was now combined with
St. Margaret’s and in the year of Linstede’s surrender to Henry VIII.
(1540) the three parishes were united under the name of the Collegiate
Church of St. Saviour.

St. Saviour’s was several times repaired and altered in the Eighteenth
Century, and then fell into neglect.

The East End is an enlargement or addition to the choir. It consists, as
we see, of four bays separated by buttresses and surmounted by gables.
Each gable is lighted by a triplet of lancet windows. Larger windows of
the same general style light the bays below. At the north-east corner is
a short hexagonal stair turret. Above the Lady-Chapel rises the East End
or gable of the choir. This has also a three-light lancet window, with a
small circular window with seven cusps above. On the north-east corner
the turret is capped by a pinnacle. Above rises the venerable square
tower--St. Saviour’s best feature.

The =Tower= at the intersection of the nave and transepts was partly built
by Bishop Fox in the Perpendicular style.

     “At the intersection of the nave, transepts and choir, rises a
     noble tower, thirty-five feet square and one hundred and fifty feet
     in height, resting on four massive pillars adorned with clustered
     columns. The sharp-pointed arches are very lofty. The interior of
     the tower is in four stories, in the uppermost of which is a fine
     peal of twelve bells. Externally the tower, which is not older than
     the Sixteenth Century, somewhat resembles that of St. Sepulchre’s
     Church, close by Newgate. It is divided into two parts, with
     handsome pointed windows, in two stories, on each front; it has
     tall pinnacles at each corner, and the battlements are of flint, in
     squares or chequer-work.”--(E. W.)

The South transept, like the north transept, was built in the Decorated
style in the first half of the Fourteenth Century, but was rebuilt by
Cardinal Beaufort. It has been restored in the style of his time, and
the window of five lights is Transitional in style from Decorated to
Perpendicular.

We enter by the =Doorway= at the south-west, the principal entrance to the
Cathedral.

     “In all probability the door was placed in this position when the
     Norman nave was built by Bishop Giffard (_circa_ 1106); but its
     character was altered by Peter de Rupibus, a century later, to
     bring it into harmony with the rest of his Early English work, when
     he remodelled the nave in that style.

     “The porch that we now have agrees in its main features with the
     drawings taken of the earlier one before it was destroyed. A deeply
     recessed and acutely pointed arch is divided into two by a central
     shaft, with moulded base and foliaged capital. The jambs contain
     five shafts on each side, which differ from that in the centre, in
     that they are of Purbeck marble, and banded, in pleasing contrast
     to the plain stone of their own bases and capitals, and of the
     (unbanded) central shaft. In the tympanum of the double doorway
     thus formed, there is a pointed arcading, consisting of a central
     arch and two smaller arches on either side. The deep soffit of the
     arch in which this elegant arcading is enclosed, is adorned with a
     series of quatrefoil panels.”--(Geo. W.)

On entering we get a fine view of more than two hundred feet.

The =Nave= was rebuilt in 1890-1897 and is a reproduction of the Early
English nave in nearly every detail. As we look down the long vista we
are reminded of Salisbury. Here, however, we have the magnificent screen
and the handsome East window above it. The clerestory is lighted by
plain lancet windows, enclosed in an elegant arcading.

Walking down the north aisle of the nave we soon come to the most
interesting monument in the Cathedral--the tomb of =John Gower=, who died
in 1408, eight years after his friend Chaucer, to whom the window above
(1900) is appropriately enough a memorial and bears the latter’s
portrait.

     “He had been a liberal benefactor to the Church, and founded a
     chantry in the Chapel of St. John the Baptist, where he was
     eventually buried. The chapel and chantry are no more, but the
     monument marks the spot, having been restored in 1894 to its first
     position. It is in the Perpendicular style, and consists of an
     altar-tomb, with a dado, ornamented by seven panels in front, on
     which lies the effigy of the poet, surmounted by a canopy of three
     ogee arches, with an inner order of five cusps, and terminating in
     crocketed pinnacles. There is a pilaster set angle-wise at each
     end, banded at the separate divisions of the monument, and also
     rising into crocketed pinnacles. There are similar pinnacles
     between the arches of the canopy. Behind the canopy is a screen,
     divided into open panels of three trefoil-headed lights. The
     cornice at the top is modern, and the hands and nose of the figure
     are restorations.

     “The poet is represented lying on his back, with his hands joined
     in prayer, and his head resting upon the three volumes on which his
     fame depends, the _Speculum Meditantis_, _Vox Clamantis_, and
     _Confessio Amantis_. He is vested in a long dark habit, buttoned
     down to the feet, after the manner of a cassock, the ordinary dress
     of an English gentleman at the time. There is a garland of four
     roses round his head, and at his feet a lion couchant. The SS.
     collar adorns the neck, with a pendant jewel, on which a swan is
     engraved--the device of Richard II., to whom Gower was Poet
     Laureate. On the wall of the canopy, at the foot of the tomb, there
     is a sculptured and coloured representation of the poet’s own
     shield of arms, crest and helmet. On the back wall of the recess,
     above the effigy, there were formerly three painted figures,
     representing Charity, Mercy, and Piety, each bearing a scroll with
     an invocation, in Norman-French, for the soul of the departed.
     After undergoing repainting more than once, with modifications, the
     figures were scarcely recognisable in 1832, when the monument was
     repaired, but the figures were unfortunately obliterated. The
     inscription along the ledge of the tomb, which had also been
     destroyed, is now replaced: ‘Hic jacet I. Gower, Arm. Angl: poeta
     celeberrimus ac hoc sacro benefac. insignis. Vixit temporibus Edw.
     III., Ric. II., et Henri IV.’”--(Geo. W.)

Now we have reached the =North Transept=, supposed to have been originally
a chapel dedicated to St. Peter. It is now used as a sort of museum for
the relics and antiquities of the church--old bosses, chests,
stone-coffins, etc. The large north window was unveiled in 1898 to
commemorate doubly the Prince Consort and Queen Victoria’s Diamond
Jubilee. Its four lights depict Gregory the Great, King Ethelbert,
Stephen Langton and William of Wykeham.

Passing to the tower we can now look upward as far as the floor of the
bell-ringers. The bosses on the new oaken roof date from the Fifteenth
Century. From it hangs a fine =Chandelier= of 1680.

The =South Transept= was rebuilt by Cardinal Beaufort, whose arms we see
on a pier by the transept door. The great south window of five lights,
described by Sir Arthur Blomfield, the designer, as “transitional
between Flowing Decorated and Perpendicular,” is filled with modern
glass. The design is a “Tree of Jesse.”

Returning now to the =Choir= we pause here to study it in detail. It was
built by Peter de Rupibus in the Thirteenth Century, and is Early
English. It consists of five bays. The piers are alternate circular and
octagonal, with plain capitals and well-cut base mouldings. Four arched
openings occur in each bay of the triforium. Corbels with sculptured
heads occur on the arches of the south side.

The =Altar= stands on a platform and above it rises the wonderful =Screen=,
erected by Bishop Fox in 1520. It almost fills the entire eastern end of
the choir.

     “The screen is about thirty feet in height, and extends to the main
     arcades on either side. Three tiers of canopied niches, ten in each
     tier, divided down the centre by a Perpendicular series of three
     large niches, all occupied by statues, made up a composition which
     was at once ‘a thing of beauty’ and an object lesson on the
     Incarnation. The total number of niches (thirty-three) suggested a
     mystic reference to the years of our Lord’s earthly life, while the
     image of the Pelican ‘in her piety,’ here and there, besides being
     a reminder of Bishop Fox (whose peculiar device it was), also
     typified the sacrament of the altar. The original materials of
     which the screen was built are quoted as ‘Caen and fire-stone,’ for
     which Mr. Wallace substituted stone from Painswick in
     Gloucestershire, as more easily obtained and agreeing in colour
     with the old work.

     “The doors on each side will be noticed, with their depressed ogee
     headings, which indicate that this screen is of somewhat later date
     than the corresponding one (also by Bishop Fox) at Winchester.
     Another indication to the same effect has been detected in the
     grotesque carvings in the spandrels, which are here of a humorous
     character, whereas at Winchester the minor decorations are entirely
     sacred, e.g., the Annunciation and Visitation.”--(Geo. W.)

The =East Window= above contains three lancets, the glass representing the
Crucifixion in the centre with St. John on one side and the Virgin on
the other. It is placed in a quintuple arcade. The prevailing colour is
blue.

On the north side of the choir under the first arch we notice the
=Monument of Richard Humble=, a good specimen of the Jacobean period.
Here, under an arched canopy, Richard Humble is kneeling before an
altar, with his two wives behind him. The second one wears a conical
hat.

The =Retro-Choir=, now called the =Lady-Chapel=, was erected by Peter de
Rupibus. It is one of the best examples of Early English extant. Six
slender columns support the groined vault. If we look at it from the
south-east corner we gain a good view showing the altar on the north
side and the =tomb of Bishop Andrews= (died 1626) on the west, an example
of the Renaissance style, with a painted effigy. This Bishop of
Winchester (who often visited St. Saviour’s, the most important church
in his diocese after the Cathedral of Winchester) was buried in a little
chapel east of the retro-choir. The “Bishop’s Chapel,” as it was called,
was destroyed in 1830 and the body of Bishop Andrews was transferred to
its present place.

Of the windows in the Retro-Choir the most admired is the one in the
north side of three lights containing figures of Charles I., Thomas à
Becket and Archbishop Laud. The tracery is in the Decorated style.

Walking along the north-choir-aisle we pass the effigy of a knight and
soon come to the most conspicuous monument in this aisle, that of =John
Trehearne=, servant to Queen Elizabeth and “Gentleman Portar” to James I.
On the top of the tomb are Trehearne and his wife with big ruffs. They
proudly hold a tablet which is a eulogy of Trehearne’s remarkable
qualities. Their four children kneel on a bas-relief below. It is a very
interesting example of Seventeenth Century mortuary art.

A door leads from the north-choir-aisle into the =Chapel of St. John the
Divine=, now famous for the =Harvard Window= in its eastern wall.

     “Henceforth the chapel will be associated with the name of John
     Harvard, who was born in the parish, and baptised in the church on
     29th November, 1607, and its restoration is intended to take the
     form of a memorial to that great and good man.

     “The first practical step in this direction was taken by the Hon.
     Joseph H. Choate, who manifested great interest in the ancient
     fabric while he was American Ambassador, and presented the east
     window to the chapel in commemoration of John Harvard, founder of
     the renowned university which bears his name. The window, unveiled
     by Mr. Choate on Monday, 2nd May, 1905, is of three lights,
     transomed, as designed by Sir Arthur Blomfield and Sons, the glass
     being made in America under the supervision of Mr. Charles F.
     McKim, the famous American architect. The design is by Mr. John La
     Farge. In the central light of the lower division the Baptism of
     Christ is depicted, attendant angels occupying the sides. The upper
     division contains the arms of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where
     John Harvard was educated, and of the Harvard University, with its
     mottoes, _Veritas_ and _Christo et Ecclesiae_. The base bears the
     inscription, ‘In memory of John Harvard, founder of Harvard
     University in America, baptised in this church, Nov. 29, 1607.’

     “The window is a noteworthy example of modern work, and the
     treatment of the familiar subject is distinctly original, in which
     respect, as well as in colouring, it presents a very striking
     contrast to the other windows, especially to those of mediæval
     character, throughout the church. Perhaps it is fortunate that it
     occupies an isolated position in the chapel, where the brilliance
     and peculiarity of the colouring are seen to full advantage without
     detriment to the other windows.”--(Geo. W.)

We again find our way back to the tower and into the south-aisle of the
nave for the particular purpose of looking at the windows representing
the =Elizabethan players and dramatists=, associated with the Southwark
theatres. Some of them, John Fletcher, Philip Massinger and Edmund
Shakespeare, are buried here. The first of this series of windows is a
memorial to =Edward Alleyn= (1566-1626); next to =Francis Beaumont=
(1585-1616); next to =John Fletcher= (1579-1625); next to =Philip Massinger=
(1583-1639); next to =Shakespeare=, who lived not far from his theatre,
the Globe, in the parish of St. Saviour’s Church.

[Illustration: ST. SAVIOUR’S, SOUTHWARK: NAVE, EAST]

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: WEST FRONT]




WESTMINSTER ABBEY

     DEDICATED TO ST. PETER. CHURCH OF A BENEDICTINE MONASTERY.

     SPECIAL FEATURES: EDWARD THE CONFESSOR’S CHAPEL; SHRINE OF THE
     CONFESSOR; THE “POETS’ CORNER”; HENRY VII.’S CHAPEL.


Westminster Abbey, though not a cathedral, is, perhaps, the most famous
church in England. It is, however, visited on account of its historical
associations rather than because of its architecture. Yet architects
know full well that it is the equal of Salisbury, Lincoln, Ely, or
Canterbury. In it all British sovereigns have been crowned since the
days of the Conqueror and in it rest the remains of the nation’s most
honoured dead.

According to tradition, in the Seventh Century, Siebert, King of the
East Saxons, built a church to St. Peter on what was then Thorney
Island. It became known as Westminster.

Dunstan established a Benedictine monastery here; but the Abbey that we
know was begun by Edward the Confessor in 1050. This King died soon
after the Choir was finished in 1065, and was buried there. We gain an
idea of his church from the Bayeux tapestry, which depicts Edward the
Confessor’s funeral. Some portions of it remain below the present Choir.

During William Rufus’s reign the transepts and first bay of the nave
were finished.

Henry III. determined to build a new church in the French style; and
this was begun in 1245 and completed as far as the fourth bay of the
nave in 1269. It is the most finished production of the first half of
the Thirteenth Century in England.

Henry III. also built a Lady-Chapel, afterwards destroyed by Henry VII.
for his exquisite chapel--the most perfect example of Perpendicular
work. During the reign of Richard II. the old nave was reconstructed.

To many, the exterior of Westminster Abbey is not as impressive as St.
Paul’s. It is disappointing in size and somewhat too narrow for its
height. It is only when we enter and see the superb architecture and
impressive monuments that its grandeur and solemnity grow upon us,
notwithstanding the fact that the black-gowned vergers conducting
parties of tourists from tomb to tomb and chapel to chapel, in
business-like fashion, do all they can to dispel reverence by rattling
off stories of Queen Hanne and ‘Enery VII., not always with
unimpeachable accuracy.

     “The WEST FRONT is flanked by two towers 225 feet high, built by
     Wren and finished by his pupil Hawksmoor, about 1740. In the centre
     of the front is the great Perpendicular window, beneath which is a
     row of niches. The entrance porch has a groined roof. The nave is
     remarkable for its length and height. On the north side we notice
     that there is a wealth of buttresses. Strong buttresses support the
     aisle walls, and from these flying-buttresses stretch across to the
     walls built on the central arcade. The four eastern buttresses
     comprise the part of the church finished by Henry III.; the rest of
     the nave, with the exception of Wren’s towers, was built during the
     last half of the Fourteenth Century and the beginning of the
     Fifteenth. The figures in the niches are modern.”--(P. H. D.)

The =North Front= is new, designed by Sir G. Scott and Mr. Pearson.

     “It is a very elaborate work and much of it is beautiful; but it
     does not seem to harmonise with the rest of the building. There is
     a large rose-window; on each side tall buttresses crowned with
     turrets and covered with niches. There is an arcade of open-work
     below and then some deeply-recessed Early English windows, and
     below three doorways under one string-course, the centre one having
     a high gable. The door is divided by a pier having a finely-carved
     figure of the Virgin and Child. The tympanum is divided into three
     panels. In the highest is Our Lord in glory surrounded by angels
     and below him are the Twelve Apostles, while in the lowest tier are
     figures representing Art, History, Philosophy, War, Legislation and
     Science, with the builders of the Abbey, Edward the Confessor,
     Henry III. and Richard II. The niches are filled with figures of
     persons in some way connected with the Abbey. The Choir is in the
     form of an apse, with radiating chapels, planned on the model of
     the French _chevet_, according to the taste of Henry III., which he
     had cultivated during his sojourn in France. The Lady-Chapel at the
     east end, commonly called Henry VII.’s Chapel, is one of the
     noblest examples of the best Perpendicular work in the kingdom, and
     ranks with St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, and King’s College,
     Cambridge. The monastic buildings are on the south side of the
     Abbey.”--(P. H. D.)

The ground plan is French, with a French _chevet_ and chapels radiating
from the Choir, and not only in the plan but in the narrowness and
height of the bays of the Choir and in the tracery of the windows.
French characteristics declare themselves. The nave is bordered with
aisles. Beyond the Choir rises the central tower; and on either side the
north and south transepts. The latter is known as the “Poets’ Corner.”
Beyond comes the altar, around which many tombs crowd closely; and
beyond them the North and South Ambulatory. Beyond again runs a circle
of chapels. Then beyond this apse a flight of steps leading to Henry
VII.’s Chapel, also crowded with tombs.

The Cloisters and Chapter-House lie on the south side of the Abbey; and
on the right of the chief or West entrance, we find the famous Jerusalem
Chamber, Jericho, and the Dining-Hall and Court--all part of the old
Palace and demonstrating to strangers from over-sea the close connection
between the religious and civic life of the British nation.

     “One never enters the Abbey Church without a thrill of admiration
     for the daring genius who raised those lofty vaults. That they were
     the first of their kind in England is almost certain, but the name
     of their designer does not seem to have been preserved. It is more
     likely that he was an Englishman who had studied in France, than
     that he was a Frenchman. Certain it is that though the plan, if not
     all the design, is purely French, the arrangement of the chapels
     being in fact peculiar to Westminster amongst English churches, the
     workmanship is very superior to that in any contemporary building
     on the Continent.”--(W. J. L.)

The =Nave= is the loftiest in England. It is two feet higher than that of
York Minster.

     “The view of the interior is very impressive. Standing at the west
     end of the nave we cannot fail to admire the magnificent beauty of
     this noble shrine. This nave of twelve bays, with its clustered
     columns, its beautiful triforium, and its lofty and firmly
     proportioned roof soaring to the height of 101 feet, is very
     striking. A close inspection will show the difference between the
     piers of the portion finished by Henry III. and the newer work of
     the Fourteenth Century. The tracery of the triforium openings is
     very fine. The choir-screen which crosses the nave at the eighth
     pier, is modern, and also the pulpit. The west window is
     Perpendicular, and has some Georgian glass containing figures of
     the Patriarchs. Much architectural beauty has been sacrificed for
     the sake of ponderous monuments, but many of these have much
     interest and for many visitors will prove the most attractive
     features of the Abbey.”--(P. H. D.)

The general effect of the interior has changed little since Washington
Irving wrote his sympathetic essay on England’s Walhalla:

     “I pursued my walk to an arched door opening to the interior of the
     Abbey. On entering here the magnitude of the building breaks fully
     upon the mind, contrasted with the vaults of the cloisters. The eye
     gazes with wonder at clustered columns of gigantic dimensions with
     arches springing from them to such an amazing height; and man
     wandering about their bases shrunk into insignificance in
     comparison with his own handiwork. The spaciousness and gloom of
     this vast edifice produce a profound and mysterious awe. We step
     cautiously and softly about as if fearful of disturbing the
     hallowed silence of the tomb; while every footfall whispers along
     the walls, and chatters among the sepulchres, making us more
     sensible of the quiet we have interrupted.

     “It seems as if the awful nature of the place presses down upon the
     soul, and hushes the beholder into noiseless reverence. We feel
     that we are surrounded by the congregated bones of the great men of
     past times who have filled history with their deeds and the earth
     with their renown.

     “I passed some time in Poets’ Corner, which occupies an end of one
     of the transepts, or cross aisles of the Abbey. The monuments are
     generally simple; for the lives of literary men afford no striking
     themes for the sculptor. Shakespeare and Addison have statues
     erected to their memories, but the greater part have busts,
     medallions and sometimes mere inscriptions.

     “From Poets’ Corner I continued my stroll towards that part of the
     Abbey which contains the sepulchres of the kings. I wandered among
     what once were chapels, but which are now occupied by the tombs and
     monuments of the great. At every turn I met with some illustrious
     name, or the cognizance of some powerful house renowned in history.
     As the eye darts into these dusky chambers of death, it catches
     glimpses of quaint effigies: some kneeling in niches, as if in
     devotion; others stretched upon the tombs, with hands piously
     pressed together; warriors in armour, as if reposing after battle;
     prelates, with crosiers and mitres; and nobles in robes and
     coronets, lying as it were in state. In glancing over this scene,
     so strangely populous, yet where every form is so still and silent,
     it seems almost as if we were treading a mansion of that fabled
     city, where every being had been suddenly transmuted into stone.”

The =West Window= dates from the reign of George II., whose arms are in
the centre. It contains twenty-four large and fourteen small
compartments depicting Moses, Aaron and the patriarchs.

The =North-west Tower=, also called =Belfry Tower=, has been called the
“Whigs’ Corner,” on account of the monuments there. The glass in the
window is old. The =south-west=, or =Baptistery Tower=, used to contain the
font (now in Henry VII.’s Chapel). Here are also many monuments and
busts. The stained glass window, in memory of George Herbert and William
Cowper, was the gift of Mr. G. W. Childs, of Philadelphia.

The nave pulpit was placed here in 1862; and though the inner stone-work
of the =Choir-screen= is of the Thirteenth Century, what is visible is
modern.

     “The splendid arcade which forms the TRIFORIUM is one of the
     greatest glories of Westminster, for it is filled with tracery
     similar in every respect to the best window tracery of the Early
     English period. Above the triforium comes the grand tier of windows
     composing the clerestory. Each is divided by a single central
     mullion which, in the older portions, terminates with two plain
     arches surmounted by a circle foliated in six divisions, and in the
     newer portions with trefoil-headed arches surmounted by a circle
     divided into only four parts. The fine vaulting, of which the
     rib-work is enriched with sculptured bosses at its points of
     intersection, completes the centre of the nave in such a fashion
     that its decorative effect is in complete harmony with the richness
     of the arch mouldings.”--(C. H.)

The aisles are greatly disfigured by the innumerable monuments. Much
beautiful sculpture has been cut away to make room for them. The north
aisle has one doorway; the south aisle has three, two of which lead into
the Cloisters and the third (the most western one) into the Deanery.
Above it is the =Abbot’s Pew=, an oaken gallery built by Abbot Islip early
in the Sixteenth Century.

The most important monument in the north aisle is that of =Ben Jonson=,
with the famous inscription “O rare Ben Jonson.” In the south aisle lies
=Major John André=.

The =Transepts= of Westminster Abbey contain some of the most beautiful
work that can be found anywhere.

The =North Transept= is entered by the famous =Solomon’s Porch=. It consists
of four bays and is bordered with aisles. The eastern aisle is divided
into three chapels--St. Andrew, St. Michael and St. John the
Evangelist--all of which are filled with monuments.

     “The transept end consists of five stages, of which the lowest is
     composed of four obtusely pointed arches, two of them being
     doorways. The spandrels are very richly sculptured. In the second
     compartment is an arcade of six trefoil-headed arches springing
     from clustered columns. Above this arcade are six lancet windows on
     slender columns. The soffits of the arches are decorated with
     sculpture and at both ends there are statues in niches. The fourth
     stage is a continuation of the triforium arcade. There are three
     arches, each enclosing two trefoiled arches, with a cinquefoiled
     circle between them. It is possible that there were once windows in
     this compartment, but these have been filled up. The transept end
     is completed by a great rose-window filled with modern stained
     glass representing the Apostles and Evangelists. Here we find the
     celebrated CENSING ANGELS.

     “The triforium is the place from which we can best see those famous
     sculptures known as the ‘censing angels.’ The artist who placed
     these figures in the north and south transepts must have had a
     genius which brought him nearer to the great Greek sculptors of the
     Periclean period than any who has lived since their time. What must
     the central statues have been like to be worthy of such
     accessories? Perhaps if one had to select the best public statue in
     England, it would be impossible to overlook the angel on the north
     transept on the western side. He appears to be literally hovering
     in the air, or rather--for this the sculptor has most marvellously
     expressed--he is supposed to be swinging his censer in the presence
     of his Lord, and to be floating in a sea of light, which forces him
     to bow his head and avert his face from its dazzling
     effulgence.”--(W. J. L.)

Among the monuments in the north transept the most interesting are to
Admiral Vernon, George Canning, D’Israeli, Gladstone, Sir Robert Peel,
William Pitt and Warren Hastings.

The =South Transept= is popularly known as the =Poets’ Corner=, a name given
by Goldsmith. It is so crowded with tombs and cenotaphs that the
architectural features are rarely noticed. It is not uniform with the
north transept though both are of Henry III.’s reign, Early English
merging into Decorated. A door in the south wall leads into the =Chapel
of St. Faith=, long used as a vestry and now as a chapel for private
prayer.

The most interesting tomb here is that of =Geoffrey Chaucer=, who for
years lived in a house in the monastery garden pulled down to make room

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: POETS’ CORNER]

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: CHOIR, EAST]

for Henry VII.’s Chapel. It is a small altar-tomb supposed to date from
1451, with a canopy of Purbeck marble of later date. The memorial window
above dates from 1868. Here lie Dryden, Francis Beaumont, Browning,
Tennyson and Edmund Spencer among others; and a bust of Longfellow was
placed here in 1884.

     “The Choir, which has been the scene of so many solemn and
     memorable services, has no ancient woodwork. The stalls were
     erected about the middle of the last century. The altar and reredos
     are modern. There are some large figures, and a mosaic of the Last
     Supper. Here the coronations of our monarchs take place. The
     pavement is interesting, as it was brought from Rome by Abbot Ware
     in 1268, and beneath it he rests with other abbots of Westminster.
     The sedilia are Thirteenth Century work, and were decorated with
     paintings. The figures of King Siebert, the first founder, and of
     Henry III., the munificent re-founder, remain. Above the base of
     the tomb of Anne of Cleves, one of Henry VIII.’s many wives, is a
     remarkable painting of Richard II., and behind it some ancient
     tapestry.”--(P. H. D.)

On the north side of the sanctuary three ancient tombs harmonise
perfectly with their architectural surroundings. The most westerly is
that of =Aveline of Lancaster=, who died about 1273, a wealthy heiress,
daughter of the Earl of Albemarle, who was married in the Abbey in 1269
to Edmund Crouchback, Earl of Lancaster, younger son of Henry III. A
single cusped arch with a high gable in the spandrel of which is a
trefoiled panel forms the canopy. Two dogs are at the feet of the effigy
draped in flowing mantle. The tomb is Early Decorated. Next comes the
tomb of =Aymer de Valence=, Earl of Pembroke (died 1323). The Earl, in
full armour, rests his feet on a lion couchant. Beyond is the tomb of
=Edmund Crouchback= (died 1296). The effigy of the Earl in chain armour
lies under a triple canopy, richly ornamented. The aisles are crowded
with tombs and monuments. The aisles of the choir are filled with tombs
and monuments.

Behind the altar is situated the =Confessor’s Chapel= containing the
famous =Shrine of Edward the Confessor=.

     “When we enter St. Edward’s Chapel, or the Chapel of the Kings
     (_Capella Regum_), we find ourselves in what may fairly be
     described as the most important part of the Abbey, alike from the
     ecclesiastical and historical points of view. The chapel is
     distinguished from the rest of the church by its superior height
     above the ground. In the centre is the Confessor’s shrine, around
     which are the tombs of five Kings and six Queens of England. The
     entrance is by some wooden steps through a small space between one
     of the columns and Edward I.’s tomb. The chapel is separated from
     the sanctuary by a Fifteenth Century screen, which, though much
     mutilated, is still beautiful. The sculptures deal with the life
     and visions of the Confessor.”--(C. H.)

The =Confessor’s Shrine=, though mutilated, is the most important monument
in the Abbey. The present tomb was finished in 1269 at the instance of
King Henry, and was the work of one Peter, a Roman citizen. At the
Dissolution of the Monasteries the body of the King was removed and the
golden ornaments of the tomb disappeared; but in Queen Mary’s time Abbot
Feckenham had the body re-interred, the shrine repaired and the wooden
superstructure erected. James II. had the old coffin enclosed in another
case. This remains still within the shrine.

On the north side of the shrine is the =Tomb of Henry III.=, of two
stages, in the upper one of which the body rests. An effigy in gilt
bronze rests on the top. Next is the tomb of =Edward I.= On the other side
(east) lies =Eleanor of Castile= (died 1290) in a tomb of Purbeck marble,
the sides of which are embellished with trefoiled heads, a fine example
of Gothic, probably designed by Torel. Immediately behind the
Confessor’s Shrine comes the =Chantry of Henry V.= (where an altar once
stood). It is a splendid piece of ornate Perpendicular work, with
elaborate sculptured figures representing St. George, St. Denys and the
story of the hero’s life--his fights, coronation and court. The effigy
is mutilated. Above the tomb hang the monarch’s shield, saddle and
helmet, which were carried in his funeral procession.

The next tomb is that of =Queen Philippa of Hainault=, Queen of Edward
III., who died in 1369. Next comes =Edward III.= (died 1377) and next that
of =Richard II.= and his first wife, =Anne of Bohemia=. Next, =Siebert’s
Tomb=, consisting of an arched recess in the wall and supposed to contain
the body of the legendary founder of the Abbey. It dates from 1308. Next
comes the tomb of =Anne of Cleves=.

In this chapel stand the =Coronation Chairs=. The one on the left was made
in the reign of Edward I. to enclose the stone of Scone, supposed to be
the stone on which Jacob slept at Beth-el. The chair was once painted
and jewelled. The other chair was made for the coronation of William and
Mary. Between these hang the sword and shield of state of Edward III.,
used at his and all other coronations.

The little =Chapel of St. Benedict= is closed to the public. Under an arch
is an altar tomb of four children of Henry III. and four of Edward I.

Then comes =St. Edmund’s Chapel=, filled with tombs; then =St. Nicholas’s
Chapel=, separated from the ambulatory by an embattled stone screen
(Perpendicular), probably erected in the reign of Henry IV. On the other
side of the steps leading to Henry VII.’s Chapel is =St. Paul’s Chapel=,
corresponding with St. Nicholas’s Chapel. Next we find the =Chapel of St.
John Baptist= with the =Chapel of St. Erasmus= forming the entrance. The
doorway, dating from the reign of Richard II., is beautiful, a low arch,
supported by clustered pillars. Next to this comes =Islip’s Chapel=,
screened off and vaulted by Abbot Islip (died 1532), to hold his own
tomb. The abbot’s rebus, an eye with a slip of a tree grasped in a hand,
or a man slipping from the branch of a tree, occurs frequently inside
and outside the chapel. In the upper part of Islip’s chapel are
preserved the remarkable collection of wax-works.

     “The wax-works of Westminster Abbey have not been seen by many
     people, but are deservedly famous. At first, it was customary when
     a king or any other great personage was to be buried, to place on
     the coffin his effigy formed of boiled leather. When the art of
     modelling in _cuir bouilli_ was lost, wax was employed for making
     the image, and wax, notwithstanding its proverbial pliancy, is a
     very enduring substance. From the north aisle of the apse we ascend
     a narrow staircase, passing by the way some of the most beautiful
     sculpture in the Abbey fronting the chapel of Abbot Islip. At a
     turn in the stair which leads to a kind of upper gallery we are
     suddenly confronted with the lifelike figure of King Charles II.,
     whose face, as rendered familiar by numerous and contemporary
     engravings, with its black eyes and swarthy complexion, looks out
     from behind the glass of a cupboard only a few inches from the spot
     we have reached. The royal figure is dressed in crimson velvet, now
     sadly browned, and adorned

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: CHAPEL AND SHRINE OF EDWARD THE
CONFESSOR]

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: HENRY VII’S CHAPEL]

     with the finest lace of the period. When we have recovered
     composure and breath, and can look around, we find ourselves in the
     presence of a series of most interesting and curious portraits. The
     wooden presses, with glass fronts, are, to judge from the pattern
     of the hinges, of about the time of the monarch whose effigy was
     the first to confront us. The rest, taken chronologically, consist
     of ten figures beginning with Queen Elizabeth and ending with Lord
     Nelson, but neither of these, the first and last, were really
     funeral effigies.”--(W. J. L.)

Directly behind the Confessor’s Chapel we come to =Henry VII.’s Chapel=,
originally designed to hold the remains of Henry VI., who was buried at
Windsor, but the plan was not carried out.

     “At the entrance to the chapel we are brought to what Dean Stanley
     calls a ‘solemn architectural pause.’ Here we may study three
     distinct architectural periods. ‘First,’ as Mr. Loftie says, ‘there
     is the early work of Henry III., who, it will be remembered, made a
     Lady-Chapel here before he recommenced the rebuilding of the
     Confessor’s church. Secondly, the next pier shows us the work done
     when the body of Henry V. was brought hither from France in 1422.
     Lastly, alongside of these two is the first column of the new and
     gorgeous structure with which Henry VII. replaced the Lady-Chapel
     of Henry III.’ The dimness of the approach materially enhances the
     effect of the superb building beyond, and it cannot be doubted that
     this comparative gloom, so far from being an accident, was
     deliberately intended. The building of the chapel occupied the
     first twelve years of the Sixteenth Century. It measures inside 104
     feet 6 inches long by 69 feet 10 inches broad, and consists of a
     nave and aisles of four bays, the nave terminating in five small
     polygonal chapels, the style throughout being Perpendicular. The
     entrance is under a large central and two smaller side arches,
     which have six bronze doors of superb design and splendid
     workmanship, in which a number of Henry VII.’s devices
     appear.”--(C. H.)

Washington Irving’s impressions were as follows:

     “I stood before the entrance to Henry the Seventh’s Chapel. A
     flight of steps leads up to it, through a deep and gloomy, but
     magnificent arch. Great gates of brass, rich and delicately
     wrought, turn heavily upon their hinges, as if proudly reluctant to
     admit the feet of common mortals into this most gorgeous of
     sepulchres.

     “On entering, the eye is astonished by the pomp of architecture and
     the elaborate beauty of sculptured detail. The very walls are
     wrought into universal ornament, encrusted with tracery and scooped
     into niches, crowded with the statues of saints and martyrs. Stone
     seems, by the cunning labour of the chisel, to have been robbed of
     its weight and density, suspended aloft, as if by magic, and the
     fretted roof achieved with the wonderful minuteness and airy
     security of a cobweb.

     “Along the sides of the chapel are the lofty stalls of the Knights
     of the Bath, richly carved of oak, though with the grotesque
     decorations of Gothic architecture. On the pinnacles of the stalls
     are affixed the helmets and crests of the knights with their scarfs
     and swords; and above them are suspended their banners, emblazoned
     with armorial bearings, and contrasting the splendour of gold and
     purple and crimson, with the cold grey fretwork of the roof. In the
     midst of this grand mausoleum stands the sepulchre of its
     founder,--his effigy, with that of his queen, extended on a
     sumptuous tomb, and the whole surrounded by a superbly wrought
     brazen railing.

     “There is a sad dreariness in this magnificence; this strange
     mixture of tombs and trophies; these emblems of living and aspiring
     ambition, close beside mementoes which show the dust and oblivion
     in which all must sooner or later terminate.

     “Two small aisles on each side of this chapel present a touching
     instance of the equality of the grave, which brings down the
     oppressor to a level with the oppressed, and mingles the dust of
     the bitterest enemies together. In one is the sepulchre of the
     haughty Elizabeth; in the other is that of her victim, the lovely
     and unfortunate Mary. Not an hour in the day but some ejaculation
     of pity is uttered over the fate of the latter, mingled with
     indignation at her oppressor. The walls of Elizabeth’s sepulchre
     continually echo with the sighs of sympathy heaved at the grave of
     her rival.

     “A peculiar melancholy reigns over the aisle where Mary lies
     buried. The light struggles dimly through windows darkened by dust.
     The greater part of the place is in deep shadow, and the walls are
     stained and tinted by time and weather. A marble figure of Mary is
     stretched upon the tomb, round which is an iron railing much
     corroded, bearing her national emblem--the thistle.”

Dean Stanley writes:

     “It was to be his chantry as well as his tomb, for he was
     determined not to be behind the Lancastrian princes in devotion;
     and this unusual anxiety for the sake of a soul not too heavenward
     in its affections expended itself in the immense apparatus of
     service which he provided. Almost a second Abbey was needed to
     contain the new establishment of monks who were to sing in their
     stalls ‘as long as the world shall endure.’ Almost a second shrine
     surrounded by its blazing tapers and shining like gold with its
     glittering bronze, was to contain his remains.

     “To the Virgin Mary, to whom the chapel was dedicated, he had a
     special devotion. Her ‘in all his necessities he had made his
     continual refuge’; and her figure, accordingly, looks down upon his
     grave from the east end, between the apostolic patrons of the
     Abbey, Peter and Paul, with ‘the holy company of heaven--that is to
     say, angels, archangels, patriarchs, prophets, apostles,
     evangelists, martyrs, confessors and virgins,’ to ‘whose singular
     mediation and prayers he also trusted,’ including the royal saints
     of Britain, St. Edward, St. Edmund, St. Oswald, St. Margaret of
     Scotland, who stand, as he directed, sculptured tier above tier, on
     every side of the Chapel; some retained from the ancient
     Lady-Chapel; the greater part of the work of his own age. Around
     his tomb stand his ‘accustomed Avours or guardian saints to whom he
     calls and cries’--St. Michael, St. John the Baptist, St. John the
     Evangelist, St. George, St. Anthony, St. Edward, St. Vincent, St.
     Anne, St. Mary Magdalene and St. Barbara, each with their peculiar
     emblems--‘so to aid, succour and defend him, that the ancient and
     ghostly enemy, nor none other evil or damnable spirit, have no
     power to invade him, nor with their wickedness to annoy him, but
     with holy prayers to be intercessors to his Maker and Redeemer.’
     These were the adjurations of the last Mediæval King, as the Chapel
     was the climax of the latest Mediæval architecture.”

     “But although the Chapel hangs on tenaciously to the skirts of the
     ancient Abbey and the ancient Church, yet that solemn architectural
     pause between the two--which arrests the most careless observer,
     and renders it a separate structure, a foundation ‘adjoining the
     Abbey,’ rather than forming part of it--corresponds with marvellous
     fidelity to the pause and break in English history of which Henry
     VII.’s reign is the expression. It is the close of the Middle Ages:
     the apple of Granada in its ornaments shows that the last Crusade
     was over; its flowing draperies and classical attributes indicate
     that the Renaissance had already begun. It is the end of the Wars
     of the Roses combining Henry’s right of conquest with his fragile
     claim of hereditary descent. On the one hand, it is a glorification
     of the victory of Bosworth. The angels at the four corners of the
     tomb, held or hold the likeness of the crown which he won on that
     famous day. In the stained glass we see the same crown hanging on
     the green bush in the fields of Leicestershire. On the other hand,
     like the Chapel of King’s College at Cambridge, it asserts
     everywhere the memory of the ‘holy Henry’s shade’; the Red Rose of
     Lancaster appears in every pane of glass: in every corner is the
     Portcullis--the _Alters securitas_, as he termed it, with an
     allusion to its own meaning, and the double safeguard of his
     succession--which he derived through John of Gaunt from the
     Beaufort Castle in Anjou inherited from Blanche of Navarre by
     Edmund Crouchback; whilst Edward IV. and Elizabeth of York are
     commemorated by intertwining these Lancastrian symbols with the
     Greyhound of Cecilia Neville, wife of Richard, Duke of York, with
     the Rose in the Sun, which scattered the mist at Barnet, and the
     Falcon on the Fetterlock, by which the first Duke of York expressed
     to his descendants that ‘he was locked up from the hope of the
     kingdom, but advising them to be quiet and silent, as God knoweth
     what may come to pass.’

     “It is also the revival of the ancient Celtic-British

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: CLOISTERS]

[Illustration: WESTMINSTER ABBEY: SOUTH-WEST]

     element in the English monarchy, after centuries of eclipse. It is
     a strange and striking thought, as we mount the steps of Henry
     VII.’s Chapel, that we enter there a mausoleum of princes, whose
     boast it was to be descended not from the Confessor or the
     Conqueror, but from Arthur and Llewellyn; and that roundabout the
     tomb, side by side with the emblems of the great English Houses, is
     to be seen the Red Dragon of the last British King
     Cadwallader--‘the dragon of the great Pendragonship,’ of Wales,
     thrust forward by the Tudor King in every direction, to supplant
     the hated White Boar of his departed enemy--the fulfilment, in
     another sense than the old Welsh bards had dreamt, of their
     prediction that the progeny of Cadwallader should reign
     again.”--(A. P. S.)

And now we will begin a more detailed survey:

     “We now enter Henry VII.’s Chapel, the most perfect example of the
     Perpendicular style at its best in the country. At the entrance are
     beautiful bronze doors covered with designs symbolical of the
     titles of the Royal founder. It is impossible to describe in words
     the richness and beauty of the interior of this noble chapel. The
     vault is very beautiful with fan-tracery. The banners of the
     Knights of the Order of the Bath hang over their stalls. The
     _misereres_ are wonderfully carved, and are worthy of close
     examination. The black marble tomb of the founder is considered to
     be the best example of the Renaissance style in England. It was
     fashioned by Torregiano. Very numerous monuments are found here.
     The tombs of Mary Queen of Scots and of Queen Elizabeth have
     especial interest. Oliver Cromwell’s body once lay in the most
     eastern chapel, but the Royalists at the Restoration wrought
     vengeance on his corpse, and on that of other regicides, and did
     not suffer them to remain in these hallowed precincts.”--(P. H. D.)

The tombs that attract the most attention are those of =Queen Elizabeth=
and =Mary, Queen of Scots=. Queen Elizabeth’s, erected by James I.,
consists of a canopy supported on ten Corinthian pillars, under which
the effigy of the queen lies on a slab borne by lions. Mary I. rests in
the same tomb. Mary Stuart’s tomb bears an effigy. At her feet is the
crowned lion of Scotland. Her body was removed from Peterborough (see
page 331) by James I.

From the east walk of the Cloisters, finished in 1345, we enter the
=Chapter-House=, dating from 1350. It is octagonal and is noted for its
fine tracery. The House of Commons used to meet here (before 1340). The
speaker sat in the abbot’s seat.

     “The Chapter-House is visited by comparatively few of the myriads
     who come to the Abbey; but those who know what to look for may well
     linger for some time in this deeply interesting building. The
     splendour and loveliness of the entrance to it show the important
     place which it held in the general estimation; the stones under the
     left arcade of the vestibule are still deeply worn by the feet of
     generations of monks, as they walked two and two to their weekly
     assemblies. The vaulting and its bosses are quaint and rich. The
     quaint entrance door itself, bleared and ruined as it now is, was
     once rich with gold and scarlet.

     “Entering the Chapter-House we see at a glance an octagon of the
     noblest proportions, of which the roof is supported by a slender
     and graceful pillar of polished Purbeck, thirty-five feet high,
     ‘surrounded by eight subordinate shafts, attached to it by three
     moulded bands.’ The painted windows were placed there as a memorial
     to Dean Stanley. One was given by the Queen, and one by Americans.
     In the central light at the summit of each is represented the
     greatest man of each century--the Venerable Bede, St. Anselm, Roger
     Bacon, Chaucer, Caxton and Shakespeare. In the window over the door
     is Queen Victoria. The central band of the windows represents many
     of the great historical events connected with the Abbey.”--(F. W.
     F.)

     “The Chapel of the Pyx is approached from the East Cloister Walk by
     a massive door with seven locks. It is beneath the old dormitory
     and occupies two bays of the Confessor’s building, and,
     historically considered, is perhaps the most interesting portion of
     the Abbey buildings. The pyx is a box containing the standard
     pieces of gold and silver coin of the realm which were used for
     testing the accuracy of the currency. It has now been removed to
     the Mint, where the trial of the pyx takes place.”--(C. H.)

The =Cloisters= with their arches, beautiful tracery and ancient memorials
are strangely impressive, particularly as they are situated in the midst
of London’s roar; yet here there is quiet.

The most famous part of the =Deanery= is the =Jerusalem Chamber= projecting
just beyond the south-west tower. It probably was so called on account
of the tapestry representing the history of Jerusalem that adorned it.
Henry IV. died in it in 1413, according to the prophecy that he should
die in Jerusalem. (See _Henry IV._, Part II., Act IV., Scene 4.) In this
room the Assembly of Divines met in 1643; and the Revisers of the Old
and New Testaments of late years. A small room with carved panelling,
built by Abbot Islip, leading from it, is known as the =Jericho
Parlour=.




INDEX


Abbey of St. Werburgh, 215.

Abbot’s Cloister, 171.

Abbot’s Pew, 431.

Abbots of St. Albans, 360-361.

Aisles, Five, 71.

Aldred, 152, 153.

Alfred, King, 46, 47, 49.

Alleyn, Edward, 424.

Altar:--Canterbury, 16;
  Chester, 219;
  of the Martyrdom, 3;
  St. Paul’s, 409;
  of the Sword’s Point, 3;
  of the Virgin, 4.

Ambulatories:--Exeter, 102;
  Gloucester, 162.

Amen Corner, 398.

André, Major John (tomb), 431.

Andrews, Bishop (tomb), 422.

Angel Choir, 285, 289, 298-300, 307, 309.

Angel Tower (Canterbury), 9, 10, 11, 13, 30.

Angel Windows (Salisbury), 88.

Anne of Bohemia (tomb), 435.

Anne of Cleves (tomb), 435.

Anselm, 12;
  burial-place of, 25.

Aquablanca, Thomas, 174, 177, 180.

Arcade, Winchester, 60.

Archbishop of Canterbury, 2, 263.

Archbishop of York, 263, 265.

Arches, Inverted (Wells), 110, 116.

Arundel, Earl, and Maud (tomb), 72.

Arundel Tower, 9, 11.

Athelstan, 90.

Atholl, Countess (tomb), 30.

Austen, Jane (brass), 54.

Aveline of Lancaster (tomb), 433.

Ave Maria Lane, 398.


Ball-flower, 143, 159, 163, 175.

Ball and Cross, St. Paul’s, 403.

Baptistry Tower, 430.

Bath Abbey, 134-139.

Bayeux Tapestry, 425.

Beauchamp, James de (effigy), 198.

Beauchamp, John (tomb), 192.

Beaufort, Cardinal, 53, 59, 417, 418.

Beaufort, Jane, 417, 421.

Beaumont, Francis, 424, 433.

Becket, Thomas à, 2, 3, 10, 18, 19, 249, 262.

Becket’s Crown, 19, 23-24.

Beckington, Bishop, 108, 110, 119.

Beckington (tomb), 129.

Bede, Venerable, grave of, 242-243.

Belfry Tower, 430.

Bell Harry Tower, 11, 30.

Bell Tower, 380.

Bell:--Dunstan (Canterbury), 11;
  (Rochester), 36;
  Great Peter, 268;
  Peter, 98;
  Tom of Lincoln, 310-311;
  Tom of Oxford, 375.

Bells:--Canterbury, 36;
  Exeter, 92;
  Gloucester, 152;
  Lincoln, 310-311;
  Oxford, 375, 380;
  Peterborough, 321;
  St. Albans, 369;
  St. Saviour’s, 418;
  Winchester, 65;
  York, 268.

Bell Ringer’s Gallery, 238.

Ben Jonson, 431.

Berkeley, Maurice (tomb), 145.

Birde, William, 134-135.

Bishop’s Cloisters (Hereford), 175.

Bishops’ Gardens (Norwich), 303, 357.

Bishop’s Eye (Lincoln), 305, 308.

Bishop’s Palace (Wells), 132, 133.

Bishop’s Throne:--Chester, 219;
  Exeter, 99, 100-101;
  Hereford, 183;
  Lincoln, 297;
  Ripon, 258.

Bitton, Bishop, 90.

Black Prince (tomb), 9, 20-21.

Blois, William de (effigy), 198.

Blue Dick, 9, 13, 27.

Bohun, Joanne de, 185.

Booth, Bishop (effigy), 176.

Booth (tomb), 176.

Borough, The, 415.

Bouchier, Cardinal, 16.

Bowet, Archbishop (tomb), 274.

Boy Bishop, 82-83.

Boys, Dean (tomb), 27.

Brantingham, 91, 100.

Bridport, Giles de (tomb), 86-87.

Brithnoth, 335.

Bristol, 140-150.

Bronescomb, Bishop, 91, 102.

Bronescomb (tomb), 103.

Browne’s Gate, 108.

Bruce, Robert, 227.

Bubwith, Bishop, 110.

Bubwith Tower, 113, 114, 118.

Burne-Jones, Windows by, 88, 380, 382, 384, 386, 388, 391.

Butler, Bishop (tomb), 149.

Butler Tower, 140.

Bytton, St. William (tomb), 129.


Campanile, 69.

Canon Alley, 398.

Cantelupe, Walter de (effigy), 198.

Canterbury, 1-32.

Carileph, 244.

Carlisle, 227-232.

Carving:--Carlisle, 228;
  Exeter, 95, 96;
  Lincoln, 285, 295-296;
  Wells, 117-118, 120-122, 130;
  Worcester, 196-197;
  York, 280;
  Southwell, 317-318.

Cathedral Pool, 201, 203.

Celia, John de, 363, 364.

Cemetery, 5.

Cemetery Gate, 38.

Censing Angels, 432.

Cerdic, 46.

Chain-Gate, 102, 112, 113, 124.

Chantry:--Audley, 85, 175, 185-186;
  Beaufort, 62;
  Birde, 139;
  Bubwith, 122;
  Edington, 54, 162;
  Fleming, 302, 309;
  Fox, 62, 85;
  Gardiner, 62;
  Henry IV, 22;
  Henry V, 435;
  Hungerford, 85;
  Langton, 60, 61;
  Longland, 302, 308;
  Oldham, 102, 104-105;
  Prince Arthur, 195-196;
  Ramryge, 370, 371;
  Russell, 302, 308;
  Speke, 102;
  St. George, 104;
  St. Radegunde, 97;
  Stanbery, 181;
  Sugar, 122;
  Sylke, 98;
  Waynflete, 62;
  Wheathampstead, 370, 371;
  William of Wykeham, 54-55.

Chapel:--Alcock, Bishop, 345;
  Berkeley, 141, 146;
  Botelers, 168;
  Christ Church, 375;
  Derby, 223, 226;
  Dean’s (Canterbury), 22, 26, 27;
  Dean’s (Lincoln), 306;
  Ducie, 222, 225;
  Four Virgins, 72;
  Fraser, 223, 226;
  Guardian Angels, 60, 61;
  Holy Cross, 118, 123;
  Holy Ghost, 99;
  Holy Sepulchre, 64;
  Holy Trinity, 224;
  Islip, 436;
  Jesus, 192, 222, 223, 225, 409;
  Mallory, 255, 259;
  Morning, 410;
  Newton, 141, 145;
  Nine Altars, 130, 236, 237, 238, 240, 246-247;
  of the Pyx, 443;
  Order of St. Michael and St. George, 410;
  Ringers, 309;
  Saints, 367, 371;
  Seabroke, 169;
  Silkstede’s, 64;
  of the Transfiguration, 374;
  Warriors’, 18, 25, 26;
  West, Bishop, 345;
  St. Andrews, 102, 169;
  St. Benedict, 331, 435;
  St. Calixtus, 123;
  St. Catherine, 129, 387;
  St. Chad, 210-211, 213;
  St. David, 123;
  St. Dunstan, 410;
  St. Edward the Confessor, 434;
  St. Edmund, 45, 97, 436;
  St. Erasmus, 436;
  St. Faith, 75, 432;
  St. Gabriel, 30, 105;
  St. George, 224;
  St. Hugh, 309;
  St. James, 102, 224;
  St. John, 193, 196;
  St. John the Baptist, 43, 98, 129, 436;
  St. John the Baptist and St. Edmund the King, 73;
  St. John the Divine, 423;
  St. Katherine, 73;
  St. Kyneburga, 331;
  St. Kyneswitha, 331;
  St. Lucy, 381, 390;
  St. Luke, 353, 358;
  St. Martin, 123;
  St. Mary the Less, 353, 357;
  St. Mary Magdalene, 73, 105;
  St. Nicholas, 224, 436;
  St. Oswald, 331;
  St. Paul, 98, 168, 436;
  St. Philip, 169;
  St. Stephen, 129;
  St. Thomas of Canterbury, 323;
  Trinity, 6, 9, 12, 18, 19, 20;
  Warner, 43.

Chapels:--Ely, 223, 226;
  Lincoln, 292.

Chapter-House:--Bristol, 141;
  Carlisle, 232;
  Chester, 221, 225;
  Durham, 237, 248;
  Gloucester, 149-150, 151, 172;
  Lichfield, 130, 207, 213, 214;
  Lincoln, 307;
  Peterborough, 331;
  Oxford, 379, 392;
  Ripon, 259;
  Salisbury, 78, 88-89;
  Southwell, 313, 317-318;
  Wells, 112, 113, 124, 125-126;
  Westminster Abbey, 428, 442;
  Winchester, 64;
  Worcester, 199;
  York, 261, 280, 281, 282.

Chapter-House Doorway (Rochester), 44-45.

Charles Edward, 228.

Charlton, Bishop (tomb), 180.

Chaucer, 1, 10, 415.

Chaucer (tomb), 432, 433.

Chaucer Window, 419.

Cheapside, 398.

Chequers Inn, 8, 10.

Chertsey’s Gate, 38.

Chests, Mortuary, 57.

Chester, 215-221.

Chichele Tower, 11, 12.

Chichele, Archbishop (tomb), 17.

Chichester, 66-75.

Chillenden, Prior, 9, 12, 13, 31, 32.

Choate, Joseph H., 423.

Choir:--Bath Abbey, 138;
  Bristol, 142;
  Canterbury, 14-17;
  Carlisle, 227, 228, 230-232;
  Chester, 218;
  Chichester, 73;
  Durham, 237, 244;
  Ely, 343-345;
  Exeter, 99-102;
  Gloucester, 53, 160-163;
  Hereford, 182-183;
  Lincoln, 295-297;
  Lichfield, 209-211;
  Manchester, 225;
  Norwich, 356;
  Oxford, 381, 383;
  Peterborough, 328-329;
  Ripon, 255-256;
  Rochester, 42;
  Salisbury, 84-85;
  Southwell, 316;
  St. Alban’s, 356;
  St. Paul’s, 404;
  St. Saviour’s, 421;
  Wells, 126-129;
  Westminster Abbey, 427, 433;
  Winchester, 55;
  Worcester, 193-194;
  York, 271-272, 281.

Choir of Conrad, glorious, 2, 4, 12, 14.

Choir-screen (Lichfield), 211.

Choir-screen (Southwell), 313, 316.

Choir-stalls:--Canterbury, 9, 14;
  Carlisle, 231;
  Chester, 218-219;
  Chichester, 73;
  Durham, 245;
  Ely, 345;
  Exeter, 57;
  Gloucester, 161;
  Hereford, 183;
  Manchester, 225;
  Norwich, 356;
  Peterborough, 329;
  Ripon, 256-257;
  Rochester, 43;
  Salisbury, 85;
  St. Albans, 369;
  St. Paul’s, 408;
  Winchester, 56-57;
  Worcester, 194;
  York, 271.

Choristers’ Green, 80.

Choristers’ Vestry, 306.

Christ Church Gate, 10.

Christ Church, Oxford, 375.

Clive, Geoffrey de (tomb), 180.

Clock (Exeter), 98.

Cloisters:--Bristol, 141, 149;
  Canterbury, 28, 31-32;
  Chester, 220-221;
  Chichester, 75;
  Durham, 248;
  Ely, 340, 341;
  Exeter, 99;
  Gloucester, 151, 159, 170-172;
  Oxford, 350, 358, 359, 380, 392;
  Peterborough, 333;
  Salisbury, 78, 89;
  Wells, 110, 132;
  Westminster Abbey, 428;
  Worcester, 198-199.

Cloister Court, 333.

Close (Salisbury), 80;
  (Wells), 108.

Close Gate, 80.

Coldstream Guards, 411.

College Gate, 37.

Collingwood, 412.

Colston Tower, 140.

Conrad, Prior, 2, 14.

Cornish, Bishop (tomb), 123.

Cornwallis, Lord, 412.

Constantine, 46, 262.

Corona, 12, 23-24.

Coronation Chairs, 435.

Courtenay, Archbishop, 21.

Creed Lane, 398.

Cricklade, Robert of, 377, 378.

Cross, St. Paul’s, 407.

Crouchback, Edmund (tomb), 434.

Crypt:--Canterbury, 29-31;
  Exeter, 102;
  Gloucester, 169-170;
  Hereford, 186;
  Ripon, 254, 259;
  Rochester, 45;
  St. Paul’s, 412;
  Wells, 126;
  Winchester, 64;
  Worcester, 198;
  York, 279-280.


Dark Entry, 31.

Davenport, Bishop, 85.

Deanery (Carlisle), 232, 443.

Deanery Gate, 38.

Deanery Gateway, 331-332.

Dean’s Door, 332.

Dean’s Eye (Lincoln), 304, 309.

Dean’s Yard, St. Paul’s, 400.

Decorated:--Bristol, 145, 147;
  Canterbury, 32;
  Carlisle, 227, 231, 232;
  Chester, 215, 217;
  Ely, 338, 343, 344, 345, 346;
  Exeter, 90;
  Hereford, 175, 180, 182;
  Lichfield, 202, 207, 209, 210;
  Lincoln, 301, 305, 307;
  Norwich, 350, 353, 354, 359;
  Oxford, 379, 387;
  Peterborough, 321, 325, 326, 327, 329, 333;
  Ripon, 250, 252;
  Rochester, 38, 41, 44-45;
  Southwell, 315, 316, 317;
  St. Albans, 368, 374;
  St. Saviour’s, 418;
  Wells, 111, 112, 114;
  Worcester, 191, 192;
  York, 279, 280, 281.

Devil Looking over Lincoln, 301, 309.

Dickens, Charles, 38, 41.

Diocletian, 46.

Doddridge, Sir John and Lady (tomb), 103.

Dog-tooth, 207, 208, 214, 230, 231, 251, 307, 315, 324, 368.

Dome (St. Paul’s), 397, 402, 412.

Doorway, Southwest (St. Saviour’s), 418.

Drum (St. Paul’s), 407.

Duncan, 319, 330.

Dun Cow, 234, 338.

Dunstan, 425.

Durham, 233-248.


Earl of Hertford (monument), 87.

Early Decorated:--Hereford, 181;
  Lichfield, 201;
  Wells, 130;
  York, 267, 282.

Early English:--Bristol, 141, 144;
  Carlisle, 230;
  Chester, 215, 217, 220, 221;
  Chichester, 70;
  Durham, 236;
  Ely, 338, 340, 344, 346;
  Exeter, 97;
  Gloucester, 168;
  Hereford, 184;
  Lichfield, 201, 207, 210, 214;
  Lincoln, 292, 295;
  Oxford, 386;
  Peterborough, 320, 324, 327, 328, 332;
  Ripon, 250, 252;
  Rochester, 38, 40, 41;
  Salisbury, 76, 78;
  Southwell, 315, 316;
  St. Albans, 364, 368;
  Wells, 111, 118, 119, 127, 133;
  Westminster Abbey, 430, 432;
  Winchester, 48, 57, 60;
  Worcester, 196;
  York, 202, 282.

Earthquakes, 109, 153, 287.

Easter Sepulchre, 301.

Eastern Transept (Lincoln), 297-298.

East End:--Hereford, 184;
  Wells, 130, 131;
  St. Saviour’s, 417.

East Front (York), 281.

East Window:--Bristol, 147-148;
  Canterbury, 28;
  Carlisle, 227, 228, 231;
  Chichester, 70;
  Exeter, 100, 103;
  Gloucester, 164-166, 167;
  Hereford, 184;
  Lincoln, 302-303;
  Oxford, 391;
  Ripon, 252;
  Southwell, 316;
  St. Saviour’s, 419, 422;
  Wells, 132;
  Winchester, 58;
  York, 261, 264, 273-274, 281.

Eboracum, 262.

Edfrid, 334.

Edgar, 313, 317, 330, 335.

Edgar, Coronation of, 135.

Edington, Bishop, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54.

Edward I., 265, 274.

Edward I. (tomb), 435.

Edward II. (tomb), 152, 161-162.

Edward III. (tomb), 435.

Edward IV., 5.

Edward of Caernarvon (tomb), 162.

Edward the Confessor, 335, 425.

Edwin Drood, 38.

Edwin, King, 263.

Eleanor, Queen (monument), 300;
 (tomb), 435.

Elder Lady Chapel (Bristol), 141, 144.

Elias of Dereham, 77.

Elizabeth, Queen (tomb), 438, 441.

Elizabeth, Lady Montacute (tomb), 386.

Elizabethan Players and Dramatists, 424.

Ely, 19, 63, 334-348;
  Isle of, 334.

Erasmus, 29.

Ernulf, 2, 14, 25, 30, 31, 34.

Erpingham Gate, 350, 351.

Ethelbert, King of Kent, 2, 33.

Ethelred, the Unready, 376, 378.

Ethelwold, St., 46, 47, 48, 319, 335.

Evelyn, John, 290, 396.

Exchequer Gate, 311.

Exeter, 90-106.


Faith, Hope and Charity (window), 382.

Fan-tracery, 22, 27, 126, 137, 138, 170, 329, 383.

Feretory, 59.

Fire:--Bath Abbey 136;
  Canterbury, 4, 9, 14-15, 17, 18;
  Carlisle, 227;
  Chichester, 66, 67;
  Exeter, 91;
  Gloucester, 153, 158;
  Lincoln, 286;
  Norwich, 350, 355, 358;
  Peterborough, 319, 330;
  Rochester, 35;
  St. Paul’s, 393;
  St. Saviour’s, 416, 417;
  York, 266-267.

Fitzhardinge, Robert, 141, 149, 150.

Fitzjocelyn, Bishop, 108, 117.

Five Sisters (York), 261, 269-270, 282.

Flambard, Randolph, 235, 242.

Fleet Street, 398.

Fletcher, John, 424.

Flos Florum, 261, 280.

Flying-buttresses:--Canterbury, 12;
  Ely, 339, 340;
  Gloucester, 164.

Font:--Durham, 240;
  Hereford, 176;
  Lincoln, 294;
  Peterborough, 327;
  Ripon, 253;
  Wells, 122;
  Winchester, 53-64.

Four Doctors of the Church (Durham), 237, 244.

Fox, Bishop, 55, 57, 59, 421.

French Church (Canterbury), 29.


Galilee Chapel (Durham), 233, 236, 240-242;
  Porch (Ely), 336, 338;
  Porch (Lincoln), 305-306.

Garrick, David, 208.

Gateway, Great (Bristol), 150.

Geometrical Staircase, 411.

Gibbons, Grinling, 9, 14, 408-409.

Gibbons, Orlando, 17.

Glass:--Lincoln, 294;
  Oxford, 390-391;
  York, 261-262, 264, 269, 270, 272.

Glastonbury, 107.

Glastonbury Clock, 124.

Glenham Window (Bristol), 143, 145.

Globe Theatre, 424.

Gloucester, 151-173.

Godelee, John de, 109.

Goldstone II, 9, 10, 11, 13, 27, 31.

Goldwell, Bishop, 350, 352.

Golden Gallery, 413.

Gorges, Thomas (monument), 87.

Gordon, General, 411.

Gower, John (tomb), 419-420.

Grandison, Bishop, 90, 91, 92, 97, 99.

Grandison, Sir Peter, 185.

Gray (Grey), Walter de, 250, 264, 313, 316;
  (tomb), 270.

Great Fire, 396, 412.

Great Gate, St. Albans, 362.

Grecian Stairs, 312.

Green Church Haw, 37.

Green Court, 10, 31.

Gregory, Pope, 1, 2.

Grimthorpe, Lord, 360, 364, 365, 373.

Grosseteste, Robert, 289, 293, 310, 321.

Gundulf, 33, 40, 153;
  (tomb), 44;
  (tower), 35, 37.

Gunthorpe, Dean, 110.


Hackett, Bishop, 204.

Hackett (tomb), 210.

Hadrian, 262.

Hagiscopes, 28.

Hamo de Hythe, 36.

Harbledown, 1.

Harewell, Bishop, 110.

Harewell Tower, 113, 114, 118.

Harnham Gate, 80.

Harvard Window, 423.

Hatfield, Bishop (tomb), 245.

Hawford (effigy), 198.

Henry III., 4, 77, 78, 425;
  (tomb), 434-435.

Henry IV. (tomb), 21-22.

Henry V., Chantry, 435.

Henry VII.’s Chapel, 427, 437-441.

Henry VIII., 6, 9, 321, 360, 376.

Henry of Huntingdon, 286, 301.

Hereford, 35, 67, 130, 174-187.

Hereward, 319.

Herkenrode Glass, 209, 212-213.

Hugh of Avalon, 287.

Hugh of Eversden, 365.

Hugh de Wells, 288, 289.

Hodson of Hodson’s Horse, 211.

Holland, Lady M., 26.

Holy Hole, 60.

Hotham, John, 336, 338, 342, 343;
  (tomb), 346.

House of the Six Poor Travellers, 41.

Howley, Archbishop, 16.

Humble Richard (tomb), 422.

Hunton, Prior, 61.

Husse, Dean (tomb), 123.


Imp on Back of Witch, 308.

Ina, King, 107.

Ingoldsby Legends, 31, 76.

Islip, Abbot, 431, 436, 443.

Irving, W., 429, 438.


Jack Blandiver, 124.

James I., 417.

Jericho Parlour, 428, 443.

Jerusalem Chamber, 428, 443.

Jesse Window (Wells), 128.

Jesus Chapel, Norwich, 353, 358.

Jesus Tower, 200.

Jewell, Bishop, 78.

Joan of Navarre (tomb), 21-22.

Jocelin, Bishop, 108, 109, 111, 117.

John, King (tomb), 194-195.

John of Canterbury, 34.

John Le Romeyn, 267.

John of Thorsby, 264, 283.

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, 208.

Joseph of Arimathea, 107.

Joseph’s Window (Durham), 248.

Justus, 33.


Katherine of Aragon, 321, 330.

Kemp, Cardinal, 16.

Kenwalk, 46.

Kilkenny, Bishop, 346.

“King of Bath,” 135.

King, Oliver, 134.

King Window, 391.

Kirton, Abbott, 332, 333.

Knight (effigy), 62 (Fourteenth Century).

Knight (tomb), 104.

Knowle, Abbot, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147.

Kyneburga, 152.

Kynegils, 46.


Lacey, Bishop (tomb), 101.

Lady Arbour, 175.

Lady Bells, Lincoln, 294,311.

Lady Chapel:--Bristol, 141, 147;
  Canterbury, 27;
  Chester, 220;
  Chichester, 67, 69, 74-75;
  Durham, 236;
  Ely, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 347;
  Exeter, 102;
  Gloucester, 151, 154-155, 166-167;
  Hereford, 175, 183-184;
  Lichfield, 203, 207, 211-212;
  Manchester, 222, 223, 225;
  Oxford, 374, 379, 384, 385, 386;
  Peterborough, 321;
  Ripon, 259;
  Rochester, 37, 38, 41;
  St. Alban’s, 367;
  St. Saviour’s, 417, 422;
  Wells, 109, 112, 126, 129, 130-131;
  Westminster Abbey, 426; Winchester, 60;
  Worcester, 196, 197, 198;
  York, 264, 273, 282.

Lady Lisle (tomb), 123.

Lady Loft, 259.

Lady, Fourteenth Century (effigy), 97.

La Farge, John, 423.

Lancet, 67.

Lanfranc, 2, 13, 18, 33.

Langley, Cardinal (tomb), 242.

Langton, John de, 68.

Langton, Stephen, 4, 77.

Langton, Stephen (tomb), 26.

Langton, Walter de, 203.

Lantern (Ely), 339;
  York, 269.

Lantern of the West, 137.

Late Decorated (York), 267.

Latin Chapel, 381, 384, 387.

Laurel Court, 333.

Lee, Archbishop, 266.

Leighton, Lord, 411.

Library:--Chichester, 73;
  Gloucester, 151, 171;
  Hereford, 181;
  St. Paul’s, 411;
  Wells, 110.

Lichfield, 200-214.

Liddell, Edith (window), 391.

Lincoln, 284.

Lincoln Imp, 301.

Ling, A. Van, 379, 382.

Lollards’ Prison, 74.

London Bridge, 415-416.

Longespée, William, 77;
  (tomb), 82.

Longfellow (bust), 433.

Losinga, Robert de, 174;
  (tomb), 182.

Losinga, Herbert de, 349.

Louth, Bishop (tomb), 346.

Louis VII., 4, 8.

Lucius, King, 2, 46.

Lucy, Bishop, 48, 57, 61;
  (tomb), 60.

Ludgate Hill, 398, 400.

Luffa, Bishop, 66.

Lyhard, Bishop, 350, 352, 355, 356.


Manchester, 222-226.

Mandeville, Sir John, 368.

Map of the World, 182.

Marchia, Bishop (tomb), 123.

Margaret of Anjou, 361.

Massinger, Philip, 424.

Maurice, Lord Berkeley (effigy), 145.

Mary, Queen of Scots, 322, 331;
  (tomb), 438, 439, 441, 442.

Meist’ Omers, 31.

Melbourne, Lord, 411.

Melrose Abbey, 249.

Melton Arch, 275.

Mercery Lane, 8, 10.

Merton, Walter de, 43.

Minster Yard, 311.

Minstrels’ Gallery:--Exeter, 96;
  Winchester, 54;
  Lichfield, 210-211.

Misereres, Exeter, 99-100.

Misericords, Wells, 128;
  Bristol, 142.

Mitford, Bishop (tomb), 85.

Mompesson, Sir Richard (tomb), 85.

Monks’ Door:--Ely, 340;
  Norwich, 359.

Monks’ Stone, 330.

Monmouth Rebellion, 111.

Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley, 208.

Montague, Bishop, 135;
  (tomb), 139.

Morning Chapel, 331.

Morton, Cardinal (tomb), 30.

Morwent, Abbot, 156, 158, 159.

Music Gallery (Wells), 119.


Nave:--Bath, 137;
  Bristol, 141;
  Canterbury, 12-13;
  Carlisle, 229;
  Chester, 217;
  Chichester, 71-72;
  Durham, 239-240;
  Ely, 341;
  Exeter, 95-96;
  Gloucester, 156-158;
  Hereford, 175-176;
  Lichfield, 207-208;
  Lincoln, 292-294, 309;
  Manchester, 223-224;
  Norwich, 353, 354-355, 366;
  Oxford, 381;
  Peterborough, 328;
  Ripon, 252-253;
  Rochester, 40-41;
  Salisbury, 81-82;
  Southwell, 315;
  St. Albans, 367, 368;
  St. Paul’s, 404;
  St. Saviour’s, 419;
  Wells, 115-120;
  Westminster Abbey, 428;
  Winchester, 12, 51-53;
  Worcester, 191-192;
  York, 274-276, 282.

Nelson, Lord, 411-412.

Neville, Lady Alice, 243.

Neville, Lord John (tomb), 243, 245.

Neville, Lord Ralph (tomb), 243.

Neville Screen, 240, 245-246.

New Building, 321, 329-330, 333.

New Work (Durham), 246.

Nicholas of Portland, 77.

Norman:--Bristol, 141, 149, 150;
  Canterbury, 25, 29, 32;
  Carlisle, 229;
  Chester, 220;
  Durham, 238, 241;
  Ely, 340, 341, 344;
  Exeter, 91, 92;
  Gloucester, 151, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 168, 172;
  Hereford, 175, 176, 178;
  Lincoln, 286;
  Norwich, 349, 352, 353, 354, 355, 357, 358;
  Oxford, 383;
  Peterborough, 320, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 332, 333;
  Rochester, 34, 38, 40, 41;
  Southwell, 314, 315, 316;
  St. Albans, 363, 365, 369;
  Welles, 110, 111, 114-115;
  Winchester, 48, 52, 57, 63;
  Worcester, 191, 192;
  York, 202, 264, 279.

Northcote (Chantreys), 105.

North Door:--Durham, 238;
  Lichfield, 206-207.

North Front (Westminster Abbey), 426-427.

North Porch:--Bristol, 141;
  Exeter, 97, 190-191;
  Hereford, 175, 177;
  Manchester, 223;
  Southwell, 315;
  Wells, 114-115;
  Worcester, 190-191.

North Transept:--Hereford, 174, 177-180;
  Norwich, 357;
  St. Saviour’s, 420;
  Westminster Abbey, 431-432;
  York, 282.

Northwold (Norwold), Bishop, 336, 337, 343;
  (tomb), 346.

Norwich, 349-359.


Octagon (Ely), 334, 338, 339, 341.

Offa, King, 135, 136, 174, 360, 363.

Old St. Paul’s, 393-395.

Osric, 152, 156.

Osric (monument), 162.

Oswald, 188, 216.

Organ:--Canterbury, 16;
  Gloucester, 159;
  Hereford, 182;
  Rochester, 37;
  Salisbury, 84;
  St. Paul’s, 408-409.

Organs, Ancient, 47.

Oseney Abbey, 380, 391.

Oxford, 375-392.


Painters’ Corner, 412.

Palace Green, 237.

Paris, Matthew, 321, 362, 363.

Parker, Abbot (tomb), 161.

Parvise, 325-326.

Paternoster Row, 398.

Paulinus, 33, 34, 263, 285.

Paul of Caen, 363.

Paul’s Cross, 398, 399.

Paul’s Walk, 395.

Peckham, Archbishop, 27.

Pembridge, Sir Richard (effigy), 176.

Penda, 319.

Penniless Porch, 108.

Pepys, Samuel, 37.

Perpendicular:--Bath Abbey, 136;
  Canterbury, 12, 26;
  Chester, 215, 217, 220;
  Ely, 340, 341, 347;
  Gloucester, 157, 158, 159, 160, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172;
  Hereford, 175, 181, 187;
  Lichfield, 204, 209, 210;
  Lincoln, 294, 308;
  Manchester, 222;
  Norwich, 350, 352, 353, 354, 359;
  Oxford, 379, 383;
  Peterborough, 321, 325, 328, 329, 331, 332, 333;
  Ripon, 251, 252;
  Rochester, 38, 41;
  Southwell, 314;
  St. Albans, 365;
  St. Saviour’s, 418;
  Wells, 111, 113, 118, 119;
  Winchester, 48, 49, 51, 52, 57;
  Worcester, 191, 192; York, 267, 268, 271, 273, 281.

Peterborough, 319-333.

Peter’s Pence, 362.

Philippa of Hainault (tomb), 435.

Pilgrimage of Grace, 266.

Pilgrims, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 17, 18, 31, 43, 68, 168, 235, 265, 366, 415.

Piscina:--Ripon, 253, 258;
  Rochester, 43;
  Wells, 129.

Poets’ Corner, 427, 429, 432.

Pole, Cardinal, 37;
  (tomb), 23.

Pont l’Évêque, Roger de, 249, 250, 262, 263.

Poore, Bishop, 77, 236.

Porch (Central), Chichester, 70.

Portico (Peterborough), 324.

Pottergate Arch, 312.

Precincts (Canterbury), 10.

Presbytery:--Norwich, 357;
  St. Alban’s, 369-370;
  Winchester, 57.

Primate of England, 2, 263.

Primate of All England, 263.

Priors’ Court, 31.

Priors’ Door:--Ely, 341;
  Norwich, 359.

Priors’ Gate, 38.

Processional Path, 357.

Pudsey, Hugh, 236.

Pulpit:--Oxford, 390;
  Wells, 122.

Puritans, desecrations by, 9, 27, 37, 216,
    204, 228, 322-323, 330-331, 350-351, 379.


Quivil, Bishop, 90, 91, 98, 99, 102;
  (tomb), 102.


Ralph, Bishop (tomb), 75.

Ralph of Shrewsbury, 110.

Redman, Bishop, 346.

Refectory:--Carlisle, 232;
  Worcester, 199.

Regale of France, 4, 7.

Relics of St. Thomas, 3, 5, 6.

Relics, 368, 378.

Remigins, 286, 294.

Reredos:--Bristol, 147;
  Canterbury, 16;
  Gloucester (Lady Chapel), 167;
  Hereford, 183;
  Lincoln, 297;
  St. Albans, 59;
  Winchester, 59;
  Worcester, 194.

Retable (Italian), 358.

Retro-Choir:--Canterbury, 18;
  Carlisle, 232;
  Chichester, 67, 74;
  Peterborough, 329-330;
  Salisbury, 130, 131;
  St. Albans, 373;
  St. Saviour’s, 422;
  Wells, 126, 129-130.

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 411.

Reynolds, Archbishop (tomb), 25.

Richard of Fairleigh, 77.

Richard of Wallingford, 365.

Richard, Sir W., 409-410.

Ringers’ Chapel, 291, 292.

Robert of Lewes, 135.

Robert, Bishop, 108.

Robert, Duke of Normandy (effigy), 168.

Rochester, 33-45.

Rodney, Admiral, 411.

Roger de Norbury, 200.

Roger and Sigar, 369.

Romeyn, John, 264, 313.

Romeyn, John II., 264.

Rood-Screen:--Exeter, 99;
  Lincoln, 294;
  Ripon, 255;
  St. Albans, 367;
  York, 270.

Roofs (Winchester), 65.

Royal Children (tomb), 435.

Rupibus, Peter de, 418, 421, 422.


Sacrarium, 44.

Sais, John de, 320, 329.

Salisbury, 76-89.

Sanctuary (Durham), 239.

Saxon:--Oxford, 376, 383;
  Peterborough, 330;
  Ripon, 254;
  Winchester, 47;
  York, 279.

Scott, Sir G., 68, 70, 82, 85,
    99, 192, 211, 250, 256, 258, 329, 343, 345, 360, 380.

Screen:--Canterbury, 13, 29;
  Ely, 343;
  Exeter, 99;
  Lincoln, 306;
  St. Saviour’s, 421;
  Winchester, 55.

Screen (exterior):--Exeter, 92-93;
  Wells, 126.

Scrope, Richard, 265;
  (tomb), 279.

Sedilia:--Bristol, 147;
  Exeter, 101;
  Gloucester, 161;
  Ripon, 258; Rochester, 43;
  Southwell, 316;
  St. Albans, 374.

Seffrid II., 66, 68, 72.

Selwyn, Bishop (effigy), 213.

Serlo, 153, 156, 157.

Sermon Lane, 398.

Shakespeare, 424.

Sherborne, Bishop, 68.

Sheppy, John de (tomb), 43-44.

Shrine of:--St. Alban, 371-373;
  St. Amphibalus, 368, 373;
  Cantilupe, 178, 179;
  Edward the Confessor, 434;
  St. Etheldreda, 346, 357;
  St. Erkenwald, 393;
  St. Frideswide, 378, 385-386;
  John of Dalderby, 305;
  Little St. Hugh, 302;
  St. Albans, 371;
  St. Chad, 203, 204;
  St. Cuthbert, 235, 246;
  St. Hugh, 299, 300;
  St. Paulinus, 34, 36;
  St. Richard, 74;
  St. Swithun, 48, 59;
  St. Thomas, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 18;
  St. Werburgh, 19;
  St. Wilfrid, 250;
  St. William, 43,
  St. Ythmar, 36.

Siebert, 425;
  (tomb), 435.

Silkstede, Prior, 59, 64;
  pulpit of, 57.

Simcoe, General, 105.

Simeon of Ely, 63, 64, 335, 337, 346.

Simeon’s Tower, 335, 336, 337.

Simon de Montfort, 36.

Skirlowe, Walter, 268.

Slabs, carved, 73.

Sleeping Children (Chantrey), 211.

Slype:--Oxford, 392;
  Peterborough, 333.

Solomon’s Porch, 431.

South Porch:--Canterbury, 12;
  Chester, 217;
  Gloucester, 156;
  Manchester, 222.

Southwark Bridge, 415.

South Transept:--Chester, 217;
  Lichfield, 207;
  Westminster Abbey (see Poets’ Corner);
  York, 269, 282, 358, 432.

Southwell, 35, 313-318.

South Door:--Lichfield, 207;
  Lincoln, 308.

Spire:--Chichester, 68, 69, 79;
  Norwich, 79, 352;
  Oxford, 379;
  Peterborough, 333;
  Salisbury, 77, 78, 79, 81, 249.

Spires (Lichfield), 200.

St. Aiden, 233.

St. Alban, 362, 363.

St. Albans, 360-374.

St. Albans, Battle of, 361.

St. Alphege, 47.

St. Amphibalus, 362-363.

St. Augustine, 1, 2, 33.

St. Birinus, 46.

St. Chad, 203.

St. Columba, 249.

St. Cuthbert, 233-234, 235, 240.

St. Ermenilda, 336.

St. Etheldreda, 215, 334, 335, 336, 342-343, 344.

St. Frideswide, 377.

St. Helena, 262.

St. Hugh of Grenoble, 287-289.

St. Hugh of Lincoln, 108, 298, 300, 306.

St. Hugh, Little, 302.

St. Mary Overie, 416, 417.

St. Paul’s, 393-414.

St. Saviour’s, 415-424.

St. Sexburga, 336.

St. Swithun, 46, 51, 416.

St. Thomas, 3, 6-9.

St. Werburgh, 215.

St. Wilfrid, 249, 250.

St. William, 264, 265.

St. William of Perth, 35.

St. William Bytton, 109, 121, 122.

St. William of Norwich, 350.

St. Withburga, 336.

St. Andrew’s Chapel, 28.

St. Andrew’s Tower, 18, 19.

St. Anne’s Gate, 80.

St. Anselm’s Chapel, 25.

St. Anselm’s Tower, 19, 25.

St. Augustine’s Choir, 28-29.

St. Catherine’s Window, 391.

St. Cecelia’s Window, 384-385.

St. Cuthbert’s Window, 248, 261, 273.

St. Dunstan’s Tower, 11.

St. Edmund’s Chapel, 347.

St. Ethelbert’s Gate, 350, 351.

St. Frideswide’s Priory, 375.

St. Frideswide’s Window, 388-389.

St. Hugh’s Choir, 67, 285, 287-289, 295, 306.

St. Hugh’s Tower, 297.

St. Hugh’s Transept, 35, 308.

St. Lucy’s Chapel, 381.

St. Mary’s Gate, 173.

St. Mary’s Tower, 291, 292.

St. Michael’s Chapel, 25.

St. Oswald, Church of, 216-217, 218.

St. Paul’s Bridge, 400.

St. Paul’s Cathedral, 392-414.

St. Paul’s Churchyard, 397-398.

St. Richard’s Walk, 75.

St. Wilfrid’s Needle, 254.

St. William’s Head, 264, 266.

St. William’s Window, 261, 273.

St. William, Tomb of, 43.

Stafford, Bishop (tomb), 103.

Staircase (Wells), 124.

Stanley, Sir John, 211.

Stapledon, Bishop (tomb), 101.

Still, Bishop (effigy), 123.

Stone Gallery (St. Paul’s), 412-413.

Stratford, Archbishop, 16.

Strickland, Bishop, 227, 228.

Swinfield, Bishop (tomb), 180.

Swynford, Catherine (tomb), 301.


Tabard Inn, 415.

Tait, Archbishop, 28.

Te Deum Window, 244.

Thanksgiving at St. Paul’s, 400.

Thomas of Bayeux, 263.

Thomas, Lord Berkeley (tomb), 145.

Throne, Archbishop’s, 16.

Tijou, 408.

Tom of Lincoln, Great, 291, 310.

Tom of Oxford, 375.

Tom Quad, 375, 379.

Tom Tower, 375.

Tower, Central:--Bath, 136-137;
  Bristol, 140;
  Carlisle, 228;
  Chichester, 68, 69;
  Durham, 235, 238, 244, 268;
  Ely, 63, 321, 336, 337;
  Gloucester, 153, 154;
  Hereford, 175, 177;
  Lincoln, 294, 310;
  Oxford, 378, 390;
  Peterborough, 324;
  Ripon, 251; Rochester, 36;
  St. Albans, 365, 369;
  St. Saviour’s, 418;
  Wells, 109, 114;
  Winchester, 55-56, 63, 64;
  Worcester, 190;
  York, 265-266, 268.

Tower:--North, Exeter, 98;
  Simeon’s, Ely, 64, 405, 406;
  Salisbury, 81;
  Walkelyn’s, Winchester, 64.

Towers:--Lincoln, 291-292;
  Norwich, 352;
  Wells, 113;
  York, 268.

Tracery:--Exeter, 95;
  Hereford, 187;
  Lincoln, 291, 294, 302, 304;
  Wells, 128; York, 278.

Transept of the Martyrdom, 3, 5, 17, 18, 26.

Transepts:--Canterbury, 15, 17, 25, 28;
  Carlisle, 229, 230;
  Chester, 218;
  Durham, 243;
  Ely, 346;
  Exeter, 98;
  Gloucester, 168-169;
  Hereford, 181, 182;
  Lichfield, 209;
  Peterborough,
331;
  Ripon, 254-255;
  Rochester, 41, 42-43;
  Salisbury, 83-84;
  St. Hugh’s, 308;
  St. Paul’s, 410;
  St. Saviour’s, 418;
  Wells, 120;
  Winchester, 63, 64, 196;
  Worcester, 192-193;
  York, 269-270, 272.

Translation of St. Thomas, 4, 19;
  St. Swithun, 47.

Trehearne, John, 423.

Tully, 154.


Valence, A. de (tomb), 433.

Vaulting (Norwich), 355-356.

Vicars’ Cloister, 187.

Vicars’ Close (Lichfield), 201.

Vicars’ College, 108, 112.

Vigil of the Translation, 4.

Villula, John de, 135.


Wakefield, Battle of, 361.

Walkelyn, Bishop, 47, 48, 64.

Walsingham, Alan, 336, 337, 338, 342, 345, 405.

Waller, Lady (monument), 139.

Wallingford, William of, 365.

Wallingford Screen, 370-371.

Walter, Hubert, 25.

Walton, Izaak (tomb), 64.

Warelwast, William, 90, 100.

Warham, Archbishop (tomb), 27.

Wars of the Roses, 361.

Watching Chamber, 19, 25, 387.

Wat Tyler’s Rebellion, 361, 362.

Watts, Richard, 41.

Waxhouse Gate, 366.

Waxworks (Westminster Abbey), 436-437.

Waynflete, Bishop, 53.

Well, Sacred (Winchester), 65.

Well of St. Thomas, 31.

Wellington, 411, 412.

Wells, 107-133.

West Door:--Durham, 242;
  Lichfield, 206;
  Rochester, 38-39.

West End (Worcester), 190.

West Front:--Bath, 134, 136;
  Bristol, 140;
  Canterbury, 11;
  Chester, 217;
  Chichester, 70;
  Durham, 233;
  Exeter, 92;
  Ely, 338;
  Gloucester, 155-156;
  Lichfield, 204-205;
  Lincoln, 290-291;
  Norwich, 351;
  Peterborough, 324-325;
  Ripon, 250, 251;
  Rochester, 38;
  Southwell, 314;
  St. Paul’s, 401;
  Westminster Abbey, 426;
  Winchester, 51;
  Wells, 113, 114;
  York, 267-268.

West Tower (Ely), 338.

West Window:--Bristol, 142;
  Canterbury, 13, 14;
  Chichester, 70;
  Gloucester, 162;
  Lichfield, 205;
  Lincoln, 293-294;
  Peterborough, 327;
  Rochester, 40-41;
  Wells, 120;
  Westminster Abbey, 430;
  Winchester, 51;
  York, 275.

West, Benjamin, 43, 59.

Western Porch (Manchester), 222.

Western Transept:--Lincoln, 303;
  Peterborough, 327.

Westminster Abbey, 78, 414, 425-443.

Wheathampstead, John de, 365.

Wheel of Fortune, 42.

Whispering Gallery:--Gloucester, 155, 164;
  St. Paul’s, 404, 407, 410.

White Church, 234.

Winchester, 46-65;
  burials in, 63;
  coronations in, 49-50.

Winchester Historical Associations, 49-50, 58.

William the Conqueror, 235.

William, Earl of Dudley (effigy), 198.

William, English, 4, 18, 25, 36.

William, Fitzherbert (tomb), 263.

William of Hatfield (tomb), 274.

William de Hoo, 36, 43, 44.

William of Malmsbury, 263.

William Rufus, 47, 55-56, 58, 157, 359, 425.

William of Sens, 4, 12, 15, 18, 25, 36.

William of St. Carileph, 234.

William of Trumpington, 363, 364, 367.

William of Wykeham, 48, 49, 51, 53.

William La Zouche, 265.

Window (Decorated):--Chichester, 68;
  Diamond Jubilee, 420;
  Edward IV. (Canterbury), 5, 26-27;
  Edward VII., 410;
  Flamboyant (Oxford), 390;
  South (St. Saviour’s), 421.

Windows:--Bath, 136, 137, 138;
  Bristol, 142, 144, 145, 146, 148;
  Canterbury, 11, 13, 17, 22-23, 24, 25;
  Carlisle, 229;
  Durham, 243, 248;
  Ely, 340, 346, 347;
  Exeter, 94, 97;
  Gloucester, 159;
  Hereford, 181, 182, 186-187;
  Lichfield, 209, 212;
  Lincoln, 291, 307;
  Norwalk, 356;
  Oxford, 379, 380;
  Peterborough, 328, 332;
  Rochester, 37, 38;
  Salisbury, 84, 87-88;
  Southwell, 314, 315, 316;
  St. Saviour’s, 423, 424;
  Wells, 118, 119, 128;
  Westminster Abbey, 430;
  Winchester, 58;
  York, 276-279.

Wolsey, Thomas, 266, 316, 375, 379, 412.

Worcester, 188-199.

Wordsworth, Bishop (tomb), 301.

Wren, Bishop, 340.

Wren, Sir C., 69, 78, 85, 307, 340, 375, 396, 397, 403, 405-406, 412, 426.

Wulstan, 153, 188, 189.

Wyatt, 78, 84, 175, 237, 248.

Wyvill, Bishop (brass), 85-86.

Wych, Richard de la, 68.


York, 202, 260-283.

York and Lichfield, 202.

Young, Sir John (tomb), 147.

Ythamar, 33.


Zouch (tomb), 390.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The dog-tooth being in the form of a four-leaved flower with a
projecting centre, has caused some authorities to think it derived from
the dog-tooth violet.--(E. S.)

[2] The Regale of France, the glory of the Shrine, was long worn
by Henry himself in the ring which after the manner of those times
encircled his enormous thumb. It last appears in history among the
“diamonds” of the golden collar of his daughter, Queen Mary.

[3] See page 4.

[4] See p. 120.

[5] Canterbury, Rochester, Winchester, Worcester, Gloucester.

[6] Similar stalls, or carrels, existed at Durham.

[7] The cloister, of which the inner walls only remain, itself extended
beyond this passage eastward.

[8] A triforium in purely Perpendicular buildings is rare.

[9] See pp. 99, 101.










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO VISIT THE ENGLISH CATHEDRALS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


