The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pistol marksmanship
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pistol marksmanship

Author: United States. Marine Corps

Author of introduction, etc.: Edward Hanlon

Release date: April 30, 2025 [eBook #75995]

Language: English

Original publication: Albany: USMC Logistics Base, 2003

Credits: Brian Coe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTOL MARKSMANSHIP ***





                                                              =MCRP 3-01B=

                           Pistol Marksmanship

                              [Illustration]

                           =U.S. Marine Corps=

  =DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is
  unlimited.=

                                                       =PCN 144 000138 00=




To Our Readers


=Changes=: Readers of this publication are encouraged to submit
suggestions and changes that will improve it. Recommendations may be sent
directly to Commanding General, Marine Corps Combat Development Command,
Doctrine Division (C 42), 3300 Russell Road, Suite 318A, Quantico, VA
22134-5021 or by fax to 703-784-2917 (DSN 278-2917) or by E-mail to
=morgann@mccdc.usmc.mil=. Recommendations should include the following
information:

  Location of change
    Publication number and title
    Current page number
    Paragraph number (if applicable)
    Line number
    Figure or table number (if applicable)
  Nature of change
    Add, delete
    Proposed new text, preferably double-spaced and typewritten
  Justification and/or source of change

=Additional copies=: A printed copy of this publication may be obtained
from Marine Corps Logistics Base, Albany, GA 31704-5001, by following
the instructions in MCBul 5600, _Marine Corps Doctrinal Publications
Status_. An electronic copy may be obtained from the Doctrine Division,
MCCDC, world wide web home page which is found at the following universal
reference locator: =http://www.doctrine.usmc.mil=.

=Unless otherwise stated, whenever the masculine gender is used, both men
and women are included.=




                        DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
                 Headquarters United States Marine Corps
                      Washington, D.C. 20380-1775

                                                          25 November 2003

FOREWORD


Marines must have the versatility, flexibility, and skills to deal with
any situation at any level of intensity across the entire range of
military operations. Whenever the situation warrants the application
of deadly force, a Marine must be able to deliver well-aimed shots to
eliminate the threat. A Marine who is proficient in pistol marksmanship
handles this challenge without escalating the level of violence or
causing unnecessary collateral damage. It is not enough to simply provide
Marines with the best available firearms; we must also ensure that their
training prepares them to deliver accurate fire against the enemy under
the most adverse conditions without hesitancy, fear, or uncertainty
of action. A well-trained Marine is confident that he can protect
himself, accomplish the mission, and protect his fellow Marines. To be
combat ready, a Marine must be skilled in the tactics, techniques, and
procedures of pistol marksmanship and diligent in the proper care and
maintenance of the M9, 9-mm service pistol.

Marine Corps Reference Publication (MCRP) 3-01B, _Pistol Marksmanship_,
is the Marine Corps’ source document for pistol marksmanship and provides
the doctrinal basis for Marine Corps pistol marksmanship training. This
publication provides all Marines armed with a pistol with the tactics,
techniques, and procedures for range and field firing the M9, 9-mm
service pistol.

MCRP 3-01B supersedes the discussion of pistol marksmanship in Fleet
Marine Force Manual (FMFM) 0-8, _Basic Marksmanship_.

Reviewed and approved this date.

BY DIRECTION OF THE COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS

                                   EDWARD HANLON, JR.
                            Lieutenant General, U.S. Marine Corps
                                   Commanding General
                            Marine Corps Combat Development Command

Publication Control Number: 144 000138 00

Distribution A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Chapter 1. The M9 Service Pistol

    Functional Capabilities                                            1-1
      Single-Action Mode                                               1-1
      Double-Action Mode                                               1-1
    Nomenclature                                                       1-1
    Major Components                                                   1-1
      Slide Assembly                                                   1-1
    Safety Features                                                    1-3
      Decocking/Safety Lever                                           1-3
      Firing Pin Block                                                 1-3
      Half-Cock Notch                                                  1-4
    Cycle of Operation                                                 1-4
      Firing                                                           1-4
      Unlocking                                                        1-4
      Extracting                                                       1-4
      Ejecting                                                         1-4
      Cocking                                                          1-5
      Feeding                                                          1-5
      Chambering                                                       1-5
      Locking                                                          1-5
    Ammunition                                                         1-6
    Wearing of the M9 Service Pistol’s Gear                            1-6
      M12 Holster                                                      1-6
      M1 Ammunition Pocket                                             1-7
      M7 Shoulder Holster                                              1-7
      Assault Holster                                                  1-7
      Concealed Pistol Holster                                         1-7
      Lanyard                                                         1-10
      Firing the M9 Service Pistol While Wearing Gloves               1-10
    Preventive Maintenance                                            1-11
      Pistol Disassembly                                              1-11
      Disassembly of the Magazine                                     1-12
      Inspection of the Pistol                                        1-13
      Cleaning and Lubricating the Pistol                             1-13
      Pistol Re-assembly                                              1-14
      Pistol Magazine Re-assembly                                     1-14
    Safety/Function Check                                             1-14
    User Serviceability Inspection                                    1-15
    Pistol Maintenance in Adverse Conditions                          1-15
      Extreme Cold                                                    1-15
      Hot, Wet Climates                                               1-15
      Hot, Dry Climates                                               1-16
      Heavy Rain and Fording Operations                               1-16
      Amphibious Conditions                                           1-16

  Chapter 2. Weapons Handling

    Safety Rules                                                       2-1
    Weapons Conditions                                                 2-2
    Determining a Weapon’s Condition                                   2-2
      Checking the Round Indicator                                     2-2
      Conducting a Chamber Check                                       2-2
    Weapons Commands                                                   2-3
    Loading the Pistol                                                 2-4
    Making the Pistol Ready                                            2-5
    Fire                                                               2-5
    Cease Fire                                                         2-6
    Unloading the Pistol                                               2-6
    Unloading and Showing the Pistol Clear                             2-7
    Emptying the Magazine                                              2-7
    Filling the Magazine                                               2-7
    Reloading the Pistol                                               2-8
      Dry Reload                                                       2-8
      Condition 1 Reload                                              2-11
      Reloading Considerations                                        2-12
    Remedial Action                                                   2-13
      Stoppage                                                        2-13
      Malfunction                                                     2-13
      Remedial Action                                                 2-13
      Audible Pop or Reduced Recoil                                   2-14
    Weapons Carries                                                   2-15
      Alert                                                           2-15
      Ready                                                           2-16
    Weapons Transports                                                2-16
      Holster Transport                                               2-16
      Administrative Transport                                        2-17
    Combat Mindset                                                    2-17
      Physical and Mental Preparation                                 2-18
      Threat Levels                                                   2-18
    Transferring the Pistol                                           2-19
      Show Clear Transfer                                             2-19
      Condition Unknown Transfer                                      2-20

  Chapter 3. Fundamentals of Pistol Marksmanship

    Aiming                                                             3-1
      Sight Alignment                                                  3-1
      Establishing Sight Alignment                                     3-1
      Sight Picture                                                    3-1
      Relationship Between the Eye and the Sights                      3-2
    Trigger Control                                                    3-2
      Sight Alignment and Trigger Control                              3-2
      Grip                                                             3-2
      Trigger Finger Placement                                         3-3
      Types of Trigger Control                                         3-3
    Breath Control                                                     3-3
    Application of Marksmanship Fundamentals in Field Firing           3-3
      Compression of Fundamentals                                      3-3
      Aiming                                                           3-4
      Trigger Control                                                  3-4
      Breath Control                                                   3-4

  Chapter 4. Pistol Firing Positions and Grip

    Pistol Firing Position                                             4-1
      Mobility                                                         4-1
      Observation of the Enemy                                         4-1
      Stability                                                        4-1
    Pistol Firing Grip                                                 4-2
      Before Firing: Stabilize the Sights                              4-2
      During Firing: Allow Trigger Control                             4-2
      After Firing: Manage Recoil                                      4-2
    Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster                            4-3
    Weaver and Isosceles Variations                                    4-4
    Standing Position                                                  4-5
      Weaver Standing Position                                         4-5
      Isosceles Standing Position                                      4-7
    Kneeling Position                                                  4-7
      Weaver Kneeling Position                                         4-8
      Isosceles Kneeling Position                                      4-9
    Prone Position                                                    4-10
      Weaver Prone Position                                           4-10
      Isosceles Prone Position                                        4-12
      Natural Body Alignment                                          4-13

  Chapter 5. Use of Cover and Concealment

    Cover Materials                                                    5-1
      Dirt                                                             5-1
      Cinder Blocks                                                    5-1
      Trees, Logs, and Telephone Poles                                 5-1
      Sandbags                                                         5-1
    Considerations for Firing From Cover                               5-2
      Adjusting the Firing Position                                    5-2
      Applying the Weaver and Isosceles Variations                     5-2
      Keeping the Body Behind Cover                                    5-2
      Providing Support for the Position and the Pistol                5-3
      Changing Positions                                               5-5
      Moving                                                           5-5
    Supported Firing Positions                                         5-5
      Supported Prone                                                  5-6
      Supported Kneeling                                               5-6
      Supported Standing                                               5-6
    Locate and Engage Targets From Behind Cover                        5-7
      Pie Technique                                                    5-7
      Rollout Technique                                                5-8
      Combining the Pie and Rollout Techniques                         5-8

  Chapter 6. Presentation of the M9 Service Pistol

    Sight Alignment/Sight Picture                                      6-1
    Presentation From the Carries and Holsters                         6-1
      Presentation From the Ready                                      6-1
      Presentation From the Alert                                      6-1
      Presentation From a Holster Transport                            6-2
    Presentation While Assuming the Kneeling Position                  6-7
      From the Ready                                                   6-7
      From the Alert (Arms Straight)                                   6-7
      From the Alert (Close Quarters, Elbows Bent)                     6-8
      From the Holster Transport                                       6-8
    Presentation While Assuming the Prone Position                     6-8
      Isosceles Prone                                                  6-8
      Weaver Prone                                                     6-8
    Search and Assess                                                  6-8

  Chapter 7. Pistol Engagement Techniques

    Target Detection                                                   7-1
      Movement                                                         7-1
      Sound                                                            7-1
      Improper Camouflage                                              7-1
    Techniques of Fire                                                 7-2
      Double and Single Action Firing                                  7-2
      Single Action or Double Action Firing Factors                    7-2
      Two-Shot Technique                                               7-3
      Slow Fire Technique                                              7-3
    Re-engagement Techniques                                           7-3
      Slow Fire Technique                                              7-3
      Two-Shot Technique                                               7-4
      Offset Aiming                                                    7-4
    Multiple Targets                                                   7-4
      Combat Mindset                                                   7-4
      Prioritizing Targets                                             7-5
      Engaging Multiple Targets                                        7-5
    Moving Targets                                                     7-6
      Types of Moving Targets                                          7-6
      Leads for Moving Targets                                         7-7
      Methods of Engagement                                            7-7
      Applying the Fundamentals of Marksmanship                        7-8

  Chapter 8. One-Handed Techniques

    Presentation and Shooting                                          8-1
      Adjustment of the Standing Position                              8-1
      Searching and Assessing After Firing                             8-2
    Reloading                                                          8-2
      Dry Reload                                                       8-2
      Condition 1 Reload                                               8-4
    Remedial Action                                                    8-5
    Presentation From the Holster With the Weak Hand                   8-7
      Method One: Pistol Rotation                                      8-7
      Method Two: Hand Rotation                                        8-8
      Method Three: Knee Placement                                     8-9
    Transferring the Pistol From One Hand to the Other                8-10

  Chapter 9. Advanced Techniques

    Shooting on the Move                                               9-1
      Moving With the Pistol                                           9-1
      Moving: The Glide Technique                                      9-1
      Engaging Targets: Using the Pistol Sights                        9-1
      Continuing to Move                                               9-2
      Reloading and Stoppages                                          9-2
    Turn and Fire                                                      9-2
      Engaging Targets 90 Degrees to the Right and Left                9-2
      Engaging Targets 180 Degrees to the Rear                         9-3

  Chapter 10. Low Light and Darkness Techniques

    Combat Mindset                                                    10-1
    Night Vision Adaptation and Maintenance                           10-1
      Night Vision Adaptation                                         10-1
      Night Vision Maintenance                                        10-1
    Target Detection Techniques                                       10-1
      Off-Center Vision                                               10-2
      Scanning/Figure Eight Scan                                      10-2
    Effects of Illumination                                           10-2
    Acquiring Targets at Night                                        10-3
    Sight Alignment/Sight Picture                                     10-3
    Flashlights                                                       10-3
      Types of Flashlights                                            10-3
      Activation Devices                                              10-3
      Types of Lenses                                                 10-3
      Target Detection                                                10-4
      Target Engagement                                               10-5




CHAPTER 1

THE M9 SERVICE PISTOL


The Marine Corps’ uses the M9 service pistol as a defensive weapon. It is
a semiautomatic, magazine-fed, recoil-operated, double-action pistol. The
M9 service pistol’s magazine holds 15 rounds and is chambered with a 9-mm
ball (NATO M882 round). The M9 service pistol has a maximum effective
range of 50 meters (54.7 yards).

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines reverse instructions
    as necessary.


Functional Capabilities

When the M9 service pistol’s safety lever is moved to the firing
position, it can be fired in either a single-action or double-action
mode. It is designed to fire one round each time the trigger is pulled.
When the last round is fired, the slide automatically locks to the rear.


Single-Action Mode

The single-action mode allows the pistol to be fired when the hammer is
cocked; single action requires the hammer to be cocked to the rear before
the trigger is pulled. The hammer can be manually cocked or mechanically
cocked. The hammer is mechanically cocked after the first shot is fired.
See figure 1-1.

[Illustration: Figure 1-1. Single-Action Mode.]


Double-Action Mode

The double-action mode causes the hammer to move to the rear as the
trigger is being pulled. See figure 1-2.

[Illustration: Figure 1-2. Double-Action Mode.]


Nomenclature

See figure 1-3 on page 1-2.


Major Components

The M9’s major components consist of the slide assembly, barrel assembly,
and receiver. See figure 1-4 on page 1-3.


Slide Assembly

The slide assembly houses the firing pin, firing pin block, striker,
extractor, and loaded chamber indicator, and it cocks the hammer during
recoil.

_Extractor_

The extractor pulls the brass from the chamber after the round is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 1-3. M9 Service Pistol.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-4. Major Components.]

_Loaded Chamber Indicator_

When a round is in the chamber, the upper surface of the loaded chamber
indicator protrudes from the right side of the slide. This protrusion can
be felt with the finger, verifying that there is a round in the chamber.

_Barrel Assembly_

The barrel assembly houses the round for firing, directs the projectile,
and locks the barrel in position during firing.

_Receiver_

The receiver supports the major components, controls the functioning of
the pistol, and holds the magazine in place. The front and back straps
of the grip are grooved vertically to ensure that the hand does not slip
while firing. The receiver consists of the disassembly button, slide
stop, and magazine catch assembly.

_Disassembly Button_

The disassembly button permits quick disassembly of the pistol.

_Slide Stop_

The slide stop holds the slide to the rear after the last round is fired.
It can also be manually operated to lock the slide to the rear or release
the slide.

_Magazine Catch Assembly (Magazine Release Button)_

The magazine catch assembly secures the magazine in place when loading,
and it releases the magazine from the pistol when unloading. The magazine
catch assembly is designed for both right- and left-handed Marines.

    _Note_: Reversal of the magazine catch assembly for left-handed
    Marines can be performed by a qualified armorer.


Safety Features

The safety features of the M9 service pistol include the decocking/safety
lever, firing pin block, and half-cock notch.


Decocking/Safety Lever

The decocking/safety lever, commonly referred to as the safety, permits
safe operation of the pistol by both right- and left-handed Marines. As
the safety is moved to the safe (down) position, the firing pin striker
moves out of alignment with the firing pin. This movement prevents the
pistol from firing as the hammer moves forward.

    _Note_: In the fire (up) position, a red dot is visible,
    indicating that the pistol is ready to fire.


Firing Pin Block

The firing pin block rests in the firing pin notch and prevents movement
of the firing pin until the trigger is pulled. As the trigger is pulled,
the firing pin block moves up and out of the firing pin notch. This
movement allows a round to be fired when the hammer strikes the firing
pin.


Half-Cock Notch

The half-cock notch stops the forward movement of the hammer during a
mechanical failure.


Cycle of Operation

There are eight steps in the cycle of operation for the M9 service pistol.


Firing

Once the safety is off and the trigger is pulled to the rear, the hammer
falls on the firing pin, which strikes the primer and ignites the round.
See figure 1-5.

[Illustration: Figure 1-5. Firing.]


Unlocking

As the slide assembly moves to the rear, the locking block rotates out of
the notches in the slide. See figure 1-6.

[Illustration: Figure 1-6. Unlocking.]


Extracting

As the slide moves rearward, the extractor withdraws the cartridge case
out of the chamber. See figure 1-7.

[Illustration: Figure 1-7. Extracting.]


Ejecting

As the face of the slide passes over the ejector, the case strikes the
ejector and it is knocked upward and outward through the ejection port.
See figure 1-8.

[Illustration: Figure 1-8. Ejecting.]


Cocking

As the slide moves rearward, the hammer is pushed back, allowing the sear
to engage the hammer hooks, cock the hammer to the rear, and place the
pistol in the single-action mode. See figure 1-9.

[Illustration: Figure 1-9. Cocking.]


Feeding

The slide starts forward, pushed by the recoil spring. The face of the
slide makes contact with the cartridge at the top of the magazine,
stripping it from the magazine and pushing it toward the chamber. See
figure 1-10.

[Illustration: Figure 1-10. Feeding.]


Chambering

As the slide continues forward, it pushes the cartridge into the chamber.
See figure 1-11.

[Illustration: Figure 1-11. Chambering.]


Locking

As the slide assembly continues to move forward, the locking block lugs
move into the locking block recesses on the right and left sides of the
slide. See figure 1-12 on page 1-6.

[Illustration: Figure 1-12. Locking.]


Ammunition

The only ammunition authorized for the M9 service pistol is the NATO M882
9-mm ball. Dummy ammunition can be used during training (a dummy round
has a hole drilled in its side and contains no primer). See figure 1-13.

[Illustration: Figure 1-13. M9 Service Pistol Ammunition.]

Do not open ammunition containers until the ammunition is to be used.
Ammunition must be maintained in a high state of readiness. To care for
ammunition—

    Keep ammunition dry and clean. If ammunition gets wet or dirty,
    wipe it off with a clean dry cloth.

    Wipe off light corrosion as soon as it is discovered. Never
    use ammunition that is heavily corroded, dented, or has the
    projectile pushed in.

    Do not expose ammunition to direct sunlight for long periods of
    time.

    Do not oil or grease ammunition. Dust or other abrasives can
    collect on greasy ammunition and may cause damage to the
    operating parts of the pistol. Oiled cartridges also produce
    excessive chamber pressure.


Wearing of the M9 Service Pistol’s Gear

The proper placement of pistol gear helps ensure safety and aids the
Marine in effectively handling and employing the pistol.


M12 Holster

The M12 holster consists of the holster, removable holster flap, and
metal retaining clip. To check for proper placement of the holster, allow
the right arm to hang freely. The holster should be slightly in front of
the arm to permit easy access to the pistol upon presentation from the
holster. See figure 1-14.

    _Note_: In most cases, the holster is issued with the holster
    flap installed for a right-handed Marine. To convert the
    holster for a left-handed Marine, remove the metal retaining
    clip and install the clip on the opposite side of the holster.

[Illustration: Figure 1-14. The M12 Holster and Ammunition Pocket.]


M1 Ammunition Pocket

The ammunition pocket attaches to the cartridge belt on the side opposite
the holster in a position that best permits ready access for reloads.
The magazine is stored in the ammunition pocket with the rounds down and
pointed inboard.


M7 Shoulder Holster

The M7 shoulder holster consists of a holster with a thumb snap closure,
shoulder strap, chest strap, and a belt retaining loop. The holster
is positioned on the left side of the chest to provide easy and quick
access with the right hand. See figure 1-15. The M7 holster comes fully
assembled and has adjustable straps to accommodate each Marine’s body
size. The holster is available for right-handed Marines only, therefore,
a left-handed Marine has to withdraw the pistol from the holster with the
right hand and then transfer the pistol to the left hand before firing.
(See chap. 8 for transferring the pistol from one hand to the other.)
When the shoulder holster is worn properly—

    The shoulder strap lays flat across the left shoulder with the
    shoulder pad directly on top of the shoulder.

    The chest strap attaches to the D-ring at the top of the
    holster and runs diagonally across the chest, underneath the
    right arm, and around the back where it attaches to the end of
    the shoulder strap.

    The belt retaining loop is at the bottom of the holster and
    attaches to the belt to stabilize the holster’s position.

    The ammunition pocket attaches to the chest strap directly
    underneath the right arm.

[Illustration: Figure 1-15. M7 Shoulder Holster.]


Assault Holster

Some Marines (i.e., Marine security force, direct action platoon, and
military police) are required to carry the assault holster. This holster
has a retention strap that fastens over the top of the holster to retain
the pistol. This type of holster generally has a thumb break on the
retention strap that is disengaged to access the pistol. See figure 1-16.

[Illustration: Figure 1-16. Assault Holster.]


Concealed Pistol Holster

Some Marines are required to carry a concealed pistol as part of their
official duties. The primary consideration for placement of a concealed
pistol holster is to ensure the pistol cannot be seen; therefore, the
Marine must consider the type of clothing to be worn. A secondary
consideration is to place the holster so the pistol can be presented
easily. Typically, the best position for a concealed holster is just
behind the strong side hip. This position best conceals the pistol while
allowing it to be presented quickly. Another placement choice is in a
shoulder holster, placing the pistol just under the weak side arm. See
figures 1-17 through 1-20 on pages 1-8 and 1-9.

[Illustration: Figure 1-17. Wearing of the Concealed Pistol
Holster—Utilities.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-18. Wearing of the Concealed Pistol—Sweater.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-19. Wearing of the Concealed Pistol
Holster—Jacket.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-20. Wearing of the Concealed Pistol
Holster—Civilian Attire.]


Lanyard

The lanyard aids in pistol retention. It is issued in three sizes and is
adjustable. The lanyard consists of a fabric cord, two cylindrical slip
rings, and a metal clip that attaches the lanyard to the pistol’s lanyard
loop. See figure 1-21.

To don the lanyard—

    Adjust the slip rings so they are positioned flush with the
    lanyard’s base (clip end).

    Place the right arm through the loop and place the loop over
    the head, resting on the left shoulder.

    Attach metal clip to the pistol’s lanyard loop.

    Place the pistol in the holster.

    Use the left hand to hold the bottom slip ring against the base
    of the lanyard. Use the right hand to slide the top slip ring
    upward to position the loop of the lanyard under the arm. The
    lanyard should fit snugly against the body, but not restrict
    the Marine’s movements.

    Tuck any excess cord behind the holster.

    Ensure that the lanyard is adjusted properly by removing the
    pistol from the holster and fully extending the right arm. The
    lanyard should be taut. Adjust as necessary.

        _Note_: Re-adjust the lanyard if any equipment
        changes are made (e.g., flak jacket).

[Illustration: Figure 1-21. M9 Service Pistol (With Lanyard).]


Firing the M9 Service Pistol While Wearing Gloves

Not all combat engagements occur during ideal weather conditions.
During cold weather, the Marine may find it necessary to wear gloves
to protect the fingers from frostbite and help prevent stiffening of
the hands. Gloves may also be worn in mission-oriented protective
posture conditions. Gloves provide protection to the hands, however,
they also may interfere with the Marine’s ability to engage targets
effectively. The added bulk of the gloves may affect the Marine’s ability
to manipulate the safety, magazine release button, magazine, hammer,
and slide stop/release. For example, the Marine may need to exert more
pressure to engage the magazine release or slide release buttons to
compensate for the thickness of the gloves.

The principles of target engagement (see chap. 7) do not change while
wearing gloves, however, the specific ability to manipulate and control
the trigger is greatly affected by the thickness of the gloves around the
fingers. Wearing gloves reduces the Marine’s ability to feel, which makes
it difficult to apply trigger control when firing. The Marine may find
that more pressure than normal must be applied with the trigger finger
just to establish initial contact with the trigger. Once the Marine
can “feel” the trigger through the gloves, then the pressure required
to fire a shot can be applied. This action may increase the chances of
firing the pistol prematurely due to excessive pressure on the trigger.
Dry firing while wearing gloves allows the Marine to learn how to apply
trigger control consistently and determines how much pressure is needed
to effectively fire a shot.

While wearing gloves, the Marine may find it difficult to fire the
pistol in the double-action mode due to the position of the trigger and
the limited amount of space between the trigger and the trigger guard.
Therefore, if the situation permits, the Marine may wish to thumbcock the
pistol to fire in single-action mode. In single-action mode, there is
more space between the trigger guard and the trigger, making it easier
to position the finger on the trigger. However, the Marine’s ability to
thumbcock the pistol may also be hindered by the gloves’ bulk. Therefore,
to thumbcock the pistol while wearing gloves, the Marine may perform one
of the following methods:

    For method one, loop a section of 550 cord (approximately 2
    inches) through the loop located on the top rear portion of
    the hammer. The length of the cord should not interfere with
    the pistol’s cycle of operation or with the Marine’s ability
    to establish sight alignment. Once the cord is attached to the
    hammer, take the pistol off safe and pull downward on the cord
    to cock the hammer. See figure 1-22.

    For method two, take the pistol off safe, rotate the pistol
    inboard, and place the top of the hammer against a secure
    surface (e.g., cartridge belt, table top, heel of boot). Apply
    pressure on the pistol to keep the hammer in place and push
    downward on the pistol in one continuous motion to cock the
    hammer. See figure 1-23.

[Illustration: Figure 1-22. Cocking the Pistol with 550 Cord.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-23. Cocking the Pistol on a Secure Surface.]


Preventive Maintenance

If the M9 service pistol is to be effective, it must be maintained in
a state of operational readiness at all times; therefore, maintenance
of the M9 service pistol is a continuous effort. A clean, properly
lubricated, well-maintained pistol will fire when needed.


Pistol Disassembly

Before disassembling the M9 service pistol, ensure that the pistol is in
Condition 4. The pistol is in Condition 4 when the magazine is removed,
the chamber is empty, the slide is forward, and the safety is on. To
disassemble the pistol, perform the following steps in sequence:

    Hold the pistol in the right hand with the muzzle slightly
    elevated. Reach over the slide with the left hand and place the
    left index finger on the disassembly button and the left thumb
    on the disassembly lever. Press the disassembly button and
    hold it in place while rotating the disassembly lever downward
    until it stops.

        _Note_: A left-handed Marine places the right thumb
        on the disassembly button and the right index finger
        on the disassembly lever.

    Pull the slide and barrel assembly forward and remove it while
    wrapping the fingers around the slide to hold the recoil spring
    and recoil spring guide in place.

    Turn the slide assembly over in the left hand until the recoil
    spring and recoil spring guide face up. Place the right thumb
    on the end of the recoil spring guide next to the locking block
    and compress the recoil spring and spring guide while lifting
    and removing them from the slide and barrel assembly. See
    figure 1-24. Allow the recoil spring to decompress slowly.

    Separate the recoil spring from the recoil spring guide.

    Push in on the locking block plunger with the right index
    finger while pushing the barrel forward slightly. Lift and
    remove the locking block and barrel assembly from the slide.

A Marine is not authorized to disassemble the pistol any further than the
preceding steps. Any further disassembly must be performed by ordnance
personnel. See figure 1-25.

[Illustration: Figure 1-24. Removing the Recoil Spring and Recoil Spring
Guide.]

[Illustration: Figure 1-25. Disassembled M9 Service Pistol.]


Disassembly of the Magazine

To disassemble the magazine, perform the following steps:

    Grip the magazine firmly in the left hand with the floorplate
    up and the thumb resting against the flat end of the floorplate.

    Release the floorplate by pushing down (with a blunt object;
    e.g., an ink pen) on the floorplate retainer stud in the center
    of the floorplate. At the same time, slide the floorplate a
    short distance forward with the thumb.

    Maintain the magazine spring pressure with the thumb and remove
    the floorplate from the magazine.

    Remove the floorplate retainer and magazine spring and follower
    from the magazine tube.

See figure 1-26.

[Illustration: Figure 1-26. Disassembled Magazine.]


Inspection of the Pistol

Once the pistol has been disassembled, it must be thoroughly inspected to
ensure it is in a serviceable condition. Pistol inspection is continuous
during the pistol’s cleaning and re-assembly:

_Slide Assembly_

    Check for free movement of the safety. Ensure the rear sight is
    secure.

_Barrel Assembly_

    Inspect the bore and chamber for pitting or obstructions.

    Check the locking block plunger for free movement of the
    locking block.

    Inspect the locking lugs for cracks and burrs.

_Recoil Spring and Recoil Spring Guide_

    Check the recoil spring for damage.

    Check that it is not bent.

    Check the recoil spring guide for straightness and smoothness.

    Check to be sure it is free of cracks and burrs.

_Receiver Assembly_

    Check for bends, chips, and cracks.

    Check for free movement of the slide stop and magazine catch
    assembly.

    Check the guide rails for excessive wear, burrs, cracks, or
    chips.

_Magazine Assembly_

    Check the spring and follower for damage.

    Ensure the lips of the magazine are not excessively bent and
    are free of cracks and burrs. The magazine tube should not be
    bent or dirty.


Cleaning and Lubricating the Pistol

Only authorized cleaning materials should be used to clean and lubricate
the pistol. If these items are not issued with the pistol, they may be
obtained from the armory. The following procedures are used to clean and
lubricate the pistol—

_Slide Assembly_

    Clean the slide assembly with a cloth. A general purpose brush
    and cleaning lubricant protectant (CLP) can also assist in the
    removal of excess dirt and carbon buildup.

    Ensure the safety, bolt face, slide guides, and extractor are
    free of dirt and residue.

    Wipe dry with a cloth and apply a light coat of CLP.

_Barrel Assembly_

    Insert a bore brush with CLP into the chamber end of the
    barrel, ensuring that it completely clears the muzzle before it
    is pulled back through the bore.

        =Caution=

        Insert the bore brush through the chamber to prevent
        damage to the crown of the barrel.

    Repeat several times to loosen carbon deposits.

    Dry the barrel by pushing a swab through the bore.

    Repeat until a clean swab can be observed.

    Clean the locking block with a general purpose brush.

    Use the barrel brush to apply a light coat of CLP to the bore
    and chamber area and lubricate the exterior surfaces of the
    barrel and locking block.

_Recoil Spring and Recoil Spring Guide_

    Clean the recoil spring and recoil spring guide using CLP and a
    general purpose brush or cloth.

    Apply a light coat of CLP after wiping the recoil spring and
    recoil spring guide clean.

_Receiver_

    Wipe the receiver assembly clean with a cloth.

    Use a general purpose brush for areas that are hard to reach,
    paying special attention to the disassembly lever, trigger,
    slide stop, hammer, and magazine release button.

    Apply a light coat of CLP.

        =Caution=

        Do not allow the hammer to fall with full force by
        pulling the trigger when the slide is removed. This
        can damage the receiver and hammer.

_Magazine_

    Clean the magazine tube and follower with CLP and a general
    purpose brush.

    Wipe the magazine spring, floorplate retainer, and floorplate
    clean with a cloth.

    Apply a light coat of CLP.


Pistol Re-assembly

After the M9 service pistol has been cleaned and lubricated, it must be
properly re-assembled to ensure its serviceability. To re-assemble the M9
service pistol—

    Use the left hand to grasp the slide with the bottom facing up
    and the muzzle pointing toward the body. Use the right hand to
    grasp the barrel assembly with the locking block facing up. Use
    the index finger to push in the locking block plunger while
    placing the thumb on the base of the locking block.

    Insert the muzzle of the barrel assembly into the forward
    open end of the slide. At the same time, lower the rear of
    the barrel assembly by slightly moving the barrel downward.
    The locking block should fall into the notches of the slide
    assembly.

    Slip the recoil spring guide into the recoil spring.

    Insert the end of the recoil spring and recoil spring guide
    into the slide recoil spring housing. At the same time,
    compress the recoil spring and lower the spring guide until it
    is fully seated onto the locking block cutaway.

    Use the left hand to grasp the slide and barrel assembly,
    sights up, and wrap the fingers around the slide assembly to
    hold the recoil spring and guide in place. Align the slide
    assembly guide rails onto the receiver assembly guide rails.

    Push the slide rearward while pushing up on the slide stop
    with the thumb. Lock the slide to the rear while maintaining
    upward pressure on the slide stop. Rotate the disassembly
    lever upward. Listen for a click, an audible click indicates a
    positive lock.


Pistol Magazine Re-assembly

To re-assemble the magazine—

    Grip the magazine firmly in the left hand with the floorplate
    end up and the counting holes facing the Marine. Insert the
    follower into the magazine so the flat end of the follower is
    against the flat end of the magazine.

    Ensure the floorplate retainer is attached to the first curve
    of the bottom coil.

    Hold the spring upright with the right hand and insert the
    spring into the magazine tube so that the flat end of the
    floorplate retainer is against the flat end of the magazine.

    Push the magazine spring and floorplate retainer down with the
    right hand and hold it in place with the thumb of the left
    hand. Use the right hand to slide the floorplate over the side
    walls of the magazine until fully seated, which is indicated by
    an audible click.


Safety/Function Check

A safety/function check is performed after reassembling the M9 service
pistol. Perform the following steps to ensure the pistol is operational:

    Ensure there is no ammunition in the chamber of the pistol.

    Ensure that the safety is in the safe position, then depress
    the slide stop, allowing the slide to return fully forward.
    At the same time, the hammer should fall to the full forward
    position.

    Pull and release the trigger. The firing pin block should move
    up and down but the hammer should not move.

    Place the safety in the fire position.

    Pull the trigger to check the double action. The hammer should
    cock and fall.

    Pull the trigger again and hold it to the rear. Use the fingers
    and thumb of the left hand to grasp the serrated sides of
    the slide just forward of the safety. Pull the slide to its
    rearmost position and release it while holding the trigger to
    the rear. Release the trigger, a click should be heard and the
    hammer should not fall.

    Pull the trigger to check the single action. The hammer should
    fall. Place the safety in the safe position.

If the safety/function check does not indicate an operational pistol,
the Marine takes the pistol to organizational maintenance or the next
authorized repair level.


User Serviceability Inspection

The Marine is responsible for performing a user serviceability inspection
on the pistol prior to live fire. The user serviceability inspection
ensures the pistol is in an acceptable operating condition. This
inspection is not intended to replace the detailed pistol components
inspection following disassembly or the limited technical inspection or
pre-fire inspection conducted by a qualified armorer. To conduct a user
serviceability inspection on the pistol, perform the following steps:

    Ensure the magazine release button is on the left side of the
    pistol for a right-handed Marine, the right side of the pistol
    for a left-handed Marine.

    Ensure the magazine seats into the magazine well when it is
    inserted and that it cannot be pulled out.

    Ensure the slide stays locked to the rear when the slide is
    pulled rearward with an empty magazine in the pistol.

    Ensure the magazine falls out freely when the magazine release
    button is depressed.

    Repeat the preceding four steps with the second magazine.

    Ensure the slide is locked to the rear before lubricating
    the spring guide, the top of the barrel just forward of the
    front sight, and the guide rails of the slide assembly behind
    the safety. With the muzzle pointed downward, work the slide
    several times and release.

    Inspect the pistol’s external parts visually to ensure that
    there are no cracks or excessive wear.

    Perform a safety/function check of the pistol.


Pistol Maintenance in Adverse Conditions

Combat situations can place Marines in a variety of adverse conditions.
Therefore, the M9 service pistol must be maintained properly to ensure
its continued operation.


Extreme Cold

In extreme cold conditions, ensure that the following maintenance is
performed:

    Clean and lubricate the pistol inside at room temperature, if
    possible.

    Apply a light coat of lubricant, arctic weather (LAW) to all
    functional parts.

    Always keep the pistol dry.

    Keep the pistol covered when moving from a warm to a cold
    area. This permits gradual cooling of the pistol and prevents
    freezing.

    Ensure that a hot pistol is not placed in snow or on ice.

    Keep snow out of the bore of the barrel. If snow should enter
    the bore, use a swab and cleaning rod to clean the bore before
    firing.


Hot, Wet Climates

Maintenance in hot, wet climates must be performed more frequently:

    Inspect hidden surfaces for corrosion. If corrosion is found,
    clean and lubricate.

    Remove handprints with a clean cloth in order to prevent
    corrosion.

    Dry the pistol with a cloth and lubricate it with CLP.

    Check ammunition and magazines frequently for corrosion.
    Disassemble and clean the magazines with CLP and wipe dry with
    a clean cloth. If necessary, clean ammunition with a dry cloth.


Hot, Dry Climates

In a hot, dry climate, dust and sand can cause stoppages and excessive
wear on component contact surfaces during firing; therefore, keep the
pistol covered whenever possible.

Corrosion is less likely to form on metal parts in a dry climate.
Therefore, lightly lubricate internal working surfaces with CLP. Do
not lubricate external parts of the pistol. Wipe excess lubricant from
exposed surfaces. Do not lubricate internal components of the magazine.


Heavy Rain and Fording Operations

The following maintenance procedures are followed during periods of heavy
rains or during fording operations:

    Always attempt to keep the pistol dry.

    Drain any water from the barrel prior to firing.

    Dry the bore with a swab and cleaning rod.

    Generously lubricate internal and external surfaces of the
    pistol with CLP.


Amphibious Conditions

If the pistol comes into contact with salt water, clean the pistol
as soon as possible. If time does not permit cleaning in accordance
with Technical Manual (TM) 1005A-10/1, _Operator’s Manual, Pistol
Semiautomatic, 9mm, M9_, then wash the pistol with fresh water.




CHAPTER 2

WEAPONS HANDLING


Weapons handling is a method of providing consistent and standardized
procedures for handling, operating, and employing the M9 service
pistol. Understanding and applying the principles of weapons handling
are critical to developing safe and consistent weapons skills. Strict
adherence to training and diligent practice will make weapons handling
instinctive. Mission accomplishment and survival during combat depend on
a Marine’s ability to react instinctively and with confidence.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


Safety Rules

The following safety rules are the foundation for responsible weapons
handling. They must be observed at all times, both in training and combat.

    =Safety Rules=

    =Rule 1: Treat every weapon as if it were loaded.=

    This rule is intended to prevent unintentional injury to
    personnel or damage to property from handling or transferring
    possession of a weapon.

    =Rule 2: Never point a weapon at anything you do not intend to
    shoot.=

    This rule enforces the importance of muzzle awareness and
    reinforces positive identification of the target.

    =Rule 3: Keep your finger straight and off the trigger until
    you are ready to fire.=

    This rule is intended to minimize the risk of firing the weapon
    negligently (when not firing, the trigger finger is straight
    along the receiver, outside of the trigger guard). This rule
    also reinforces positive identification of the target.

    =Rule 4: Keep weapon on safe until you intend to fire.=

    This rule enforces the use of the weapon’s own safety feature
    and reinforces positive identification of the target.


Weapons Conditions

The M9 service pistol’s level of readiness is defined by three specific
conditions. The steps in the loading and unloading process take the
pistol through the specific conditions that indicate the pistol’s
readiness for live fire. The Marine must understand and know the
condition of his pistol at all times.

    =Condition 1.= Magazine inserted, round in chamber, slide
    forward, and safety on.

    =Condition 2.= Not applicable to the M9 service pistol.

    =Condition 3.= Magazine inserted, chamber empty, slide forward,
    and safety on.

    =Condition 4.= Magazine removed, chamber empty, slide forward,
    and safety on.


Determining a Weapon’s Condition

There are two methods for determining the pistol’s condition: checking
the round indicator on the right side of the pistol and conducting a
chamber check.


Checking the Round Indicator

When there is a round in the chamber, the upper surface of the extractor
protrudes from the right side of the slide. The protrusion can be felt by
sliding either the thumb or the index finger of the left hand over the
top of the slide and across the extractor. See figure 2-1.


Conducting a Chamber Check

To conduct a chamber check—

    Point the pistol in a safe direction and grasp the pistol grip
    with the right hand.

    Place the trigger guard in the palm of the left hand. Use the
    thumb and index finger to grasp the forward end of the slide at
    the indentations under the front sight, behind the muzzle. See
    figure 2-2.

        =Caution=

        Ensure the muzzle does not cover the hand or fingers.

    Keep thumb in place around the pistol’s backstrap and rotate
    fingers of the right hand over the top of the slide in front of
    the rear sight.

    Pull the slide to the rear by pushing forward with the right
    thumb and pulling back on the rear sight with the fingers. Use
    the left hand to steady the pistol and to assist in pulling the
    slide to the rear.

    Use the right hand to hold the slide to the rear (just enough
    to visually inspect the chamber for a round). Physically check
    for a round by inserting a finger of the right hand into the
    chamber area. See figure 2-3.

        _Note_: At night or in low light conditions, the
        Marine’s visibility is reduced; therefore, the Marine
        will have to rely on the physical check with the
        finger to determine if a round is in the chamber.

        =Caution=

        Pulling the slide too far to the rear while
        inspecting the chamber may cause a double feed or the
        ejection of a round.

    Remove the finger from the chamber and release tension on both
    hands to allow the slide to go forward. Ensure that the slide
    is all the way forward.

[Illustration: Figure 2-1. Checking the Round Indicator.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-2. Placement of the Left Hand.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-3. Chamber Check.]


Weapons Commands

Weapons commands direct the Marine to safely load, unload, and employ the
M9 service pistol. Six commands are used in weapons handling:

    “_Load_”

    This command is used to take a weapon from Condition 4 to
    Condition 3.

    “_Make Ready_”

    This command is used to take a weapon from Condition 3 to
    Condition 1.

    “_Fire_”

    This command is used to engage targets.

    “_Cease Fire_”

    This command is used to cease target engagement.

    “_Unload_”

    This command is used to take a weapon from any condition to
    Condition 4.

    “_Unload, Show Clear_”

    This command is used to require a second individual to check
    the weapon to verify that no ammunition is present before the
    weapon is put into Condition 4.


Loading the Pistol

Perform the following steps to load the pistol (take the pistol from
Condition 4 to Condition 3):

    Ensure the pistol is on safe.

    Use the right hand to grip the pistol grip firmly. Ensure that
    the pistol is pointed in a safe direction, bring the trigger
    guard to the right of eye level and cant the pistol so the
    magazine well faces inboard at approximately a 45-degree angle
    to the deck. Draw the right elbow in to facilitate control of
    the pistol.

    Use the left hand to remove a filled magazine from the
    ammunition pocket. Index the magazine by sliding the index
    finger along the forward edge of the magazine. See figure 2-4.

    Insert the filled magazine into the magazine well by guiding it
    with the index finger and, with the fingers extended, pushing
    it in with the heel of the hand until it is fully seated. Do
    not relinquish contact with the magazine until it is fully
    seated. See figure 2-5.

[Illustration: Figure 2-4. Indexing the Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-5. Seating the Magazine.]


Making the Pistol Ready

Perform the following steps to take the pistol from Condition 3 to
Condition 1:

    Firmly grip the pistol grip with the right hand. Ensure that
    the pistol is pointed in a safe direction and the slide is in
    its forward position.

    Rotate the magazine well outboard to facilitate pulling the
    slide to the rear. With the fingers and thumb of the left hand,
    grasp the serrated sides of the slide just forward of the
    safety. See figure 2-6.

        =Caution=

        Ensure the muzzle does not cover the hand or fingers.

    Pull the slide to its rearmost position by pushing forward with
    the right hand while pulling back on the slide with the left
    hand.

    Release the slide; this strips a round from the magazine and
    chambers it as the slide moves forward.

    Ensure the pistol remains on safe.

    Conduct a chamber check to ensure a round is in the chamber.

        _Note_: A chamber check may be conducted at any time
        to check the pistol’s condition.


Fire

Perform the following steps to fire the pistol:

    Keep trigger finger straight and use the right thumb to take
    the pistol off safe.

    Place the trigger finger on the trigger and apply pressure to
    the trigger until the shot is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 2-6. Grasping the Slide to Make Ready.]


Cease Fire

Perform the following steps to execute a cease fire of the pistol:

    Remove the finger from the trigger and place it straight along
    the receiver.

    Place the pistol on safe without breaking the grip of the right
    hand.

    Assume a carry or transport position.


Unloading the Pistol

Perform the following steps to take the pistol from any condition to
Condition 4:

    Use the right hand to grip the pistol firmly. Ensure that the
    pistol is on safe.

    Rotate the pistol so the magazine well is pointed inboard and
    angled down.

        _Note_: The angle of the magazine well must allow
        the magazine to fall freely from the well once the
        magazine release button is engaged.

    Depress the magazine release button to remove the magazine from
    the pistol. Catch the magazine with the left hand and retain it.

    Push upward on the slide stop with the right thumb and maintain
    pressure. Rotate the weapon so the chamber is outboard.

        _Note_: A left-handed Marine pushes upward on the
        slide stop with the left index finger.

    Reach over the top of the pistol with the left hand and grasp
    the slide serrations with the thumb and index finger. The
    left hand should partially cover the ejection port so it is
    positioned to catch an ejected round.

    Point the pistol in a safe direction and fully retract the
    slide and lock it to the rear. At the same time, catch the
    ejected round with the left hand. See figure 2-7.

    Rotate the pistol so the inside of the chamber can be seen.
    Visually inspect the chamber to ensure it is empty.

    Press the slide stop to release the slide and observe it going
    forward on an empty chamber.

[Illustration: Figure 2-7. Catching the Ejected Round.]


Unloading and Showing the Pistol Clear

Perform the following steps to take the pistol from any condition to
Condition 4. See figure 2-8.

    Use the right hand to grip the pistol firmly. Ensure that the
    pistol is on safe.

    Rotate the pistol so the magazine well is pointed inboard and
    angled down.

        _Note_: The angle of the magazine well must allow
        the magazine to fall freely from the well once the
        magazine release button is engaged.

    Depress the magazine release button to remove the magazine from
    the pistol. Catch the magazine with the left hand and retain it.

    Push upward on the slide stop with the right thumb and maintain
    pressure. Rotate the weapon so the chamber is outboard.

        _Note_: A left-handed Marine pushes upward on the
        slide stop with the left index finger.

    Reach over the top of the pistol with the left hand and grasp
    the slide serrations with the thumb and index finger. The
    left hand should partially cover the ejection port so it is
    positioned to catch an ejected round.

    Point the pistol in a safe direction and fully retract slide
    and lock it to the rear. At the same time, catch the ejected
    round with the left hand.

    Rotate the pistol so the inside of the chamber can be seen.
    Visually inspect the chamber to ensure it is empty.

    Bring the pistol to the administrative transport and have
    another Marine visually inspect the chamber to ensure that—

        The chamber is empty, no ammunition is present, and
        the magazine is removed.

        The pistol is on safe.

    Acknowledge that the pistol is clear.

    Press the slide stop to release the slide and observe it going
    forward on an empty chamber.

[Illustration: Figure 2-8. Unload, Show Clear.]


Emptying the Magazine

Once the pistol is unloaded, the pistol magazine can be emptied of
ammunition. To empty the magazine, perform the following steps:

    Hold the magazine upright with the back of the magazine tube
    against the palm of the hand.

    Push the top round forward with the thumb and catch it with the
    other hand as it is removed.

    Repeat until the magazine is empty.


Filling the Magazine

Prior to loading the pistol, the pistol magazine must be filled with the
prescribed number of rounds of ammunition. See figure 2-9. To fill the
magazine, perform the following steps:

    Hold the magazine with the back of the magazine against the
    palm of the hand and the follower up.

    Use the other hand to place a round (primer end first) on the
    follower in front of the magazine lips.

    Press down on the round and slide the round completely back
    under the lips. The thumb or finger may push down on the back
    of the round to assist movement. The base of the round should
    be flush with the back of the magazine.

Repeat this procedure until the magazine is filled with the appropriate
number of rounds. Holes on the back of the magazine allow the visual
counting of rounds in five-round increments.

[Illustration: Figure 2-9. Filling the Magazine.]


Reloading the Pistol

The Marine’s ability to reload the pistol quickly improves his chance for
success on the battlefield.


Dry Reload

A dry reload is conducted when the pistol runs out of ammunition during
engagement and the slide locks to the rear. See figure 2-10. Perform the
following steps to conduct a dry reload with the slide locked to the rear:

        _Note_: The pistol is not placed on safe during a
        dry reload; the trigger finger is taken out of the
        trigger guard and placed straight along the side of
        the receiver.

    Seek cover, if the situation permits.

    Retain the firing grip with the right hand and pull the pistol
    in close to the body to facilitate control. Bring the trigger
    guard to the right of eye level and cant the pistol so the
    magazine well is facing inboard at approximately a 45-degree
    angle to the deck. See figure 2-11.

    Press the magazine release button and let the empty magazine
    fall to the deck. At the same time, unfasten the ammunition
    pocket to withdraw a filled magazine. See figure 2-12.

        _Note_: The primary objective during a dry reload
        is to get the pistol back in action as quickly as
        possible. Following engagement, retrieve the magazine
        before moving.

    Grasp the magazine by curling the middle finger and thumb of
    the left hand around the base of the magazine, with the index
    finger straight along the ammunition pocket. See figure 2-13.

    Index the magazine: as the magazine is being withdrawn from
    the pocket, the index finger should be along the front of the
    magazine. See figure 2-14.

    Rotate the hand up so the magazine is aligned with the magazine
    well.

    Glance quickly at the magazine well, insert the magazine into
    the magazine well (see fig. 2-15).

    Bring the eyes back on target at the same time as the heel of
    the left hand seats the magazine, do not relinquish contact
    with the magazine. See figure 2-16.

    Roll both hands inward to establish a two-handed grip and
    press the slide release with the left thumb to allow the slide
    to move forward, chambering the first round, and present the
    pistol to the target. See figure 2-17.

        _Note_: A left-handed Marine presses the slide
        release with his trigger finger.

[Illustration: Figure 2-10. Pistol Ran Dry of Ammunition.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-11. Bring the Pistol Toward the Body.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-12. Release Magazine and Unfasten Ammunition
Pocket.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-13. Grasping the Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-14. Indexing the Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-15. Glance at the Magazine Well.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-16. Seating the Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-17. Present Pistol Back to Target.]


Condition 1 Reload

In a Condition 1 reload, a partially-filled magazine is removed from the
pistol and replaced with a fully filled magazine. A Condition 1 reload is
performed when there is a lull in the action or whenever deemed necessary
by the Marine. To perform a Condition 1 reload—

    Retain the firing grip with the right hand and pull the pistol
    in close to the body to facilitate control. Keep the pistol
    pointed in the direction of the likely threat. See figure 2-18.

    Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket with the
    left hand. Index the magazine and bring it up to the left of
    eye level. See figure 2-19.

    Slide the index finger to the side of the magazine to grasp the
    magazine between the index and middle fingers. See figure 2-20.

    Raise the pistol and bring the trigger guard to the right of
    eye level and cant the pistol so that the magazine well is
    facing inboard at approximately a 45-degree angle to the deck.

        _Note_: The angle of the magazine well must allow
        the magazine to fall freely from the well once the
        magazine release button is engaged.

    Press the magazine release button with the right thumb to eject
    the partially-filled magazine from the magazine well. Grasp the
    magazine between the index finger and thumb. See figure 2-21.

    Insert the filled magazine into the magazine well (see fig.
    2-22). Use the heel of the hand to ensure it is fully seated
    (see fig. 2-23).

    Lower the pistol and point it in the direction of the likely
    threat.

[Illustration: Figure 2-18. Facilitating Control of Pistol.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-19. Withdrawing and Indexing a Filled Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-20. Grasping a Filled Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-21. Removing a Partially-Filled Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-22. Inserting a Filled Magazine.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-23. Seating a Filled Magazine.]

If time permits, examine the partially-filled magazine to determine the
number of rounds remaining. Stow the partially-filled magazine in the
ammunition pocket for later use.


Reloading Considerations

If possible, take cover before reloading. Always reload before leaving
cover to take advantage of the protection.

When reloading, the first priority is to reload the pistol quickly
so that it is ready to fire. During a reload, the Marine focuses on
reloading only—not on the enemy.

The next priority is for the Marine to retain the magazine during the
reload. However, the combat situation may dictate dropping the magazine
to the deck when performing a reload (i.e., dry reload). If time permits
(i.e., Condition 1 reload), the Marine picks the magazine up or secures
the magazine (e.g., ammunition pocket, flak jacket) before moving to
another location.


Remedial Action

The M9 service pistol is an effective and extremely reliable weapon.
Proper care and preventive maintenance usually ensures the pistol’s
serviceability. However, stoppages, while infrequent, do occur. To keep
the pistol in action, stoppages must be cleared as quickly as possible
through remedial action. A malfunction cannot be corrected through
remedial action by the Marine.


Stoppage

A stoppage is an unintentional interruption in the cycle of operation;
e.g., the slide not moving forward completely. A stoppage is normally
discovered when the pistol will not fire. Most stoppages can be prevented
by proper care, cleaning, and lubrication of the pistol.

Many stoppages of the M9 service pistol are caused by shooter error. The
Marine must be aware of shooter-induced stoppages in order to avoid them
or to quickly identify and correct the stoppage and return the pistol to
action. In a shooter-induced stoppage, the Marine—

    Fails to make ready.

    Fails to take the pistol off safe prior to firing.

    Engages safety while firing.

    Engages magazine release button while firing.

    Engages slide stop while firing (particularly prevalent when
    firing with an Isosceles grip).

    Fails to reset the trigger.

    Fails to recognize the pistol has run dry and the slide has
    locked to the rear.


Malfunction

A malfunction is a failure of the pistol to fire satisfactorily or to
perform as designed (e.g., a broken front sight that does not affect the
functioning of the pistol). A malfunction does not necessarily cause an
interruption in the cycle of operation. When a malfunction occurs, the
pistol must be repaired by an armorer.


Remedial Action

There is no one set of procedures (i.e., immediate action) that can be
performed to clear all or even most of the stoppages that can occur with
the M9 service pistol. Therefore, remedial action requires investigating
the cause of the stoppage, clearing the stoppage, and returning the
pistol to operation. When performing remedial action, the Marine should
seek cover if the tactical situation permits. Once a pistol ceases to
fire, the Marine must visually or physically observe the pistol to
identify the problem before it can be cleared:

        _Note_: The steps taken to clear the pistol are based
        on what is observed.

    Remove the finger from the trigger and place it straight along
    the receiver.

    Bring the pistol in close to the body and in a position to
    observe the chamber.

    Pull the slide to the rear while observing the chamber area to
    identify the stoppage. See figure 2-24 on page 2-14.

        _Note_: Ensure the pistol does not move to safe when
        pulling the slide to the rear.

    Correct the stoppage:

        If there is a round in the magazine but not in the
        chamber (see fig. 2-25), the slide is released and a
        round is observed being chambered.

        If a round being chambered is not observed, the
        bottom of the magazine is tapped to seat it properly,
        and the slide is racked to the rear. See figure 2-26.

        If there is no round in the magazine or chamber, a
        reload is conducted. See figure 2-27.

    Fire the pistol.

[Illustration: Figure 2-24. Observing Chamber.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-25. Round in Magazine but Not in Chamber.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-26. Round Not Being Chambered.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-27. No Round in Magazine or Chamber.]


Audible Pop or Reduced Recoil

    =WARNING=

    =When an audible pop or reduced recoil is experienced, the
    Marine DOES NOT perform remedial action unless he is in a
    combat environment. An audible pop occurs when only a portion
    of the propellant is ignited. It is normally identifiable by
    reduced recoil and the pistol will not cycle. Sometimes, it is
    accompanied by excessive smoke escaping from the chamber area.=


_Training Environment_

If an audible pop or reduced recoil is experienced during firing, cease
fire immediately. Do not apply remedial action; instead, perform the
following steps:

    Remove the finger from the trigger and place it straight along
    the receiver.

    Point the pistol down range.

    Place the pistol on safe.

    Raise a hand to receive assistance from available range
    personnel.


_Combat Environment_

The tactical situation may dictate correction of an audible pop or
reduced recoil. To clear the pistol, perform the following steps:

    Remove the finger from the trigger and place it straight along
    the receiver.

    Seek cover if the tactical situation permits.

    Unload the pistol, but leave the slide locked to the rear.

    Insert something into the bore and clear the obstruction.

    Observe the barrel for cracks or bulges.

    Reload the pistol.


Weapons Carries

As the threat level increases, so should the Marine’s readiness for
engagement. Weapons carries are designed to place the Marine in a state
of increased readiness as the threat level increases. There are two
carries with the pistol: the Alert and the Ready. The carries permit
quick engagement when necessary.


Alert

The Alert is used when enemy contact is likely (probable). See figure
2-28. The Marine performs the following steps to assume the Alert:

    Ensure the pistol is on safe.

    Grasp the pistol grip firmly with two hands. The trigger finger
    is straight and the right thumb is on the safety and in a
    position to

    Extend the arms down at approximately a 45-degree angle to the
    body or bend the elbows. See figure 2-29.

    The muzzle of the pistol is pointed in the likely direction of
    the threat.

[Illustration: Figure 2-28. Alert.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-29. Alert—Close Quarters.]


Ready

The Ready is used when there is no target, but contact with the enemy is
imminent. The Marine performs the following steps to assume the Ready
(see fig. 2-30):

    Ensure the pistol is on safe.

    Grasp the pistol firmly with two hands. The trigger finger is
    straight and the right thumb is on the safety and in a position
    to operate it.

    Extend arms and raise the pistol to just below eye level so a
    clear field of view is maintained.

    Point the muzzle of the pistol in the direction of enemy
    contact.

[Illustration: Figure 2-30. Ready.]


Weapons Transports

The M9 service pistol is transported in either the holster transport or
the administrative transport.


Holster Transport

The holster transport is the most common method of carrying the pistol
because it can be transported safely in the holster. This transport is
used when there is no immediate threat (enemy contact is remote). See
figure 2-31. To transport the pistol in the holster:

    Point the pistol in a safe direction.

        =WARNING=

        =Ensure the pistol is pointed in a safe direction at
        all times and does not cover any part of the body
        while holstering.=

    Ensure that the safety is on, the slide is forward, and the
    trigger finger is straight.

    Use the right hand to firmly grip the pistol grip and place the
    pistol in the holster:

        Lift the flap of the holster with the left hand.

        Look down at the holster, bring the pistol back to
        a position above the holster, and rotate the muzzle
        down into the holster.

    Push the pistol snugly into the holster and fasten the flap
    with the right hand.

[Illustration: Figure 2-31. Holster Transport.]


Administrative Transport

The administrative transport is used to transport the pistol when the
Marine does not have a holster. See figure 2-32. The Marine performs the
following steps to assume the administrative transport:

    Establish a firm grip around the pistol grip with the right
    hand.

    Ensure the pistol is on safe, the magazine is removed, the
    slide is locked to the rear, and the trigger finger is straight
    along the receiver.

    Bend the elbow to approximately a 45-degree angle so the pistol
    is positioned near shoulder level. The wrist should be straight
    so the pistol’s muzzle points up.

[Illustration: Figure 2-32. Administrative Transport.]


Combat Mindset

In a combat environment, the Marine must be constantly prepared to
engage targets. When a target presents itself, there may be little time
to react. The target must be engaged quickly and accurately. It is not
enough to simply know marksmanship techniques, the Marine must be able to
react instinctively.

The development of a combat mindset can be associated with the carries
and holster transport for the pistol. The use of each carry/transport
is dictated by the perceived level of threat. Each carry and transport
should signify a stage of mental and physical preparedness for combat.
The intensity of the Marine’s mental and physical preparation depends on
the likelihood of enemy contact.


Physical and Mental Preparation


_Physical Preparation_

In combat, targets can present themselves without warning. Therefore, it
is essential for the Marine to maintain proper balance and control of the
pistol at all times so that the pistol can be presented quickly and the
target engaged accurately.

Speed alone does not equate to effective target engagement. The Marine
should fire only as fast as he can fire accurately, never exceeding
his physical ability to apply the fundamentals of marksmanship. To be
effective in combat, the Marine must train to perfect the physical skills
of shooting so they become second nature. The more physical skills that
can be performed automatically, the more concentration that can be given
to the mental side of target engagement.


_Mental Preparation_

While combat is unpredictable and constantly changing, the Marine can
prepare mentally for the contingencies of the operational setting and
confrontation with a threat. The stress of combat, coupled with the
limited time available to engage targets, requires concentration on the
mental aspects of target engagement; e.g., identification of targets,
shoot/no-shoot decisionmaking, and the selection and use of cover.
Minimizing stress and maximizing the limited time available to engage
targets can be accomplished by—

    Knowing the combat environment and being constantly aware of
    the surroundings (e.g., terrain, available cover, possible
    threats) enables the Marine to quickly present the pistol and
    accurately engage targets.

    Identifying and evaluating possible courses of action and
    developing potential plans for target engagement that will be
    appropriate to the combat situation.

    Instilling confidence in a Marine’s ability to fire well-aimed
    shots in the stress of a combat situation. A key factor in a
    Marine’s level of confidence is the degree to which he has
    mastered the tactics, techniques, and procedures of pistol
    marksmanship.


Threat Levels


_No Immediate Threat_

When there is no immediate threat, the Marine assumes the holster
transport. The pistol should be in Condition 1. This is the lowest level
of awareness for the Marine in a combat environment, but the Marine
must stay alert and aware of any nearby activity. To prepare for target
engagement at this level, the Marine must—

    Be aware of likely areas of enemy contact.

    Be aware of the condition of his pistol.

    Establish a plan or course of action to present the pistol to a
    target should a target appear.

    Mentally review appropriate actions such as reloading and
    remedial action.


_Contact Likely (Probable)_

If enemy contact is likely (probable), the Marine assumes the Alert. When
enemy contact is likely, the Marine should—

    Expect enemy contact and be constantly prepared to present the
    pistol.

    Search the entire area for indications of enemy targets and for
    suitable terrain features that offer cover and concealment. The
    Marine should avoid restricting the search to a single terrain
    feature because this hinders awareness to a sector of the
    battlefield and to approach by the enemy.

    Be mentally prepared for contact. Plan a course of action for
    immediate response to a target. Modify the plan of action as
    needed.

    Be physically prepared to fire. Maintain proper balance at all
    times. Avoid self-induced physical fatigue. For example, do not
    grip the pistol so tightly that fingers, hands, and arms tire
    from carrying the pistol.


_Contact Imminent_

When contact with an enemy target is imminent, assume the Ready. In
this carry, the Marine is at the highest level of awareness and is
constantly searching for and expecting a target. To fire well-aimed shots
upon target detection, the Marine must be at the peak of his mental
preparation, all distractions must be eliminated, and his focus must be
on firing an accurate shot. In the Ready, the Marine must—

    Keep the pistol oriented in the general direction of
    observation (eyes, muzzle, target).

    Maintain a clear field of view above the pistol sights until
    the target is detected.

    Be mentally and physically prepared to engage the target. The
    Marine must be ready to:

        Identify the target.

        Sweep the safety.

        Apply the fundamentals of marksmanship.

    Move only as fast as he is capable of delivering well-aimed
    shots, ensuring that speed of engagement does not exceed his
    physical abilities.

    Search the entire area for indications of enemy targets,
    lowering the pistol enough to observe a clear field of view of
    the area.


Transferring the Pistol

The Marine’s ability to transfer a pistol to another Marine is critical
to safe weapons handling. There are two methods for transferring the
pistol from one Marine to another: show clear transfer and condition
unknown transfer. Each transfer is performed based on the operational
environment/combat situation.


Show Clear Transfer

To transfer the pistol—

    Grasp the pistol firmly in the right hand while ensuring that
    the pistol is on safe.

    Remove and retain the magazine.

    Lock the slide to the rear and catch the round if there is a
    round in the chamber.

    Inspect the chamber visually to ensure it is empty and leave
    the slide locked to the rear. To transfer the pistol—

        If the receiving Marine is to the right: Cradle the
        trigger guard in the palm of the left hand and wrap
        the fingers around the top of the pistol. Release the
        firing grip.

        If the receiving Marine is to the left: With the left
        hand, grasp the slide of the pistol with the thumb
        over the slide and the fingers underneath. Release
        the firing grip.

    Ensure that the muzzle points up at a 45-degree angle in a safe
    direction and the chamber exposed. Hand the pistol to the other
    Marine, grip first. See figure 2-33.

    The receiving Marine—

        Grasps the pistol grip with the trigger finger
        straight along the receiver.

        Inspects the chamber visually to ensure it is empty.

        Ensures the pistol is on safe.

[Illustration: Figure 2-33. Show Clear Transfer.]


Condition Unknown Transfer

To transfer the pistol—

    Grasp the pistol firmly in the right hand while ensuring that
    the pistol is on safe. To transfer the pistol—

        If the receiving Marine is to the right: Cradle the
        trigger guard in the palm of the left hand and wrap
        the fingers around the top of the pistol. Release the
        firing grip. See figure 2-34.

        If the receiving Marine is to the left: With the left
        hand, grasp the slide of the pistol with the thumb
        over the slide and the fingers underneath. Release
        the firing grip. See figure 2-35.

    Ensure that the muzzle points up at a 45-degree angle in a safe
    direction. Hand the pistol to the receiving Marine, grip first.

    The receiving Marine—

        Grasps the pistol grip with the trigger finger
        straight along the receiver.

        Ensures the pistol is on safe.

        Conducts a chamber check to determine the condition
        of the pistol.

        Remove the magazine and count the number of rounds
        in the magazine by using the counting holes, if time
        permits. Re-insert the magazine into the magazine
        well ensuring it is fully seated.

[Illustration: Figure 2-34. Condition Unknown Transfer to the Right.]

[Illustration: Figure 2-35. Condition Unknown Transfer to the Left.]




CHAPTER 3

FUNDAMENTALS OF PISTOL MARKSMANSHIP


The fundamentals of pistol marksmanship are aiming, trigger control, and
breath control. Understanding and applying the basic pistol marksmanship
fundamentals ensures the Marine’s effectiveness in target engagement. The
fundamentals must be continually studied and practiced because they are
the means by which accurate shots are placed on target. A Marine with a
solid foundation in the fundamentals of marksmanship will be successful
in the application of these fundamentals during combat.


Aiming

Maintaining the correct relationship between the pistol sights is
essential for accurate target engagement. Because of the short distance
between the pistol sights, a small error in their alignment causes a
considerable error at the target.


Sight Alignment

Sight alignment is the relationship between the front sight and rear
sight with respect to the aiming eye. Correct sight alignment is the
front sight centered in the rear sight notch with the top edge of the
front sight level =aligned= with the top edge of the rear sight. There
should be equal space on either side of the front sight. See figure 3-1.

[Illustration: =Transcriber’s Note:= Although a caption exists for it,
this image was not printed in the original book.

Figure 3-1. Sight Alignment.]


Establishing Sight Alignment

The pistol is fired without benefit of bone support; therefore, the
pistol is in constant motion. The Marine must understand this, yet
continually strive to align the sights. To fire accurately, the sights
must be aligned when the shot breaks.


_Grip_

The grip is key to acquiring sight alignment. If the grip is correct,
the front and rear sights should align naturally. Dry fire during
presentation of the M9 service pistol aids in obtaining a grip that
allows sight alignment to be acquired consistently.


_Controlled Muscular Tension_

There must be enough controlled muscular tension in the grip, wrists, and
forearms to hold the pistol steady and level the barrel to maintain sight
alignment. Consistent tension stabilizes the sights and maintains sight
alignment.


Sight Picture

Sight picture is the placement of the front sight in relation to the
target while maintaining sight alignment. See figure 3-2 on page 3-2.

Because the pistol is constantly moving, sight picture is acquired within
an aiming area that is located center mass on the target. The aiming
area allows for movement of the sights on the target while maintaining
sight alignment. Each Marine defines an acceptable aiming area within his
own ability to stabilize the sights. Time, distance to the target, and
personal ability affect dictate the aiming area. As the Marine becomes
more proficient with the pistol, the aiming area becomes more precise.

The aiming area is determined by the Marine’s stability of hold. The
proper grip stabilizes the sights so sight alignment can be maintained,
but the sights move continuously within the aiming area of the target.
The Marine understands the pistol’s movement and learns to apply trigger
control as he is obtaining sight alignment/sight picture within the
aiming area so the shot breaks the moment sight picture is established.

[Illustration: Figure 3-2. Sight Picture.]


Relationship Between the Eye and the Sights

The human eye can focus clearly on only one object at a time. The Marine
must focus on the top edge of the front sight and fire the shot while
maintaining the relationship between the front and rear sights within the
aiming area. Focusing on the top edge of the front sight rather than the
target keeps the front sight clear and distinct, which allows the Marine
to detect minor variations in sight alignment. Secondary vision allows
the Marine to see the target (although slightly blurred) and maintain
sight picture within his aiming area.


Trigger Control

Trigger control is the Marine’s skillful manipulation of the trigger that
causes the pistol to fire while maintaining sight alignment and sight
picture. Proper trigger control aids in maintaining sight alignment while
the shot is fired.


Sight Alignment and Trigger Control

Aiming and trigger control are mutually supportive—one cannot be
performed without the other. Sight alignment and trigger control must be
performed simultaneously to fire an accurate shot. As pressure is applied
to the trigger, the sights may move, causing them to be misaligned. To
fire accurate shots, the sights must be aligned when the shot breaks.
Trigger control can actually assist in aligning the sights. With proper
trigger finger placement and consistent muscular tension applied to the
grip, the sights can be controlled as the trigger is moved to the rear.
If the sights move extensively while pressing the trigger, this can
indicate an improper grip or inconsistency in the muscular tension being
applied to the grip.


Grip

A firm grip is essential for good trigger control. The grip is
established before applying trigger control and is maintained throughout
the firing process. To establish the grip, the hand is placed around the
pistol grip in a location that allows the trigger finger to move the
trigger straight to the rear while maintaining sight alignment. Once
the grip is established, it should be firm enough to allow manipulation
of the trigger while maintaining sight alignment. The pressure applied
to the grip must be equal to or more than the pressure required to move
the trigger to the rear. If the pressure is not applied correctly, the
sights move as the trigger is pressed to the rear and sight alignment is
disturbed.


Trigger Finger Placement

Once the grip is established, the finger is placed on the trigger.
Placement of the finger should be natural and allow free movement of the
trigger finger. A natural trigger finger placement allows the trigger to
be moved straight to the rear while maintaining sight alignment. If the
finger presses the trigger to the side, it can cause an error in sight
alignment and shot placement.

Each Marine must experiment with finger placement in order to determine
effective placement on the trigger. Once established, effective trigger
finger placement allows the trigger to be consistently moved straight to
the rear while maintaining sight alignment.


Types of Trigger Control


_Uninterrupted Trigger Control_

During uninterrupted trigger control, the Marine applies a steady,
unchanging pressure to the trigger until the shot is fired. Uninterrupted
trigger control is particularly effective at close range, when the target
area is large, and when stability of hold is not critical for accuracy.
To apply uninterrupted trigger control, apply pressure on the trigger
while maintaining focus on the top edge of the front sight. Continue
pressure on the trigger to begin moving the trigger straight to the rear
while obtaining sight alignment and sight picture. Move the trigger
straight to the rear in a single, smooth motion with no hesitation.


_Interrupted Trigger Control_

Interrupted trigger control is particularly effective at longer ranges,
when the target is small, and when stability of hold is critical to
maintaining sight picture in the aiming area. This method is also used
if the pistol sights move outside the aiming area when applying trigger
control. If the sight picture is outside the aiming area, the Marine
stops and holds the rearward movement on the trigger until sight picture
is re-established. When sight picture is re-established, the rearward
movement of the trigger is continued until the shot is fired.


Breath Control

Breathing causes movement of the chest, abdomen, and shoulders, which
causes the pistol sights to move vertically while attempting to aim and
fire. Therefore, it is necessary to stop breathing for a period of time
while firing a shot or a series of shots.

The object of breath control is to stop breathing just long enough to
fire the shot while maintaining sight alignment, stabilizing the sights,
and establishing the sight picture. To be consistent, the breath should
be held at the same point in the breathing cycle; i.e., the natural
respiratory pause.

Breathing should not be stopped for too long because it has adverse
visual and physical effects. Holding the breath longer than is
comfortable results in a lack of oxygen that causes vision to deteriorate
and then affects the ability to focus on the sights.


Application of Marksmanship Fundamentals in Field Firing


Compression of the Fundamentals

Pistol engagements typically occur over close distances and are short in
duration. Because an immediate response to the threat is required, the
application of the fundamentals must be a conditioned response that is
executable in a compressed time. The goal of successful, quick target
engagement is the application of the fundamentals of marksmanship while
firing the shot the moment weapon presentation is complete.

The time required to move the trigger to the rear while acquiring and
maintaining sight alignment and sight picture is unique to each Marine
and is based on his capabilities. Each Marine should know his abilities
and fire only as quickly as he is capable of firing accurately. The
Marine must not exceed his shooting skills in an effort to get rounds off
quickly.


Aiming

In field firing, the fundamentals are applied in a compressed time so
sight alignment and sight picture are achieved as the shot is fired.
Although the target must be quickly engaged in combat, sight alignment is
still the first priority: strive for a clear front sight. Distance to the
target and the size of the target affects sight aligmnent as follows:

    As the distance to the target increases and the size of the
    target decreases, sight alignment becomes more critical to
    target engagement. Accurate sight picture/sight alignment
    cannot be compromised for speed.

    Sight alignment is critical to the effective engagement of
    smaller targets such as partially exposed targets.

    As the distance to the target decreases, perfect sight
    alignment is not as critical, but there must be a relationship
    between the sights and their placement on the target within the
    aiming area to ensure accuracy.


Trigger Control

Proper trigger control aids in maintaining sight alignment while the
shot is fired. As pressure is applied to the trigger, the sights may
move, causing them to be misaligned. Therefore, the Marine is constantly
re-aligning the sights as pressure is applied to the trigger. Sight
alignment and trigger control must be performed simultaneously to fire an
accurate shot.


Breath Control

During combat, the Marine’s breathing and heart rate often increase due
to physical exertion or the stress of battle. The key to breath control
in field firing is to stop breathing just long enough to fire an accurate
shot or a series of shots.




CHAPTER 4

PISTOL FIRING POSITIONS AND GRIP


The M9 service pistol is fired from the standing, kneeling, and prone
positions. Each firing position may be adapted to either a Weaver or
Isosceles variation, each possessing a distinct advantage in combat. The
Weaver variation stabilizes the pistol sights. The Isosceles variation
manages recoil. The advantages apply whether the Marine is firing in the
standing, kneeling, or prone position. The Marine must select and assume
a stable firing position that provides a solid foundation for accurate
shooting while meeting the demands of the combat situation.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


The Pistol Firing Position

During combat, the Marine selects a firing position based on mobility,
observation of the enemy, and stability.


Mobility

A firing position must provide mobility should the Marine need to move.
The standing position permits maximum mobility because it is quickly
assumed and easily maneuvered from and it permits lateral mobility to
engage widely dispersed targets. The prone position provides limited
mobility because it is the most time-consuming position to get into and
out of and it lacks the lateral mobility required to engage dispersed
targets.


Observation of the Enemy

A firing position should allow observation of the enemy while minimizing
the Marine’s exposure. During combat there can be many obstructions to a
clear field of view. Terrain features such as vegetation, earth contours,
and manmade structures often dictate the firing position. The prone
position normally allows the least exposure, but it usually provides a
limited field of view. Kneeling may provide a wider field of view, but
generally provides less concealment.


Stability

A solid firing position establishes a stable foundation for target
engagement and provides accurate and consistent shooting. The definition
of a stable position is one in which the body is positioned so as to
resist forces that cause motion (i.e., recoil and movement of the pistol
sights). The standing position is the least stable firing position,
while the prone is the most stable firing position. A consistent, stable
position is assumed for two distinct purposes:

    Minimize the pistol’s movement in order to control the sights
    and to deliver accurate fire on a target.

    Minimize the affects of recoil in order to recover the sights
    to the same area on the target.

During combat, it may be necessary to engage the same target more than
once to eliminate it. If the firing position is stable, the pistol’s
sights should recover to the same area on the target, allowing rapid
re-enactment. Distributing the body’s weight to balance the position
also stabilizes the pistol and allows better management of recoil. A
pistol firing position is stabilized through controlled muscular tension.
Because the pistol is fired without benefit of bone support, muscular
tension is needed in the body to stabilize the position and the pistol
sights. Muscular tension must follow these guidelines—

    A consistent amount of muscular tension is needed to hold the
    pistol steady so the sights are aligned with the aiming eye and
    the target.

    Controlled and consistent tension in the body provides
    resistance that the Marine uses to manage recoil and bring the
    sights back on target quicker. However, too much tension can
    cause strain or trembling.

    Muscular tension is correct when the Marine can control the
    pistol before, during, and after firing the shot.


Pistol Firing Grip

A proper grip is one that provides maximum control of the pistol before,
during, and after firing. It stabilizes the pistol sights before firing,
allows trigger control to be applied during firing, and manages recoil
after firing.


Before Firing: Stabilize the Sights

To fire an accurate shot, the sights must be stabilized prior to and as
the bullet exits the muzzle of the pistol. A proper grip controls the
alignment of the pistol’s sights and stabilizes the sights so an accurate
shot may be fired. The following guidelines apply to the establishment of
a proper grip—

    There must be muscular tension in the wrist and forearms.
    Consistent muscular tension in the wrist, forearms, and grip
    helps maintain sight alignment by reducing the movement in the
    grip that can cause movement in the sights. The grip is correct
    when it allows the sights to be naturally aligned to the aiming
    eye.

    When establishing a two-handed grip, equal pressure must be
    applied with both hands. Consistent, equal pressure from both
    hands stabilizes the sights and allows them to be aligned and
    level with respect to the aiming eye.

    The hand grips as high on the back strap as possible, bringing
    the centerline of the bore as close as possible to a parallel
    line with the bones in the forearm.


During Firing: Allow Trigger Control

The Marine’s grip provides a foundation for the movement of the trigger
finger. The trigger finger applies positive pressure on the trigger
as an independent action, completely free of the other muscles of the
gripping hand. The Marine should not apply excessive pressure to the web
of the hand touching the pistol’s back strap because excessive pressure
interferes with the manipulation of the trigger by the trigger finger.


After Firing: Manage Recoil

Once a shot is fired, the pistol recoils, disturbing alignment of the
sights. A proper grip facilitates a quick recovery from recoil so the
sights quickly return to the same area on the target. The Marine’s grip
determines the following during recoil:

    The amount the muzzle climbs during recoil depends on the
    amount of controlled muscular tension in the grip and wrists
    applied to stabilize the pistol and create consistency in
    resistance to recoil. Controlled muscular tension allows the
    sights to recover consistently back on target within a minimum
    amount of time.

    Firm, equal pressure must be applied to the grip with both
    hands to ensure that the pistol does not slip during recoil.
    An improper grip or lack of controlled muscular tension causes
    the pistol to move after the shot is fired, disrupting sight
    alignment and requiring the Marine to re-establish his grip.

    Locking out the wrist of the firing hand, similar to executing
    a punch, helps provide resistance to recoil and speed recovery.
    The elbows should be at a position slightly less than locked
    out to help absorb the recoil and aid in recoil management.


Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster

The firing grip is not established in the holster, however, a proper
firing grip can be assumed quickly if the pistol is withdrawn from the
holster correctly. The pistol should be withdrawn from the holster in one
continuous, fluid motion:

    Place the heel of the left hand at the center of the torso
    with the fingers extended toward the target. At the same time,
    unfasten and release the D-ring with the right hand. See figure
    4-1.

        _Note_: The left hand is placed on the torso in a
        position that allows a two-handed firing grip to be
        established in a minimum amount of movement.

    Place the right thumb on the forward edge of the lower portion
    of the holster and the fingers around the back edge of the
    holster, keeping the trigger finger straight. See figure 4-2.

        _Note_: The left hand may assist in holding the
        holster flap up.

    Slide the hand up the holster until the fingers come in contact
    with the pistol grip. At the same time, keep the thumb above
    the pistol to guide the holster flap up. See figure 4-3 on page
    4-4.

    Grasp the pistol grip with the fingers and draw the pistol
    straight up. Continue withdrawing the pistol while moving the
    thumb to a position on the safety. See figure 4-4 on page 4-4.

        _Note_: This hand placement allows a firing grip to
        be established once the thumb disengages the safety.
        Any adjustments made to the firing grip after the
        safety is disengaged should be minor.

    Once the muzzle clears the holster, rotate the muzzle forward
    to clear the body. Ensure the muzzle is pointed in a safe
    direction.

    Establish a two-handed grip on the pistol by joining the left
    hand with the right hand in the front of the torso. See figure
    4-5.

        =Caution=

        Ensure the muzzle does not cover the left hand when
        establishing the two-handed grip.

[Illustration: Figure 4-1. Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster—Step
1.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-2. Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster—Step
2.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-3. Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster—Step
3.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-4. Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster—Step
4.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-5. Withdrawing the Pistol From the Holster—Step
5.]


Weaver and Isosceles Variations

The size of the target, distance to the target, time, and type of
engagement needed (i.e., two shots, single precision shot) determine
whether to fire in the Weaver or Isosceles variation. The Weaver and
Isosceles variations each consist of three firing positions: standing,
kneeling, and prone. The firing position chosen is based on the combat
situation and the Marine’s body configuration, and it must permit
balance, control, and stability during firing. In addition, there is a
specific firing grip that supports each position and the combination of
the grip and the body configuration is key to establishing the variation.
See table 4-1 for a list of advantages and disadvantages of both the
Weaver and the Isosceles variations.

 =Table 4-1. Advantages and Disadvantages.=

 +-----------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
 | Variation |        Advantages            |       Disadvantages         |
 +-----------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
 | Weaver    | Additional balance, control, | Recoil has a greater impact |
 |           | and stability of hold during | due to the hand placement   |
 |           | firing due to placement of   | on the pistol (some of the  |
 |           | the arms (left arm bent,     | pistol grip is exposed and  |
 |           | pistol is in close to the    | pressure is applied in two  |
 |           | body).                       | different directions around |
 |           |                              | the pistol).                |
 |           |                              |                             |
 |           | Easier to maintain sight     | Recovery of the sights back |
 |           | picture because the pistol’s | on target may take longer   |
 |           | foundation is steady.        | since recoil is affected.   |
 +-----------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
 | Isosceles | Recoil has a lesser impact   | Stability of hold is        |
 |           | because muscular tension and | degraded due to the pistol  |
 |           | grip pressure are evenly     | being further from the body |
 |           | distributed around the       | without support.            |
 |           | pistol.                      |                             |
 |           |                              |                             |
 |           | Allows quicker recovery of   | Since it is harder to steady|
 |           | the sights on target.        | the pistol, acquiring sight |
 |           |                              | picture becomes more        |
 |           |                              | difficult.                  |
 +-----------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+

At longer ranges, the target is smaller, a more precise shot is required
to eliminate the target, and any small movement moves the sights off
the target; therefore, the pistol must be steadied. Although the Weaver
variation is effective at any distance, some aspects of the position make
it more effective for long range or precision shots on small or partially
exposed targets; i.e., sight alignment and sight picture are easier for
stability of hold.

The Isosceles variation is effective at any distance, however, some
aspects of the position make it more effective for close range
engagements. When confronted with a target, the natural physical reaction
is to face the target and push out with the arms. This makes the
Isosceles variation advantageous for quick engagements at close range.
When a target is at close range, it must be engaged quickly before it
engages the Marine.

The management of recoil is a bigger factor in close-range engagements
because it is more likely that multiple shots will be fired to eliminate
the target and the sights have to recover quickly back on target.
However, at close ranges, the target is larger so stability of hold is
not as important because it is easier to hold the sights on target and
sight picture is not as critical.


Standing Position

The standing position is the most often employed position during a pistol
engagement due to the short distance of the engagement and the nature of
combat. When properly assumed, the standing position provides a stable
base for firing, a clear field of view, and excellent mobility. The
standing position can be adapted to either the Weaver variation or the
Isosceles variation.


Weaver Standing Position

The key to successful employment of the Weaver variation is the body’s
angle to the target and the push-pull pressure applied to the grip. See
figure 4-6.

To assume the Weaver standing position—

    Face the target and make a half turn to the right, keeping the
    pistol oriented toward the target. This orients the body at
    approximately a 40 to 60 degree angle oblique to the target.
    The shoulders are angled to the target, the left shoulder
    forward of the right. The feet are about shoulder-width apart,
    the left foot forward of the right.

    Grip the pistol grip firmly with the right hand. Place the
    right thumb on the safety.

    Keep the shoulders at a 40 to 60 degree angle oblique to the
    target and raise the right arm and extend it across the body
    toward the target. Ensure that the right shoulder does not roll
    forward or turn toward the target.

    Extend the left arm to the target, bending the left elbow to
    join the left and right hands. The left elbow is inverted and
    tucked in toward the body so the left arm supports the pistol.

        _Note_: The angle of the body determines how much the
        elbow bends.

    Establish a two-handed firing grip in the Weaver variation. See
    figure 4-7.

    Place the palm of the left hand over the front of the right
    hand so the palm covers the curled fingers of the right hand.
    The trigger guard should rest in the “V” formed by the left
    thumb and forefinger. The knuckles of the left hand are just
    outboard of the trigger guard. A portion of the pistol grip is
    exposed.

    Rest the trigger finger naturally, straight and outside of the
    trigger guard, so the finger can be moved quickly and easily to
    the trigger.

    Rest the left thumb against the receiver so that both thumbs
    are on the left side of the pistol. Once the safety is
    disengaged with the right thumb, the left thumb is placed over
    the right thumb and positive pressure is applied to hold the
    right thumb in place.

    Apply rearward pressure with the left hand and forward pressure
    with the right hand to achieve a “push-pull” grip. Isometric
    tension (push-pull) stabilizes the pistol during firing.

    Lean forward slightly and apply muscular tension throughout
    the body to stabilize the position and manage recoil. The
    muscular tension in the upper body is not symmetrical due to
    the “push-pull” tension applied on the grip.

    Keep the head erect so the aiming eye can look through the
    sights.

[Illustration: Figure 4-6. Weaver Standing Position.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-7. Weaver Grip.]


Isosceles Standing Position

The key to the Isosceles variation is that the body is squared to the
target and equal pressure is applied on the pistol from the grip. To
assume the Isosceles standing position—

    Face the target with feet approximately shoulder width apart.
    The shoulders are squared to the target.

    Establish a two-handed firing grip in the Isosceles variation.
    See figure 4-8.

    Grip the pistol grip firmly with the right hand. Place the
    right thumb on the safety.

    Place the heel of the left hand on the exposed portion of the
    pistol grip in the pocket formed by the fingertips and heel of
    the right hand. There should be maximum contact between the
    pistol grip and the hands. Wrap the fingers of the left hand
    over the fingers of the right hand. Ensure both thumbs rest on
    the left side of the pistol and point toward the target.

    Apply equal pressure on both sides of the pistol to allow for
    the best management of recoil.

        _Note_: Ensure the left thumb does not apply
        excessive pressure to the slide stop or slide.

    Rest the trigger finger naturally, straight and outside of the
    trigger guard, so the finger can be moved quickly and easily to
    the trigger.

        _Notes_: Index finger of the left hand may or may not
        rest on the front of the trigger guard.

        Marines with large hands must ensure that their right
        thumb does not rest on the slide stop, preventing
        reliable pistol operation.

    Elevate and extend the arms toward the target.

    Roll the shoulders forward and shift the body weight slightly
    forward to stabilize the position and better manage recoil. The
    left foot may be slightly forward of the right foot to balance
    the position. There should be an equal amount of muscular
    tension on both sides of the body to best manage recoil.

    Tuck the head between the shoulders; the head is extended
    forward but kept erect so the aiming eye can see through the
    sights. See figure 4-9.

[Illustration: Figure 4-8. Isosceles Grip.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-9. Isosceles Standing Position.]


Kneeling Position

The kneeling position offers a smaller exposure than the standing
position and greater stability. Increased stability makes the kneeling
position effective for longer range shooting. It does not, however,
offer as much mobility for quick reaction as the standing position. The
kneeling position can be quickly assumed and allows firing from various
types of cover. Depending on the cover and the need for observation, the
kneeling position may be adapted to a high kneeling, a medium kneeling, a
low kneeling, or a two-knee kneeling position. The kneeling positions can
be adapted to either the Weaver variation or the Isosceles variation.


Weaver Kneeling Position

The advantage of the Weaver variation of the kneeling position is that
it provides bone support due to the left elbow’s placement on the knee.
The Weaver variation further enables firing from the side of cover while
exposing less of the body to a threat. To assume the Weaver kneeling
position, the following steps are basic to all adaptations:

    Make a half turn to the right, drop the right foot back or step
    forward with the left foot, and place the right knee on the
    deck. The body is positioned at a 40 to 60 degree angle oblique
    to the target.

    Blade the shoulders at a 40 to 60 degree oblique angle to the
    target, the left shoulder forward of the right.

    Extend the arms toward the target.

    Bend forward at the waist to better manage recoil.

    Place the flat part of the upper left arm, just above the
    elbow, in firm contact with the flat surface formed on top
    of the bent knee. The point of the left elbow extends just
    slightly past the left knee. However, depending on the need for
    stability or observation of the enemy, the elbow does not have
    to rest on the knee.

The following steps provide specifics for each adaptation:

    High kneeling: the toes of the right foot are curled and in
    contact with the deck or the inside of the foot may be in
    contact with the deck. Depending on the need for observation,
    the buttocks may or may not rest on the right heel. The left
    leg is bent at the knee; the shin straight up and down. The
    left foot is flat on the deck. See figure 4-10.

    Medium kneeling: the right ankle is straight with the foot
    stretched out and the bootlaces in contact with the deck. The
    left leg is bent at the knee, the left foot flat on the deck.
    The right shin may be angled to the body to create a tripod of
    support for the position. See figure 4-11.

    Low kneeling: the right ankle is turned so the outside of
    the foot is in contact with the deck and the buttocks are
    in contact with the inside of the foot. The right shin may
    be angled to the body to create a tripod of support for the
    position. See figure 4-12.

    Two-knee: drop both knees onto the deck. The toes may be curled
    to get into and out of the position quickly. Depending on the
    need for observation of the enemy, the buttocks may or may not
    rest on the heels. See figure 4-13.

[Illustration: Figure 4-10. Weaver High Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-11. Weaver Medium Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-12. Weaver Low Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-13. Weaver Two-Knee Kneeling.]


Isosceles Kneeling Position

The advantage of the Isosceles variation is that it enables the Marine to
fire over the top of cover while exposing less of the body to a threat.
To assume the Isosceles kneeling position, the following steps are basic
to all adaptations:

    Drop the right foot back or step forward with the left foot and
    place the right knee on the deck.

    Square the shoulders to the target.

    Extend the arms toward the target.

    Lean forward with the shoulders rolled forward and the head
    tucked between the shoulders to better manage recoil.

The following steps provide specifics for each adaptation:

    High kneeling: the toes of the right foot are curled and in
    contact with the deck or the inside of the foot may be in
    contact with the deck. Depending on the need for observation,
    the buttocks may or may not rest on the right heel. The left
    leg is bent at the knee, the shin is straight up and down. The
    left foot is flat on the deck. See figure 4-14.

    Medium kneeling: the right ankle is straight with the foot
    stretched out and the bootlaces in contact with the deck. The
    left leg is bent at the knee, the left foot is flat on the
    deck. The right shin may be angled to the body to create a
    tripod of support for the position. See figure 4-15.

    Low kneeling: the right ankle is turned so the outside of
    the foot is in contact with the deck and the buttocks are
    in contact with the inside of the foot. The right shin may
    be angled to the body to create a tripod of support for the
    position. See figure 4-16.

    Two-knee: drop both knees onto the deck. The toes may be curled
    to get into and out of the position quickly. Depending on the
    need for observation of the enemy, the buttocks may or may not
    rest on the heels. See figure 4-17.

[Illustration: Figure 4-14. Isosceles High Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-15. Isosceles Medium Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-16. Isosceles Low Kneeling.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-17. Isosceles Two-Knee.]


Prone Position

The prone position is easily assumed, stable, and presents a small target
to the enemy. Since the prone position places most of the body on the
deck, it offers great stability for long range shooting. However, it is
the least mobile of the firing positions and may restrict the field of
view. The prone position can be adapted to either the Weaver variation or
the Isosceles variation.


Weaver Prone Position

The Weaver variation of the prone position produces a cocked leg position
by angling the body to the target and cocking the leg to support the
position. The Weaver prone position is ideal for firing from behind
cover. See figure 4-18.

To assume the Weaver prone position, perform the following steps:

    Face the target and make a half turn to the right (this places
    the body at a 40 to 60 degree oblique to the target). Grip the
    pistol in the right hand, placing the pistol in a position that
    facilitates control of the weapon. Ensure the pistol is pointed
    in a safe direction and does not cover any portion of the body.

    Move the body to the deck by using either the squat or drop
    method, keeping the body at a 40 to 60 degree oblique to the
    target.

    _Squat Method_

        Squat down and place the left hand on the deck.

        Kick both feet backward and come down on the right
        side of the body with the right arm extended toward
        the target.

        Ensure the pistol does not cover the body or the left
        hand. See figure 4-19.

    _Drop Method_

        Drop to a kneeling position.

        Place the left hand on the deck in front of the body,
        push the pistol out toward the target.

        Roll the right side of the body onto the deck.

        Ensure the pistol does not cover the body or the left
        hand. See figure 4-20 on page 4-12.

    Bring the left knee up to support the firing position and to
    raise the diaphragm off the deck so as not to interfere with
    breathing. The inside of the knee rests on the deck. The knee
    is drawn up to provide maximum stability for the position.

    Establish a two-handed firing grip on the pistol.

    Place the left elbow on the ground for stability. For maximum
    stability, strive to keep the grip firmly placed on the deck.

    The head may rest against the right arm so the pistol sights
    can be aligned. The head may be canted as long as the aiming
    eye can look directly through the sights. Strive to keep the
    pistol sights as level as possible while acquiring sight
    alignment.

[Illustration: Figure 4-18. Weaver Prone Position.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-19. Squat Method.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-20. Drop Method.]

To make minor increases in elevation, keep the left hand in place and
firmly on the deck and raise the right hand to achieve the desired
elevation. However, contact between the right and left hands must be
maintained to stabilize the pistol. See figure 4-21 on page 4-12.
(There is a tradeoff between obtaining the needed elevation and losing
stability, so the Marine must strike a balance between the two.)

[Illustration: Figure 4-21. Increasing Elevation (Minor Adjustments).]


Isosceles Prone Position

The Isosceles variation of the prone position produces a straight leg
position. See figure 4-22.

To assume the Isosceles prone position:

    Stand facing the target. Grip the pistol in the right hand,
    placing the pistol in a position that facilitates control of
    the weapon. Ensure the pistol is pointed in a safe direction
    and does not cover any portion of the body.

    Move the body to the deck by using either the squat or drop
    method.

    _Squat Method_

        Squat down and place the left hand on the deck.

        Kick both feet backward and come down on the right
        side of the body with the right arm extended toward
        the target.

        Ensure the pistol does not cover the body or the left
        hand. See figure 4-23.

    _Drop Method_

        Drop to a kneeling position.

        Place the left hand on the deck in front of the body.

        Push the pistol out toward the target, and roll the
        right side of the body onto the deck.

        Ensure the pistol does not cover the body or the left
        hand. See figure 4-24.

    Establish a two-handed firing grip on the pistol.

    Spread the legs to a position that provides maximum stability.
    The insteps of both feet may be flat on the deck or the toes
    may be curled and dug into the deck.

    Keep the pistol sights as level as possible while acquiring
    sight alignment. Keep the head in a position to allow the
    aiming eye to look directly through the sights.

    When wearing a helmet, the head may be canted slightly and
    rest against the right arm to push the helmet from the eyes so
    the sights can be aligned. Likewise, the pistol may be canted
    outboard to allow the aiming eye to look directly through the
    sights.

[Illustration: Figure 4-22. Isosceles Prone Position.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-23. Squat Method.]

[Illustration: Figure 4-24. Drop Method.]

To make minor increases in elevation, keep the left hand in place and
firmly on the deck and raise the right hand to achieve the desired
elevation. However, contact between the right and left hands must be
maintained to stabilize the pistol. See figure 4-25 on page 4-14.
(There is a tradeoff between obtaining the needed elevation and losing
stability, so the Marine must strike a balance between the two.)

[Illustration: Figure 4-25. Increasing Elevation (Minor Adjustments).]


Natural Body Alignment

The body must be properly aligned to the target so the sights fall
naturally on the target when the pistol is presented. It takes a
combination of body alignment and consistent muscular tension to ensure
the sights fall naturally to the same area of the target every time
the pistol is presented. The Marine can execute the following to check
natural body alignment and to ensure the sights center on the aiming area:

    Orient the body to a target and establish a variation of the
    standing position and a two-handed firing grip on the pistol.
    Aim in on the target.

    Close the eyes and take a deep breath.

    Open the eyes and see where the pistol sights are in relation
    to the target. If the pistol sights are right or left of the
    target, move the feet to adjust the position right or left.

        _Note_: Do not force the sights onto the target area
        by moving the arms; this increases the muscular
        tension on one side of the body, disturbs balance,
        and makes recoil harder to manage.

If the sights are significantly out of alignment when the pistol
is at eye level, it may be an indication of a poor grip. When the
grip is correct (to include the muscular tension in the grip, wrist,
and forearms), the sights should align to the point that only minor
adjustments are needed to align the sights to the aiming eye.

Repeat the preceding steps as necessary. Body alignment and muscular
tension are correct when the sights are naturally placed in the same area
on the target every time the Marine aims on the target.




CHAPTER 5

USE OF COVER AND CONCEALMENT


On the battlefield, a firing position that allows maximum observation
of the enemy as well as cover and concealment is a necessity. A good
position provides a solid foundation for the pistol, maximizes the use
of cover to provide protection from enemy fire, allows mobility, and
provides observation of the enemy. Where possible, the cover should be
used to provide additional support for the position.

When contact with the enemy is made, it is important to seek cover as
quickly as possible. Cover is anything that provides protection from
enemy fire. Cover should be, at a minimum, thick enough to stop small
arms fire and high enough to protect the Marine when firing from behind
it. The effective use of cover enables engagement of enemy targets while
affording protection from enemy fire. Cover can also be effectively used
to conceal the Marine from enemy view while searching for targets.

Concealment is anything that hides a Marine from enemy view; however, it
might not afford protection. Concealment can be provided by brush, trees,
etc.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines must reverse
    directions as needed.


Cover Materials

Natural cover (rocks, logs, rubble, etc.) is best because it is hard to
detect. But any material (including buildings, structures, etc.) that may
protect an individual from small arms fire can be used for cover. Some
common types of cover material are as follows.


Dirt

The best type of cover is dirt packed to a minimum thickness of 18 inches.


Cinder Blocks

Cinder blocks used as foundations for houses or walls can be used for
cover, but they can be penetrated. They are also brittle and can shatter
upon impact from small arms fire, which can cause injury by secondary
fragmentation.


Trees, Logs, and Telephone Poles

Wood is a relatively dense material; therefore, it offers good covering
protection since bullets have a tendency to fragment as they penetrate.
Live trees have a greater resistance to bullet penetration than dead
wood. Wood that has been treated with creosote, such as telephone poles
and railroad ties, offers better protection from projectiles than
untreated wood, but it still does not ensure protection from small arms
fire.


Sandbags

Sandbags can be used for cover. However, they should always be packed
tightly and tamped down to increase their density. If loosely filled
or moist, a bullet can more easily penetrate the sandbag. Doubling or
overlapping sandbags also increases their protective qualities.


Considerations for Firing From Cover


Adjusting the Firing Position

Cover can provide additional support for the firing position. The firing
position is adjusted to ensure stability, mobility, and observation of
the enemy.

The Marine chooses a firing position based on his height in relation to
the height of the cover. The firing position must minimize exposure to
the enemy but allow observation of the area.

Although the cover provides additional support, the Marine continues
to apply the same amount of muscular tension in the grip, wrist, and
forearms. Muscular tension is still necessary to stabilize the pistol
sights and manage recovery.

Because the sights are higher than the muzzle of the pistol, the Marine
must ensure that the muzzle of the pistol clears the cover as he obtains
sight alignment/sight picture on the target. The closer the Marine is to
the cover, the easier it is to ensure the muzzle clears the cover.


Applying the Weaver and Isosceles Variations

The type of cover may dictate which variation of a firing position will
be the most effective. The position should provide the Marine with the
maximum amount of stability and control and allow the Marine to manage
recoil effectively in order to recover on target.


_Weaver Variation_

The Weaver variation exposes less of the body from behind cover due to
the angle of the body. The Weaver variation may be better suited for
firing from behind the right or left side of cover. For example, the
Weaver prone is ideal for firing from behind a log.


_Isosceles Variation_

The Isosceles variation is good for firing over the top of cover (e.g., a
window). The Isosceles prone is ideal for firing from behind narrow cover
(e.g., a telephone pole).


Keeping the Body Behind Cover

Avoid inadvertent exposure of any part of the body. Be especially aware
of the top of the head, elbows, knees, or any other body part that may
extend beyond the cover.


_Log or Curb_

When firing from behind a log or curb, the Marine must present the lowest
possible silhouette and may use the log or curb for maximum support of
the position. For maximum protection, muzzle clearance is kept as close
as possible to the top of the log or curb. The Marine may fire from
either the side or the top of the log, depending on cover and concealment
(see fig. 5-1). The Marine fires over the top of a curb when it is used
for cover.

[Illustration: Figure 5-1. Firing Around a Log.]


_Wall or Barricade_

Firing is done from either the side or over the top of a wall or
barricade. See figure 5-2.

[Illustration: Figure 5-2. Firing From a Barricade.]


_Window_

If the Marine has not been detected by the enemy, he should use the side
of the window or the window sill for support. Ideally, it is best to fire
from the corner of the window sill when using the window for support.
If there is little chance for detection or the shot can be made without
support, the Marine should remain back and to the side of the window
opening so the pistol does not protrude and his body is concealed by the
shadows/darkness of the room. If the Marine is positioned too close to
the window, his body provides a silhouette to the enemy.


_Vehicle_

In many combat situations, particularly in urban environments, a vehicle
may be the best form of cover. When using a vehicle for cover, the engine
block provides the most protection from small arms fire. The Marine
establishes a position behind the front wheel or front door jamb so the
engine block is between him and the target. See figure 5-3.

From this position, the Marine fires over the hood of the car or
underneath the car from behind the wheel. At the back of the car the axle
and the wheel provide the only cover. If the Marine must shoot from the
back of the car, he must position himself directly behind the wheel as
much as possible. See figure 5-4.

[Illustration: Figure 5-3. Firing Over the Hood of a Vehicle.]

[Illustration: Figure 5-4. Firing From the Back of a Vehicle.]


Providing Support for the Position and the Pistol

Support helps stabilize both the firing position and the pistol and
enable the Marine to maintain sight alignment and sight picture.

The forearms or hands can contact the support to stabilize the pistol.
The Marine may rest the pistol on or against the support as long as the
support does not interfere or affect the pistol’s cycle of operation. See
figure 5-5.

[Illustration: Figure 5-5. Hand Resting on Support.]

When firing over the top of cover, the Marine can establish a supported
position and stabilize the position by resting the trigger guard or the
magazine on the cover. The pistol may be pushed up against the support so
the “V” formed by the receiver and the front of the trigger guard rests
firmly against the support. See figure 5-6.

[Illustration: Figure 5-6. Trigger Guard Resting Against Support.]

When firing around the sides of cover, the Marine can establish support
and stabilize the position by placing the back of the hand or arm against
the cover. Avoid placing the slide of the pistol against the cover
because it can interfere with the pistol’s cycle of operation. However,
the pistol can be canted and placed against the cover so the trigger
guard or the “V” formed between the receiver and trigger guard rests
against the support. This position enables the Marine to expose less of
himself to the enemy. See figure 5-7.

[Illustration: Figure 5-7. Hand Resting Against Side of Support.]

When using a vehicle for cover, the Marine can establish additional
support for the pistol by positioning himself in the car behind the door
jamb (frame of door) and placing his hands or pistol against the “V”
formed by the open door and door frame. See figure 5-8.

[Illustration: Figure 5-8. Firing From Behind the Door Jamb of a Vehicle.]

When shooting from the left side of cover, the Marine still uses his
right hand and eye. See figure 5-9. He may have to cant his head and
the pistol to the left to establish sight alignment. For right-handed
Marines, shooting from the left side of cover may expose more of the
Marine to the enemy than shooting from the right side.

[Illustration: Figure 5-9. Firing From the Left Side of Cover.]


Changing Positions

If the Marine has been firing from cover and has to reload or clear a
stoppage behind cover he should attempt to resume firing from a different
position. The enemy is aware of the Marine’s current position and will be
ready to engage him once he re-appears.


Moving

In combat, the Marine must be constantly aware of his surroundings and
the available cover should enemy contact occur during movement from one
position to another.

When moving from cover to cover, the Marine selects the next cover
location and plans the route of movement before leaving his present
position. This is done by quickly looking from behind cover to ensure the
area is clear, ensuring the head and eyes are exposed for as short a time
as possible. If necessary, the Marine should conduct a Condition 1 reload
before moving from cover. Once the Marine is committed to moving, he must
focus on the move until cover is reassumed.


Supported Firing Positions

During combat, the Marine may not have the time to assume a perfect
firing position. He must know instinctively that his position is correct
rather than follow a regimented sequence of movements to ensure its
correctness. With training, the Marine can assume stable firing positions
quickly and instinctively by incorporating the use of cover for support.
Support provides foundations for the firing position; which, in turn,
provides support for the pistol. To maximize the support provided by the
position, the firing position should be adjusted to fit or conform to the
shape of the cover.

A supported firing position minimizes exposure to the enemy, maximizes
the stability of the pistol and protection from fire, and provides
observation of the enemy. Any stable support may be used (e.g., logs,
sandbags, walls). The surrounding environment dictates the support and
position.

The size, distance to the target, and time affect the need for stability
and recovery in the selection of a supported firing position. For
example, if the target is a great distance from the Marine, he may
sacrifice some of his ability to manage recoil in order to assume a
supported firing position that provides him the additional stability
needed to fire accurately at long range. But, recovery may be more
important for the Marine if he must fire multiple shots on target
quickly; therefore, he may sacrifice some stability in his supported
firing position in order to engage a target with multiple shots.


Supported Prone

The supported prone position presents the lowest silhouette and provides
maximum protection from enemy fire. The supported prone position can be
assumed behind a tree, a wall, or almost any type and size of cover. It
is flexible and allows firing of the pistol from all sides. To assume the
supported prone position and maximize the use of cover, the position is
kept as low as possible to ensure no part of the body is exposed to the
enemy. If the cover is narrow, the Marine positions his body directly
behind cover and keeps his legs together. The Marine’s body is in line
with the pistol and directly behind the pistol. The Isosceles prone
position presents a smaller target to the enemy and more body mass to
absorb recoil. The Weaver prone position is ideally suited to fire from
around cover (e.g., log) because of the angle of the body, but this
position presents a larger target to the enemy. See figure 5-10.

[Illustration: Figure 5-10. Weaver Prone.]


Supported Kneeling

If the prone position cannot be used because of the height of the
support, the Marine may use the supported kneeling position. The kneeling
position allows firing of the pistol from all sides. This position may be
altered to maximize the use of cover or support by assuming a variation
of the kneeling position (high, medium, low, or two-knee). The kneeling
position provides more mobility than the prone position. See figure 5-11.

    =Caution=

    The Marine must not indicate to the enemy his position with his
    exposed knee. If the Marine changes knees while exposed to the
    enemy, he has indicated the direction of his next shot to the
    enemy.

[Illustration: Figure 5-11. Supported Kneeling.]


Supported Standing

When use of the support is maximized, the supported standing position can
be as stable as the supported kneeling or prone position. The supported
standing position provides greater mobility than the other positions
and usually provides greater observation of the enemy. In the standing
position, the Marine must not allow the placement of his foot to indicate
to the enemy his position behind cover. See figure 5-12.

[Illustration: Figure 5-12. Supported Standing.]


Locate and Engage Targets From Behind Cover

To locate targets when behind cover or to ensure the area is clear before
moving, the Marine must expose himself to the enemy. There are two
techniques used to locate and engage targets from behind cover: the pie
and the rollout. These techniques minimize the Marine’s exposure to enemy
fire while placing him in a position to engage targets or to move to
another location if necessary. Both techniques are used in the kneeling
and standing positions.


Pie Technique

The Weaver position is the most effective position when executing the pie
technique because the position of the Marine’s body minimizes exposure to
the enemy. See figure 5-13.

To perform the pie technique—

    Stay behind cover while moving back and away from the leading
    edge of the cover. The surroundings and situation dictate
    the distance the Marine moves back and away from the cover.
    Generally, the further back the Marine is from cover, the
    greater his area of observation; staying too close to cover
    decreases the area of observation.

    Assume a firing position and lower the pistol sights enough to
    have a clear field of view, aiming in on the leading edge of
    the cover.

    Take small side steps and slowly move out from behind cover,
    covering the field of view with the aiming eye and muzzle of
    the pistol. Wherever the eyes move, the muzzle should move
    (eyes, muzzle, target).

    Continue moving out from cover until a target is identified or
    the area is found to be clear. If a target is identified, sweep
    the safety off, place the finger on the trigger, and engage the
    target.

[Illustration: Figure 5-13. Pie Technique.]

    _Note_: If a target is identified before moving out from cover,
    the pistol should be thumbcocked and off safe before moving out.


Rollout Technique

In this technique, the Isosceles position is the most effective position
when executing the rollout technique because the position of the body
allows the Marine to better maintain his balance. See figure 5-14. To
perform the rollout technique—

    Stay behind cover, move back, and position the body so it is in
    line with the leading edge of the cover, ensuring that no part
    of the body extends beyond cover.

    Assume firing position and come to the Ready, ensuring the
    muzzle is just behind cover.

    Cant the head and pistol slightly and roll the upper body out
    to the side enough to obtain a clear field of view. Keep the
    feet in place and push up on the ball of one foot to facilitate
    rolling out.

    Continue to roll out from cover until a target is identified or
    the area is found to be clear. If a target is identified, sweep
    the safety off, place the finger on the trigger, and engage the
    target.

[Illustration: Figure 5-14. Rollout Technique.]

    _Note_: If a target is identified before moving out from cover,
    the pistol should be thumbcocked and off safe before moving out.


Combining the Pie and Rollout Techniques

In some situations, it may be necessary to utilize both the pie and
rollout technique in order to search an entire area for targets (i.e.,
corner of a building, doorway). Changing from one technique to another
may allow the Marine to minimize his exposure to the enemy and reduce the
time he is exposed to enemy fire.




CHAPTER 6

PRESENTATION OF THE M9 SERVICE PISTOL


In combat, targets present themselves with little or no warning. The
Marine must have the ability to react quickly and to effectively and
efficiently present the pistol, whether the pistol is in the holster or
at a carry. To successfully engage a combat target with the M9 service
pistol, the Marine must master pistol presentation from the carries and
transport, pistol presentation while assuming a firing position, and
search and assess techniques.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


Sight Alignment/Sight Picture

Pistol presentation drills and dry fire help the Marine achieve a
consistent grip and rapid presentation and aid in quickly acquiring sight
alignment and sight picture. The Marine always executes the following
steps:

    Identify the target and quickly present the pistol to the
    target while simultaneously sweeping the safety with the thumb
    of the right hand. (Disengaging the safety with the right thumb
    ensures the trigger is not pulled before taking the pistol off
    safe.)

    Shift the focus from the target to the front sight to obtain
    sight alignment while presenting the pistol. As the front sight
    breaks the plane of vision, acquire the front sight and begin
    to apply trigger control as sight picture is acquired.

    Apply trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Presentation From the Carries and Holsters


Presentation From the Ready

To present the pistol from the Ready, the Marine performs the following
steps in sequence. When a target appears—

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the right hand, place the
    trigger finger on the trigger, and raise the arms to bring the
    pistol to the target.

        _Note_: If the Marine wishes to thumbcock the pistol
        for a single action shot, the pistol is thumbcocked
        with the left thumb after the safety is swept with
        the right thumb. The grip of the left hand may have
        to be broken to thumbcock the pistol; re-establish
        the grip after thumbcocking.

    Acquire sight alignment and sight picture within the aiming
    area and apply trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Presentation From the Alert

To present the pistol from the Alert, the Marine performs the following
steps in sequence. When a target appears—

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the right hand, place the
    trigger finger on the trigger, and bring the pistol to the
    target:

        If the arms are straight, raise the arms to a
        45-degree angle with the deck.

        If the arms are bent, straighten the arms out toward
        the target.

        _Note_: If the Marine wishes to thumbcock the pistol
        for a single action shot, the pistol is thumbcocked
        with the left thumb after the safety is swept with
        the right thumb. The grip of the left hand may have
        to be broken to thumbcock the pistol; re-establish
        the grip after thumbcocking.

    Acquire sight alignment and sight picture within the aiming
    area and apply trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Presentation From a Holster Transport

The pistol is presented from the holster in one continuous, fluid motion.


_M12 Holster_

To present the pistol from the M12 holster transport, perform the
following steps in sequence once the target appears:

    Place the heel of the left hand at the center of the torso
    with the fingers extended toward the target. (The placement of
    the left hand allows a two-handed grip to be established in a
    minimum amount of movement.) At the same time, unfasten and
    release the D-ring with the right hand.

    Use the right hand to place the thumb on the forward edge
    of the holster and the fingers around the back edge of the
    holster, keeping the trigger finger straight.

    Slide the hand up the holster until the fingers come in contact
    with the pistol grip. At the same time, keep the thumb above
    the pistol to guide the holster flap up.

    Grasp the pistol grip with the fingers and draw the pistol
    straight up. Continue withdrawing the pistol while moving the
    thumb to a position on the safety.

        _Note_: Hand placement should allow the firing grip
        to be established once the thumb disengages the
        safety. Any adjustments made to the firing grip after
        the safety has been disengaged should be minor.

    Once the muzzle clears the holster, rotate the muzzle forward
    while sweeping the safety.

    Establish a two-handed grip on the pistol by joining the left
    hand with the right hand in front of the torso. At the same
    time, start to straighten the pistol out toward the target. See
    figure 6-1.

    Continue moving the pistol toward the target and, at the same
    time, place the trigger finger on the trigger, acquire sight
    alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and apply
    trigger pressure until the shot is fired. See figure 6-2.

[Illustration: Figure 6-1. Presentation From the M12 Holster—Step 1.]

[Illustration: Figure 6-2. Presentation From the M12 Holster—Step 2.]

When time permits to thumbcock the pistol for a single action shot (e.g.,
a long-range engagement), the Marine presents the pistol from the holster
by performing the following steps once the target appears:

    Withdraw the pistol from the holster.

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the right hand.

    Join the left and right hands and thumbcock the pistol with the
    left thumb.

    Establish a two-handed grip on the pistol.

    Straighten the pistol out toward the target and, at the same
    time, place the trigger finger on the trigger, acquire sight
    alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and apply
    trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


_M7 Shoulder Holster_

The M9 service pistol fits very snugly in the M7 shoulder holster because
the holster was originally designed for the M1911A1 .45-caliber pistol,
which has a more slim, round design, particularly around the trigger
guard. A firm grip is required when holstering and withdrawing the M9
service pistol from the M7 shoulder holster. To present the pistol from
the M7 shoulder holster, perform the following steps:

    Unsnap the thumb snap closure with the left hand.

    Wrap the fingers of the right hand around the pistol grip and
    rest the thumb on top of the inside of the holster. See figure
    6-3.

    Grasp the pistol grip firmly and draw the pistol up and away
    from the holster while rotating the thumb in a position to
    operate the safety.

    Continue withdrawing the pistol until the muzzle clears the
    holster and rotate the muzzle toward the target. See figure 6-4.

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the right hand while
    starting to punch the pistol out toward the target.

    Establish a two-handed grip on the pistol by joining the right
    hand with the left hand in the center of the torso. See figure
    6-5.

    Continue punching the pistol out and, at the same time, place
    the trigger finger on the trigger, establish sight alignment
    and sight picture within the aiming area, and continue trigger
    pressure until the shot is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 6-3. Presentation From the M7 Shoulder Holster—Step
1.]

[Illustration: Figure 6-4. Presentation From the M7 Shoulder Holster—Step
2.]

[Illustration: Figure 6-5. Presentation From the M7 Shoulder Holster—Step
3.]


_Assault Holster_

To present the pistol from the assault holster, perform the following in
one, continuous motion:

    Bring the heel of the hand down on the hammer of the pistol so
    that it disengages the thumb break. See figure 6-6.

    Sweep the hand forward in a small circular motion, slide the
    hand up the holster, and bring the fingers up under the pistol
    grip.

        _Note_: Depending on the type of retention strap,
        this circular motion releases the retention strap or
        pushes the retention strap forward and out of the way.

    Grasp the pistol grip and draw the pistol straight up and out
    of the holster while establishing a firing grip and positioning
    the thumb on the safety to operate it. See figure 6-7.

[Illustration: Figure 6-6. Presentation From the Assault Holster—Step 1.]

[Illustration: Figure 6-7. Presentation From the Assault Holster—Step 2.]


_Concealed Pistol Holster_

Depending on the clothing worn by the Marine, there are two methods for
accessing the concealed pistol holster so that the clothing does not
become an obstruction while presenting the pistol. To present the pistol
from the concealed pistol holster, the following steps are performed in
one, continuous motion when the target appears:

    If the Marine is wearing a short jacket/sweater (waist-level)
    that is buttoned or zipped—

        Move the left hand across the body and grasp the
        jacket or sweater just above the holster, at the same
        time place the right hand on the holster below the
        jacket or sweater. See figure 6-8 on page 6-6.

        Pull up on the jacket or sweater with the left hand.
        At the same time, slide the right hand up the holster
        until the fingers come in contact with the pistol
        grip. Keep the thumb above the pistol to ensure the
        jacket or sweater clears the pistol. See figure 6-9
        on page 6-6.

            _Note_: Leaning slightly forward at the
            waist may assist in clearing the jacket or
            sweater from the pistol and in removing the
            pistol from the holster.

    [Illustration: Figure 6-8. Presentation From the Concealed
    Pistol Holster—Step 1.]

    [Illustration: Figure 6-9. Presentation From the Concealed
    Pistol Holster—Step 2.]

    If the Marine is wearing a long jacket (below waist-level), or
    a short jacket or sweater that is unfastened—

        Place the heel of the left hand at the center of the
        torso to hold the left side of the jacket down with
        the fingers extended. At the same time, place the
        right hand on the right side of the jacket, with the
        thumb underneath the right side of the jacket below
        the left hand. See figure 6-10 on page 6-7.

        Keep thumb of the right hand against the body and
        throw the jacket back and away from the holster. See
        figure 6-11 on page 6-7.

            _Note_: Keeping a weighted object (e.g.,
            keys, extra magazine) in the right-hand
            pocket of the jacket assists in throwing
            the jacket back and away from the holster.

        Place the right hand on the holster and slide the
        hand up the holster until the fingers come in contact
        with the pistol grip.

    Grasp the pistol grip with the fingers and draw the pistol
    straight up. Continue withdrawing the pistol while moving the
    thumb to a position on the safety.

        _Note_: Hand placement should allow the firing grip
        to be established once the thumb disengages the
        safety. Any adjustments made to the firing grip after
        the safety is disengaged should be minor.

    Rotate the muzzle forward, once it clears the holster, while
    sweeping the safety.

    Establish a two-handed grip on the pistol by joining the left
    hand with the right hand in front of the torso. At the same
    time, start to punch the pistol out toward the target.

    Continue punching the pistol out and, at the same time, place
    the trigger finger on the trigger, acquire sight alignment
    and sight picture within the aiming area, and apply trigger
    pressure until the shot is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 6-10. Presentation From the Concealed Pistol
Holster with the Long Jacket—Step 1.]

[Illustration: Figure 6-11. Presentation From the Concealed Pistol
Holster with the Long Jacket—Step 2.]


Presentation While Assuming the Kneeling Position

In combat, the Marine must be able to quickly assume the kneeling
position while presenting the pistol to the target. This usually takes
advantage of cover and provides a more stable base for shooting. The
following procedures are based on the Isosceles and Weaver variations of
the standing to the kneeling shooting positions.


From the Ready

The Marine drops to the kneeling position while raising the arms to bring
the pistol up to the target.

    _Note_: The Weaver variation maintains the body’s position in a
    40 to 60 degree oblique to the target.

At the same time, the Marine sweeps the safety with the thumb of the
right hand, places the trigger finger on the trigger, acquires sight
alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and applies trigger
pressure until the shot is fired.


From the Alert (Arms Straight)

The Marine drops to the kneeling position while raising the arms to bring
the pistol up to the target.

    _Note_: The Weaver variation maintains the body’s position in a
    40 to 60 degree oblique to the target.

At the same time, the Marine sweeps the safety with the thumb of the
right hand, places the trigger finger on the trigger, acquires sight
alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and applies trigger
pressure until the shot is fired.


From the Alert (Close Quarters, Elbows Bent)

The Marine drops to the kneeling position while pushing the arms out
toward the target.

    _Note_: The Weaver variation maintains the body’s position in a
    40 to 60 degree oblique to the target.

At the same time, the Marine sweeps the safety with the thumb of the
right hand, places the trigger finger on the trigger, acquires sight
alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and applies trigger
pressure until the shot is fired.


From the Holster Transport

The Marine withdraws the pistol from the holster while dropping to the
kneeling position. The pistol should be rotated to the target by the time
the knee hits the deck. The Marine sweeps the safety with the thumb of
the right hand, establishes a two-handed firing grip and—

    In the Weaver variation, raises the arms to bring the pistol up
    toward the target.

    In the Isosceles variation, pushes the pistol out toward the
    target.

At the same time, the Marine places the trigger finger on the trigger,
acquires sight alignment and sight picture within the aiming area, and
applies trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Presentation While Assuming the Prone Position

The prone position is generally assumed to take advantage of cover or to
provide additional stability for shooting. The following procedures are
executed from the standing holster transports.


Isosceles Prone

The Marine withdraws the pistol from holster. At the same time, the
Marine eliminates body contact with the deck by either the squat method
or the drop method. The pistol is rotated to the target as the left hand
is placed on the deck. The Marine sweeps the safety off.

    _Note_: If the Marine wishes to thumbcock the pistol for a
    single action shot, it is done once the Marine is on the deck.

The Marine establishes a two-handed firing grip while spreading the legs
a comfortable distance apart for stability. He places the trigger finger
on the trigger, acquires sight alignment and sight picture within the
aiming area, and applies trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Weaver Prone

The Marine withdraws the pistol from the holster. At the same time, the
Marine eliminates body contact with the deck by either the squat method
or the drop method. The Marine maintains the 40 to 60 degree oblique to
the target. The pistol should be rotated to the target as the left hand
is placed on the deck. The Marine sweeps the safety off.

    _Note_: If the Marine wishes to thumbcock the pistol for a
    single action shot, it is done once the Marine is on the deck.

The Marine brings the left knee up, establishes a two-handed firing
grip, and places the left elbow on the deck for stability. He places the
trigger finger on the trigger, acquires sight alignment and sight picture
within the aiming area, and applies trigger pressure until the shot is
fired.


Search and Assess

To be successful in combat, the Marine must have the ability to assess
the situation and take appropriate action following engagement. Once the
Marine fires one or two rounds to engage a target, he must quickly assess
the situation and the effectiveness of his engagement. This split-second
assessment allows the Marine to determine the best course of action and
prevents him from expending a number of rounds without assessing the
results and his ability to accurately engage the target.

To search and assess, perform the following steps in sequence:

    Place the trigger finger straight along the receiver
    immediately after a target is engaged. Do not place the pistol
    on safe.

    Lower the arms just enough to look over the pistol sights and
    provide a clear field of view. Do not rotate the wrists in
    order to angle the pistol downward, this breaks the firing
    grip and changes the tension in the arms. Lowering the arms
    maintains the firing grip, keeps the sights level, and allows
    sight alignment and sight picture to be quickly re-established
    should follow-on shots need to be fired.

    Search the area by moving the head, eyes, and pistol left and
    right (approximately 45 degrees from center). Wherever the head
    moves, the muzzle moves (eyes, muzzle, target). Keeping both
    eyes open increases the field of view.

If the target has not been eliminated, the Marine must determine whether
to re-engage the target:

    If the Marine decides to re-engage the target, the target’s
    size, time and distance to the target, and Marine’s
    capabilities dictate the technique used. Re-engagement
    techniques include re-engaging the target with a well-aimed
    precision shot, two shots, or offset aiming.

    If the target’s distance exceeds the Marine’s engagement
    capabilities or if the target is partially exposed and too
    small for the Marine to accurately engage, the Marine should
    not attempt to re-engage the target. The Marine may seek cover,
    seek out a better opportunity for engagement, or use support to
    better stabilize the pistol.

When it is determined that the area is clear of all enemy threat, place
the pistol on safe without breaking the grip and assume a pistol carry or
pistol transport.




CHAPTER 7

PISTOL ENGAGEMENT TECHNIQUES


The Marine must be able to quickly detect targets and employ the proper
pistol engagement and firing techniques. The Marine must also be able to
re-engage a target if the initial engagement is not successful.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


Target Detection

Target indicators reveal an enemy’s position. Most combat targets are
detected by smoke, flash, dust, noise, or movement and are usually only
momentarily visible. Target indicators are grouped into three general
areas: movement, sound, and improper camouflage.


Movement

The Marine does not need to look directly at an object to notice
movement. The eye is attracted to any movement, especially sudden
movement. A slowly moving target is harder to detect than one with quick,
jerky movements. Therefore, the ability to locate a moving target depends
primarily on the speed of the object’s movement.


Sound

Sound (e.g., movement, rattling equipment, talking) can be used to detect
an enemy position. Sound provides only a general location, making it
difficult to pinpoint a target by sound alone. However, sound can alert
the Marine to the presence of a target and increases the probability of
locating the target through other indicators.


Improper Camouflage

The improper use of camouflage creates three target indicators: shine,
outline, and contrast with the background. The closeness of a typical
pistol engagement somewhat diminishes these effects, but can still affect
target detection. The Marine’s ability to recognize target indicators
aids in the detection of targets.


_Shine_

Shine is created from reflective objects such as metal, glass, pools of
water, and the skin’s natural oils. Shine acts as a beacon in locating a
target’s position.


_Outline_

The outline of camouflaged objects such as the body, head and shoulders,
weapons, and gear can be recognizable.


_Contrast With the Background_

Objects contrast with a background because of differences in color,
surface, and shape. The following are examples of objects contrasting
with their background:

    A target wearing a dark uniform would be clearly visible in an
    area of snow or sand.

    Symmetrical shapes, such as helmets or rifle barrels, can be
    detected in a wooded area.

    Fresh soil around a fighting hole contrasts with the otherwise
    unbroken ground surface.

While observing an area, the Marine notes anything that looks out of
place or unusual and studies it in more detail in order to increase the
chances of spotting a hidden threat.


Techniques of Fire

To successfully engage a combat target with the M9 service pistol, the
Marine must employ effective techniques of fire. The Marine’s performance
of these skills and the proper application of the fundamentals of
marksmanship are critical to success in a combat situation.


Double and Single Action Firing

When the M9 service pistol is taken off safe, it is capable of firing in
both a double and a single action mode.


_Double Action Mode_

The design of the M9 service pistol causes the first shot fired to be a
double action shot.

In double action firing, two actions occur as the trigger is moved to
the rear; the hammer moves to the rear, cocking the pistol, and then the
hammer moves forward, firing the pistol. More pressure is required on
the trigger to fire a double action shot due to the distance between the
trigger and hammer and the weight of the trigger. A double action shot
requires approximately 9 to 16 pounds of pressure to move the trigger
rearward.

Maintaining sight alignment and sight picture are harder when firing a
double action shot. Therefore, the sights will more than likely move
outside the aiming area when applying trigger pressure.


_Single Action Mode_

In single action firing, the pistol is already cocked because the cycle
of operation in the first double action shot leaves the hammer cocked to
the rear. Therefore, the only action taking place as the trigger is moved
to the rear is the hammer moving forward, firing the pistol. A single
action shot requires approximately 4 to 6 pounds of pressure to move the
trigger rearward. Therefore, the application of trigger control is easier
when firing a single action shot.

To enable the first shot to be fired single action, the pistol’s hammer
can be manually cocked with the thumb:

        _Note_: The pistol must be taken off safe before it
        can be thumbcocked.

    Use the left thumb to pull back on the hammer to cock it. This
    ensures that the firing grip of the right hand does not have to
    be broken.

    Ensure that the hammer moves all the way to the rear.

    Ensure the trigger finger remains straight along the receiver
    until the pistol is fully cocked.

    Re-establish the firing grip with both hands once the pistol is
    cocked.


Single Action or Double Action Firing Factors

The decision to fire in a single or double action mode is made rapidly.
Ultimately, the decision is based on the Marine’s abilities, but the
decision is also based on time and accuracy. The pistol is fired in the
double action mode when trigger control, sight picture, and stability of
hold are not as critical for accuracy (i.e., close range, large targets).
The pistol is fired in the single action mode when the fundamentals are
more critical to accuracy (i.e., long range, small targets).


_Time_

The Marine sacrifices time to fire a single action, precision shot; but
what he sacrifices in time, he gains in accuracy.

For quick engagements at close range, there may not be time to thumbcock
the pistol for a single action shot. Therefore, firing the first shot in
the double action mode is preferred because shots are needed on target
quickly and stability of hold and sight picture are not as critical to
accuracy.

When time permits and for targets at longer ranges, the pistol may be
thumbcocked to place it in the single action mode to reduce the weight of
the trigger and the distance the trigger must travel rearward to fire the
first shot.


_Distance and Size of the Target_

The smaller the target, the more critical the application of the
fundamentals in order to engage the target accurately. To accurately
engage a small target (e.g., head shot, long-range target) it is better
to thumbcock the pistol for a single action shot. Engagement of a smaller
target requires additional precision because sight alignment and sight
picture are more critical to accuracy.


Two-Shot Technique

During combat, the preferred pistol engagement technique is to rapidly
fire more than one shot on a target to eliminate it as a threat. Two
shots fired in rapid succession increase the trauma (i.e., shock,
blood loss) on the target and increase the Marine’s chances of quickly
eliminating the threat. Therefore, two shots are most often fired in
rapid succession on a target at close range.

After the pistol is fired, the muzzle climbs with the recoil of the
pistol. To fire two shots, the Marine must quickly recover the sights to
the same area on the target while re-acquiring sight alignment and sight
picture. The proper recovery automatically brings the sights back on
target following recoil. A quick recovery allows more time for the Marine
to align the sights and apply trigger control to fire the next shot.
Recovery begins immediately after the application of the fundamentals to
bring the pistol sights into alignment with the target in preparation for
firing the next shot.

The amount the muzzle climbs during recoil depends on the amount of
controlled muscular tension in the grip and wrists used to stabilize
the pistol and create consistency in resistance to recoil. Controlled
muscular tension allows the pistol sights to recover consistently back on
target within a minimum amount of time. The speed of delivery of multiple
shots depends on how fast the Marine can re-acquire sight alignment.
Sight recovery is determined by the following:

    The key to proper recovery is a stable firing position and
    proper grip.

    If the Marine’s firing position is not stable, recoil forces
    him out of his firing position, requiring him to re-establish
    his position before he takes his next shot.

    An improper grip or lack of controlled muscular tension causes
    the pistol to move in the Marine’s hand after the shot is
    fired, disrupting sight alignment and requiring the Marine to
    re-establish his grip.


Slow Fire Technique

Sight alignment becomes more critical the smaller the target and the
greater the distance to the target. In these situations, the Marine does
not engage the target with two rapidly fired shots because he has to slow
down his application of the fundamentals in order to fire a precision
shot(s). To engage small targets (i.e., partially exposed) and targets
at longer ranges where precision is required, the Marine must employ the
following slow fire technique:

    Thumbcock the pistol for a single action shot.

    Slow down application of the fundamentals.

    Fire one well-aimed, precision shot on target.


Re-engagement Techniques

Once the Marine has quickly assessed the situation and determined that
the threat still exists, he may make the decision to re-engage the target
to eliminate it as a threat. Re-engagement techniques include engaging
the target with a precision shot through slow fire, two shots, or offset
aiming. The time, size, and distance to the target as well as the
Marine’s marksmanship abilities dictate the technique used to re-engage
the target.


Slow Fire Technique

If the Marine has engaged a target and the target still poses a threat,
the Marine may choose to slow down his application of the fundamentals
and fire a slow fire, precision shot. The placement of one well-aimed,
precision shot on a designated area of the target increases the chances
of eliminating the target as a threat. However, the time the Marine has
to engage the target determines if he can slow down his application of
the fundamentals to fire a precision shot. Firing a precision shot takes
time, so the Marine will sacrifice time for accuracy.

The key to successful shot placement is the Marine’s ability to slow
down his performance and focus on the application of the fundamentals of
marksmanship. The Marine must determine where to place shot for maximum
effectiveness. In order to make this decision, the Marine must consider
distance and size of the target and time. For targets at close range and
within the Marine’s marksmanship abilities, a precision shot is placed in
the head to immediately eliminate the target as a threat. Sometimes, even
at close ranges, the target may only be partially exposed; therefore,
the Marine is presented with a small target and aims his sights on the
portion of the target that is exposed. For targets at long ranges, the
target is smaller and requires a precision shot. A precision shot may be
placed in the body to add trauma to the target and increase the chances
of eliminating the target as a threat.


Two-Shot Technique

If a target is accurately engaged, but does not go down, the Marine may
re-engage the target with additional shots. Two additional, rapidly
delivered shots increases the trauma and increases the Marine’s chances
of eliminating the threat.

The size and distance to the target affect how quickly two shots can be
delivered on the target. The speed at which two shots are fired also
depends on the Marine’s marksmanship abilities and how fast he can
re-acquire his front sight. However, the Marine must not compromise
accuracy for speed; the key to successful target engagement is to fire
only as quickly as the Marine can fire effectively.


Offset Aiming

When the Marine assesses the situation and determines his shots are not
successful and not striking the target in the designated aiming area, he
may employ offset aiming. Since the pistol’s sights cannot be adjusted,
offset aiming is applied to adjust the aiming area and to cause rounds
to strike center mass. This technique should only be applied when the
Marine determines that he is applying the fundamentals of marksmanship
correctly. Sight picture will change as the aiming area is adjusted.

The known strike of the round offset aiming technique requires shifting
the point of aim to compensate for rounds striking off target center.
To effectively engage a target using this technique, the Marine must be
able to see where the rounds are striking and then aim an equal distance
from the center of the aiming area opposite the observed strike of the
round. For example, if the rounds are striking the target high and left
of center mass, aim an equal and opposite distance low and right.


Multiple Targets

If engaging more than one target at a time, the Marine adheres to the
fundamentals of marksmanship and employs the techniques of multiple
target engagement. The introduction of multiple targets in a combat
scenario requires additional skills that must be learned and practiced if
a Marine is to be successful. To be effective in combat, the Marine must
be able to detect targets through identification of target indicators
(identified on page 7-1), prioritize the targets, and employ multiple
target engagement techniques.


Combat Mindset

Successful engagement of multiple targets requires a somewhat different
mindset from single target engagement. For example, following engagement
of a single target, the Marine assesses the situation. During
multiple target engagements, after the first target is engaged, he
must immediately engage the next target and continue until all targets
have been eliminated. Because split-second decisions must be made,
the development of a combat mindset is important to success on the
battlefield. A combat mindset allows the Marine to control the pace of
the battle rather than react to the threat.

Mental preparedness is essential to successful engagement of multiple
targets, and the required mindset must be developed until it becomes
second nature to the Marine. When multiple targets appear, the Marine
must prioritize the targets to establish an engagement sequence. To
prioritize targets and establish an engagement sequence, the Marine must
be aware of the surroundings, not focus on one target, and continuously
search the terrain for additional targets.


Prioritizing Targets

Once multiple targets have been identified, they must be prioritized
in terms of the threat each target presents. While the fundamentals of
marksmanship must still be applied, prioritizing targets and planning the
engagement are just as essential to successful multiple target engagement.

Target priority is based on factors such as proximity, threat, and
opportunity. It also encompasses the Marine’s proficiency level since a
Marine should not attempt to engage a target beyond his proficiency level
or the pistol’s capability (e.g., a target 100 yards away). The principal
method of prioritizing targets is to determine the level of threat for
each target so that all targets may be engaged in succession, starting
with the most threatening and ending with the least threatening.

Prioritizing targets is an ongoing process. As the engagement proceeds,
new targets may appear or previously identified targets may take cover,
delaying their engagement. Therefore, the Marine must remain constantly
alert to changes in target threat, proximity, and the opportunity for
engagement and revise target priorities accordingly.


Engaging Multiple Targets

Once targets have been prioritized, the Marine must quickly eliminate
them. It is crucial to understand and practice the physical techniques
for engaging multiple targets until they become second nature. When
these techniques occur as automatic responses, the Marine maintains an
awareness of the complete battlefield and is able to concentrate on the
mental aspects of multiple target engagement.


_Engagement Methods_

The fundamentals of marksmanship are critical to the development of
skills to support multiple target engagement. While responsiveness is
important when engaging multiple targets, the Marine’s primary concern
is to place accurate rounds on target. A balance must be struck between
placing shots quickly on targets at close range and slowing down to place
precision shots on targets at long range because all targets pose a
threat and must be accurately engaged. To engage multiple targets—

    Engage every target, move from target to target.

    After all of the targets have been initially engaged, assess
    the effectiveness of the engagements and, if necessary,
    re-engage targets that still pose a threat.

    If all of the targets are eliminated, search the area for new
    targets.


_Considerations for Field Firing Positions_

The selection and use of field firing positions are critical to
engagement of multiple targets. As in any firing situation, if the
situation permits, the Marine should make a quick mental review of the
terrain to select a firing position that provides stability, mobility,
and observation of the enemy. The firing position should also provide
flexibility for engaging multiple targets. The more dispersed the
multiple targets, the greater the lateral movement the position must
afford to engage them.

The prone position provides the maximum stability for firing well-placed
shots, but engaging multiple targets from this position may require
adjustment in the position from shot to shot depending on the distance
between the targets and their location. Because the arms are fully
extended on the ground, the prone position can be restrictive, increasing
the time it will take to recover the sights onto subsequent targets.
If the Marine must make an adjustment in the prone position to engage
multiple targets, he must ensure that he maintains proper arm placement.
Improper arm placement may affect his stability of hold and his ability
to acquire sight picture. The following identifies position adjustments:

    For targets that are not widely dispersed, the Marine adjusts
    the position of the lower part of the body to orient the upper
    body toward the target without disturbing the placement of the
    arms. This allows the Marine to maintain stability of hold and
    quickly recover on subsequent targets. Moving the legs to the
    left orients the upper body to the right; moving the legs to
    the right orients the upper body to the left.

    For targets that are widely dispersed, the Marine may need to
    adjust his entire position to orient his body in the direction
    of subsequent targets. Using the left hand, push the upper body
    off the deck just high enough to move the body in the direction
    of the target. Extend the right arm toward the target and keep
    the muzzle pointed in the direction of the target.

The kneeling and standing positions provide an increased field of view
and allow maximum lateral adjustment to engage dispersed targets. The
type of adjustment the Marine must make in the kneeling or standing
position in order to orient his body in the direction of each target is
related to the distance between the targets. It is also related to the
Marine’s ability to maintain stability of hold and recover from recoil.
Once the first target is engaged—

    Maintain a proper shooting position, rotate the body in the
    direction of the target, keeping the feet in place. In the
    standing position, the Marine may bend slightly at the knees
    while rotating the body. This allows the Marine to distribute
    his weight forward to provide additional stability to the
    position and to better control the effects of recoil.

    Adjust the entire position by either adjusting the placement of
    the feet or knee(s) in order to face in the direction of the
    new target if the targets are some distance apart.

    Ensure that as the eyes move to a new target, the head and
    pistol muzzle should follow.


Moving Targets

The majority of combat targets will be moving; the enemy will move
quickly from cover to cover, exposing himself for the shortest time
possible. Therefore, a moving target must be engaged before it
disappears. The Marine must engage a moving target with the same accuracy
and precision used to engage a stationary target. Practice in the proper
application of leads and the fundamentals of marksmanship enable the
successful engagement of moving targets.


Types of Moving Targets


_Moving Target_

This type of target moves in a consistent manner (i.e., walking or
running) and is in continuous sight as it moves across the Marine’s
field of vision. However, unless the enemy is completely unaware of the
Marine’s presence, this type of target is not likely to present itself.


_Stop and Go Target_

This type of target appears and disappears during its movement due to
intermittent cover. It will present itself for only a short period of
time before re-establishing cover. This type of target is most vulnerable
to fire at the beginning and end of its movement because it begins slow
and gains momentum as it leaves cover and then slows to avoid overrunning
the new cover.


Leads for Moving Targets

Once the moving target has been identified it must be engaged. To engage
a moving target, the Marine must aim at a point in front of the target,
which is known as a lead. Lead is the distance in advance of the target
that is required to strike the target when it is moving. To achieve
success, determining the amount of lead to engage a moving target must
be as precise as possible. When a shot is fired at a moving target, the
target continues to move during the time of the bullet’s flight. For this
reason, the aim must be in front of the target; otherwise, the shot will
fall behind the target.


_Factors Affecting Lead_

Factors that affect the amount of lead are the target’s range, speed, and
angle of movement.

_Range._ There is a time lag from the time a round is fired until the
round strikes at the point of aim. This time of flight could allow a
target to move out of the bullet’s path if the round were fired directly
at the target. Time of flight increases as range to the target increases.
Therefore, the lead must be increased in proportion to the distance to
the target.

_Speed._ A greater lead is required to hit a running man than a walking
man because the running man moves a greater distance during the flight of
the bullet.

_Angle of Movement._ The angle of target movement also affects the amount
of lead required for target engagement. The angle of movement across the
Marine’s line of sight relative to the flight of the bullet determines
the type (amount) of lead.


_Types of Leads_

_Full Lead._ The target moves straight across the Marine’s line of sight
with only one arm and half the body visible. This target requires a full
lead because it moves the greatest distance across the Marine’s line of
sight during the bullet’s flight.

_Half Lead._ The target moves obliquely across the Marine’s line of sight
(at about a 45-degree angle). One arm and over half of the back or chest
are visible. This target requires half of a full lead because it moves
half as far as a target moving directly across the Marine’s line of sight
during the bullet’s flight.

_No Lead._ A target moving directly toward or away from the Marine
presents a full view of both arms and the entire back or chest. No lead
is required. This target is engaged in the same manner as a stationary
target because it is not moving across the Marine’s line of sight.


_Point of Aim Technique_

To engage a moving target, a Marine establishes a lead using a point of
aim offset aiming technique. This technique uses predetermined points
of aim to sector a man-sized target vertically, halfway between center
mass and the leading edge of the target (both one point of aim and two
points of aim) (see fig. 7-1 on page 7-8). The same units of measure can
be applied off the target for holds of additional points of aim. To use
the point of aim technique to establish a lead on a man-sized moving
target at various ranges, speeds, and angles of movement, the following
guidelines apply. See figure 7-2 on page 7-9.

    For a target moving at a distance of 15 yards away or less, no
    lead is required.

    For a target walking directly across the Marines line of sight
    (full lead) between 16 and 25 yards away, hold 1 point of aim
    in the direction the target is moving.

    For a target running directly across the Marine’s line of sight
    (full lead) between 16 and 25 yards away, hold 2 points of aim
    in the direction the target is moving.


Methods of Engagement

Moving targets, although difficult, can be engaged by the tracking or
ambush method or a combination of the two. See figure 7-2 on page 7-9.


_Tracking Method_

In this method, the Marine “tracks” or follows the target with his front
sight while maintaining sight alignment and a point of aim on or ahead of
(leading) the target until the shot is fired. Sight picture is the aiming
point in relation to the target while maintaining sight alignment (when
a lead is established in moving target engagement, the sights are not
entered on the target). To execute the tracking method—

    Thumbcock the pistol while presenting it to the target.

    Track the muzzle of the pistol through the target to the
    desired point of aim (lead). The point of aim may be on the
    target or some point in front of the target depending upon the
    target’s range, speed, and angle of movement.

    Track and maintain focus on the front sight while applying
    trigger pressure and acquiring sight alignment.

    Continue tracking and applying trigger pressure while acquiring
    sight picture. When sight picture is established, engage the
    target while maintaining the proper point of aim (lead).

    Follow through so the lead is maintained as the bullet exits
    the muzzle. Continuing to track also enables a second shot to
    be fired on target.


_Ambush Method_

The ambush method is generally used to engage a stop and go target and
when it is difficult to track the target with the pistol, such as in the
prone position. With this method, the pistol is aimed at a predetermined
engagement point ahead of the target and along its path, allowed to
remain stationary, and fired when the target reaches the predetermined
engagement point. The engagement point is based on the required point of
aim (lead) to engage the target effectively. When the sights are settled,
the target moves into the predetermined engagement point creating the
desired sight picture. Once sight picture is established, the remaining
pressure is applied on the trigger until the shot is fired. To execute
the ambush method—

    Look for a pattern of exposure.

    Thumbcock the pistol while presenting it to a selected point of
    aim ahead of the target.

    Apply trigger pressure while obtaining sight alignment in the
    aiming area.

    Continue applying trigger pressure and hold sight alignment
    until the target moves into the predetermined engagement point
    and the desired sight picture is established.

    Engage the target once the sight picture is acquired.

    Follow through so the pistol sights are not disturbed as the
    bullet exits the muzzle.

[Illustration: Figure 7-1. Points of Aim.]


Applying the Fundamentals of Marksmanship

The engagement of moving targets is a perishable skill that must be
practiced frequently if it is to be maintained. The Marine must practice
to develop the skill to calculate the point of aim (lead) and fire the
shot while maintaining the proper point of aim (lead).

To engage moving targets using the tracking method, the Marine moves the
pistol smoothly and steadily as the target moves. A stable position and
firm grip are necessary to steady the pistol sights while tracking.

When using the tracking method, continue tracking the target while
following through with the shot process so the point of aim (lead) is
maintained as the bullet exits the muzzle. Continuing to track also
enables a second shot to be fired on target if necessary. Concentration
should be on continuing to track while applying the fundamentals. The
fundamentals must be instinctively applied, allowing concentration on
tracking the target and applying point of aim (lead).

[Illustration: Figure 7-2. Moving Target Engagement Methods.]


_Aiming_

Sight alignment remains unchanged for accurate engagement of a moving
target. The most common error when engaging moving targets is to focus on
the target rather than focusing on the front sight. Sight picture is the
point of aim in relation to the target while maintaining sight alignment.
For both the ambush and tracking methods, sight picture is changed from
the normal center mass picture, based on range, speed, and angle of
movement of the target. It takes practice in moving target engagement
to quickly establish the desired sight picture for a given point of aim
(lead).


_Breath Control_

There is no difference in breath control when engaging moving targets;
the breath is held to fire the shot.


_Trigger Control_

Trigger control is critical to firing shots while establishing and
maintaining sight alignment and sight picture. Because the single action
mode is the preferred method of engaging a moving target, the pistol is
thumbcocked before trigger control is applied. The following guidelines
apply:

    Do not use interrupted trigger control when engaging moving
    targets because the point of aim (lead) is lost or has to be
    adjusted if the trigger is held in order to re-assume the
    proper sight picture.

    Do not stop tracking as trigger control is applied. This causes
    the shot to impact behind the moving target. Trigger control
    should be uninterrupted while maintaining the point of aim so
    the trigger is pulled in one continuous, smooth motion to the
    rear.

    Do not interrupt trigger control when the target is masked
    from view. This is particularly true in the ambush method for
    targets that appear to stop and go when moving to and from
    cover. Trigger control should be uninterrupted.




CHAPTER 8

ONE-HANDED TECHNIQUES


In combat, a situation may arise where the Marine must engage a target by
using only one hand. A Marine fires the pistol one-handed when—

    The Marine’s other hand is occupied.

    A target presents itself so quickly and at a close range that
    the Marine does not have time to establish a two-handed grip
    and position.

    One of the Marine’s hands is injured.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


Presentation and Shooting


Adjustment of the Standing Position

To fire accurately, the Marine must maintain the same stability
and control of the pistol, manage recoil, and recover on target as
effectively with one hand as with two. This is accomplished by adjusting
the standing position as the pistol is presented to the target (see fig.
8-1).

The Marine’s angle to the target determines what adjustments are made
to the standing position. This adjustment is made while the pistol is
being presented to the target by moving or sliding the feet to orient
the body to the target. For stability and balance, the right foot may be
slightly forward of the left foot. The further to the right of the Marine
the target is the farther forward the right foot will be. To adjust the
standing position when firing one-handed—

    Increase the muscular tension in the right arm and bend the
    elbow slightly to better manage the pistol.

        _Note_: For some Marines, muscular tension in the
        firing arm and the position of the body in relation
        to the target causes them to cant the pistol inboard
        slightly. A slight inboard cant of the pistol and
        firing arm allows a natural bend in the elbow and
        allows a better management of recoil and recovery of
        the sights back on target. Any cant should be natural
        and not caused by excessive muscular tension. A
        slight cant does not affect shooting performance and
        should not alter the application of the fundamentals
        of marksmanship.

    Apply controlled muscular tension throughout the body to better
    manage the effects of recoil.

    Lean forward aggressively, roll the shoulders forward, and tuck
    the head into the shoulders.

        _Note_: The following step is done only during
        training to demonstrate how to stabilize the position
        and to simulate the Marine’s other hand being
        occupied.

    Place the left hand in a fist on the center of the torso
    to increase stability. If the left arm is swinging freely
    it causes a corresponding movement in the pistol, reducing
    stability and control. Placing the left hand on the torso also
    ensures it is not covered by the muzzle of the pistol as the
    pistol is presented.

[Illustration: Figure 8-1. One-Handed Presentation.]


Searching and Assessing After Firing

Following one-handed target engagement, the Marine must quickly decide
if it is to his advantage and if it is possible to free his occupied
hand in order to place both hands on the pistol to search and assess.
Whenever possible, the Marine places both hands on the pistol to increase
stability and to be ready for re-engagement if necessary.


Reloading


Dry Reload

When only one hand is available, the dry reload can be performed as
follows:

    Seek cover, if the situation permits.

    Press the magazine release button and allow the magazine to
    fall to the deck. If using the right hand, press the magazine
    release button with the thumb. If using the left hand, press
    the magazine release button with the trigger finger.

    Point the muzzle in a safe direction and position the pistol
    to facilitate loading the magazine. Depending on the firing
    position, this is accomplished using one of the following
    methods:

    _Two-Knee Kneeling Position_

        Rotate the pistol so the magazine well faces up and
        the muzzle of the pistol is pointed away from the
        body.

        Place the pistol between the thighs or knees and
        apply pressure to hold the pistol in place.

        Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket
        and insert it into the magazine well, seating it with
        the heel of the hand. See figure 8-2.

    [Illustration: Figure 8-2. One-Handed Dry Reload: Two-Knee
    Kneeling Position.]

    _Standing Position_

        Rotate the pistol so the magazine well faces up and
        the muzzle of the pistol is pointed away from the
        body.

        Place the pistol between the thighs or knees and
        apply pressure to hold the pistol in place. Bend
        slightly at the knees to secure the pistol between
        the thighs.

        Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket
        and insert it into the magazine well, seating it with
        the heel of the hand. See figure 8-3.

    [Illustration: Figure 8-3. One-Handed Dry Reload: Standing
    Position.]

    _Kneeling Position (High, Medium, Low)_

        Rotate the pistol so the magazine well faces outboard
        and the muzzle is pointed away from the body.

        Place the rear portion of the slide in the bend of
        the right knee and apply pressure with the leg to
        hold the pistol in place. For additional control, the
        Marine may drop to a two-knee kneeling position and
        place the pistol between his knees.

        Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket
        and insert it into the magazine well, seating it with
        the heel of the hand. See figure 8-4 on page 8-4.

    [Illustration: Figure 8-4. One-Handed Dry Reload: Kneeling
    Position.]

    _Prone Position_

        The Marine places the pistol on the deck in front of
        him and against his body with the muzzle pointed in a
        safe direction. Alternately, the Marine may roll on
        his side and place the pistol between his knees, with
        the magazine well facing out.

        Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket
        and insert it into the magazine well, seating it with
        the heel of the hand. See figure 8-5 on page 8-4.

    Grasp the pistol grip and remove the pistol from its secured
    location or from the deck.

    Press the slide release to allow the slide to move forward
    and chamber a round. If using the right hand, press the slide
    release with the thumb. If using the left hand, press the slide
    release with the index finger.

[Illustration: Figure 8-5. One-Handed Dry Reload: Prone Position.]


Condition 1 Reload

When only one hand is available, a Condition 1 reload can be performed as
follows:

    Point the muzzle in a safe direction and position the pistol to
    allow for removal of the magazine (e.g., between the thighs, in
    the bend of the knee, in the holster, tucked in the cartridge
    belt, on the deck against the body). Any position is correct if
    it allows the magazine well to be exposed.

    Withdraw a filled magazine from the ammunition pocket.

    Press the magazine release button and remove the magazine from
    the pistol. If using the right hand, press the magazine release
    button with the thumb. If using the left hand, press the
    magazine release button with the index finger.

    Insert the filled magazine into the magazine well, seating it
    with the heel of the hand.

    Stow the partially-filled magazine (e.g., inside the cartridge
    belt, in the cargo pocket).

    Grasp the pistol grip and remove the pistol from its secured
    location, keeping the trigger finger straight and off the
    trigger until ready to fire.


Remedial Action

Remedial action requires investigating the cause of the stoppage,
clearing the stoppage, and returning the pistol to operation. When
performing remedial action, seek cover if the tactical situation permits.
Once a pistol ceases to fire, the Marine must visually or physically
observe the pistol to identify the problem before it can be cleared. The
steps taken to clear the pistol are based on what is observed:

    Remove the finger from the trigger and place it straight along
    the receiver.

    Lock the slide to the rear. To pull and lock the slide to the
    rear, push up on the slide stop and maintain pressure with the
    right thumb. (Push up on the slide stop with the left index
    finger if remedial action is being performed with the weak
    hand.)

    Secure the rear sight on the top of the cartridge belt or any
    other surface that provides the resistance needed to stabilize
    the pistol. See figure 8-6. While applying pressure on the
    pistol to keep the rear sight secured, push downward on the
    pistol in one continuous motion to lock the slide to the rear.

        _Note_: Ensure the pistol does not move to safe when
        locking the slide to the rear.

    Place the pistol in a position to observe the chamber.

    Correct the stoppage.

[Illustration: Figure 8-6. One-Handed Remedial Action.]

If there is a round in the magazine but not in the chamber, release the
slide and observe a round being chambered. If you do not observe a round
being chambered, tap, rack, and bang to perform remedial action:

_Tap_

    Keep muzzle pointed in a safe direction and place trigger
    finger straight along the receiver.

    Strike the bottom of the magazine against a hard surface to
    ensure it is seated. In the kneeling position, strike the
    magazine against the thigh (see fig. 8-7 on page 8-6). In the
    standing position, bring the right knee up while striking
    magazine against the right thigh (see fig. 8-8 on page 8-6). In
    the prone position, strike the magazine against the deck.

[Illustration: Figure 8-7. Tap the Magazine Against the Knee: Kneeling
Position.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-8. Tap the Magazine Against the Knee: Standing
Position.]

_Rack_

    Rotate the pistol so the rear sight can be hooked on the top
    of the cartridge belt or any other surface (e.g., the edge of
    a table, wall, heel of the boot) that provides the resistance
    needed to rack the slide in a smooth, uninterrupted motion. Do
    not let the muzzle of the pistol cover the body. See figures
    8-9 and 8-10.

    Apply pressure on the pistol to keep the rear sight secured
    while pushing downward on the pistol to move the slide fully to
    the rear.

    Release pressure on the pistol to chamber the round.

[Illustration: Figure 8-9. Rack Slide Against Cartridge Belt.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-10. Rack Slide Against Heel of Boot.]

_Bang_

    Recover the pistol on target, re-establish sight
    alignment/sight picture, and attempt to fire.


Presentation From the Holster With the Weak Hand

During combat, the Marine must be prepared to engage targets at any time.
Therefore, the Marine must have the ability to present the pistol from
the holster with his weak (left) hand if circumstances prevent him from
using his strong (right) hand. He must apply the same smooth, controlled
movement to present the pistol to the target. There are three methods for
withdrawing the pistol from the holster with the weak hand. The Marine
should practice each method to determine which works best for him.


Method One: Pistol Rotation

    Unfasten and release the D-ring with the left hand. See figure
    8-11.

    Wrap the fingers and thumb around the pistol grip so the index
    finger and thumb are around the base of the pistol grip. See
    figure 8-12.

    Draw the pistol straight up until trigger guard clears the top
    of the holster. See figure 8-13.

    Rotate the pistol so the magazine well faces the target and
    the trigger guard rests on the top of the holster. Ensure the
    trigger guard rests securely against the top of the holster.
    See figure 8-14 on page 8-8.

    Maintain downward pressure on the pistol and slide the left
    hand around the pistol grip to establish a firing grip. See
    figure 8-15.

    Grasp the pistol and continue to withdraw the pistol until the
    muzzle clears the holster and rotate the muzzle toward the
    target.

    Sweep the safety off with the thumb of the left hand while
    moving the pistol out toward the target. At the same time,
    place the trigger finger on the trigger and establish sight
    alignment and sight picture within the aiming area.

    Continue trigger pressure until the shot is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 8-11. Method One: Release D-Ring.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-12. Method One: Grasp the Pistol.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-13. Method One: Clearing Trigger Guard.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-14. Method One: Rotating the Pistol.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-15. Method One: Establishing the Firing Grip.]


Method Two: Hand Rotation

    Unfasten and release the D-ring with the left hand.

    Push the holster flap up and out of the way with the back of
    the left hand.

    Push the right hip out to facilitate grasping the pistol grip.
    Grasp the pistol grip between the holster flap and the pistol
    grip, the thumb is wrapped around the other side of the pistol
    grip against the backstrap. See figure 8-16.

        _Note_: The cartridge belt may be pulled with the
        left hand to bring the holster closer to the body’s
        center to facilitate grasping the pistol.

    Draw the pistol straight up while rotating the pistol so the
    magazine well faces inboard. Continue to remove the pistol
    until the trigger guard rests on the holster. See figure 8-17.

    Establish a firing grip and rotate the thumb to a position to
    operate the safety. See figure 8-18.

    Continue to withdraw the pistol until the muzzle clears the
    holster and rotate the muzzle to the target. See figure 8-19.

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the left hand while moving
    the pistol out toward the target. At the same time, place the
    trigger finger on the trigger and establish sight alignment and
    sight picture within the aiming area.

    Continue trigger pressure until the shot is fired.

[Illustration: Figure 8-16. Method Two: Grasping the Pistol.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-17. Method Two: Trigger Guard Rests on Holster.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-18. Method Two: Establish Firing Grip.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-19. Method Two: Rotating the Muzzle.]


Method Three: Knee Placement

This method is particularly effective when firing from the two-knee
kneeling position and the standing position.

    Unfasten and release the D-ring with the left hand.

    Wrap the fingers and thumb around the pistol grip so the index
    finger and thumb are around the base of the pistol grip.

    Draw the pistol straight up until the muzzle clears the holster
    and rotate the muzzle forward. The magazine well should face
    upward.

    Place the pistol between the thighs, applying enough tension to
    keep the pistol in place. The Marine must ensure that he does
    not disengage the safety while performing this motion and that
    the muzzle of the pistol is clear of the body. In the standing
    position, the Marine bends slightly at the knees to facilitate
    securing the pistol between the thighs.

    Remove the left hand from the pistol grip and rotate the hand
    around the pistol grip to facilitate establishing a firing grip.

    Grasp the pistol grip and remove the pistol from the thighs,
    rotating the pistol until the muzzle is pointed toward the
    target.

    Sweep the safety with the thumb of the left hand while starting
    to punch the pistol out toward the target.

    Establish a firing grip and continue to punch the pistol out
    toward the target. At the same time, place the trigger finger
    on the trigger and establish sight alignment and sight picture
    within the aiming area.

    Continue trigger pressure until the shot is fired.


Transferring the Pistol From One Hand to the Other

Situations may arise in combat where the Marine must transfer the pistol
to the left hand to engage a target because the right hand or arm is
injured. To safely transfer the pistol from one hand to the other,
perform the following steps:

        _Note_: This procedure is written to transfer the
        pistol from the right hand to the left hand.

    Point the muzzle in the direction of the target and place the
    trigger finger straight along the receiver. See figure 8-20.

    Place the web of the left index finger and thumb under the
    backstrap of the pistol. See figure 8-21.

    Wrap the fingers of the left hand around the pistol grip while
    releasing the right hand grip.

    Establish a firing grip with the left hand on the pistol. See
    figure 8-22.

[Illustration: Figure 8-20. Transferring the Pistol—Step 1.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-21. Transferring the Pistol—Step 2.]

[Illustration: Figure 8-22. Transferring the Pistol—Step 3.]




CHAPTER 9

ADVANCED TECHNIQUES


Some tactical situations are quite complex and require Marines to apply
advanced pistol engagement techniques in order to effectively engage the
enemy and survive. The ability of the Marine to rapidly shoot on the move
and to turn and fire will be critical to a successful engagement.

    _Note_: The procedures in this chapter are written for
    right-handed Marines; left-handed Marines should reverse
    directions as needed.


Shooting on the Move

When moving from one area of cover to another, the Marine may engage a
target that presents an immediate threat. In this situation, the Marine
relies on accurate fire to serve as his cover.


Moving With the Pistol

The likelihood of encountering a threat dictates how the pistol is
carried while the Marine is moving. But regardless of the method of
carry, the pistol’s muzzle is pointed in the same direction that the head
and eyes are looking—the eyes and muzzle move as one.

When carrying the pistol in the Alert position, the pistol is tucked
in close to the body, finger off the trigger. This position allows the
Marine freedom of movement and still allows for a quick presentation of
the pistol.

If there is a high probability of encountering a threat, the Marine
carries the pistol in the Ready position while moving.


Moving: The Glide Technique

To shoot accurately while moving, the Marine cannot run or walk fast. A
normal running movement produces too much bounce in the Marine’s body
and makes it extremely difficult to use the sights of the pistol or to
achieve the needed level of stability for accurate shooting. Therefore,
the proper movement technique is similar to a glide and allows for
accurate target engagement:

    A lower center of gravity is achieved by keeping the knees bent
    and the upper body erect.

    The bent knees also serve to absorb the shock generated by
    movement.

    The feet are not lifted as high as in a normal walk or run,
    allowing obstructions to be kicked out of the way.

    The feet and knees point in the direction of travel. If there
    is a need to engage a target off to the side, the Marine
    rotates at the waist to move the upper body in the desired
    direction. The upper body shooting position does not change.

The glide is not a technique that can be used for a long period of time
or for long distances. Rather, the Marine can move in a normal manner
until it becomes necessary to engage a target, he then slows and assumes
the glide.


Engaging Targets: Using the Pistol Sights

When the Marine fires the pistol, he must concentrate on the pistol’s
front sight. The adherence to the fundamentals of marksmanship becomes
even more vital when both the Marine and the enemy may be moving.


Continuing to Move

A Marine continues to move no matter what happens. Continuing to move
makes it difficult for the threat to engage the Marine and can be one
of the Marine’s best defensive assets. When moving to cover or to a
different position, the Marine should not stop to engage a target.


Reloading and Stoppages

If a stoppage occurs or a reload is required while moving, the Marine’s
primary consideration is to keep moving and seek cover. Ideally, reloads
and clearing stoppages are performed behind cover.


Turn and Fire

The techniques for turn and fire allow a Marine to engage a target that
is not directly in front of him. The key to turn and fire is smoothness
and quickness of pivoting and presentation of the pistol to engage the
threat. Turn and fire is based on the principle that wherever the head
goes, the body follows.


Engaging Targets 90 Degrees to the Right and Left

The Marine turns the head toward the threat and identifies the target.
Once the target is identified, the Marine maintains focus on the target
for the rest of the presentation.

If engaging a target 90 degrees to the right, the Marine turns toward
the target by raising the left foot while pivoting on the ball of the
right foot. The Marine plants the left foot once he is facing the target
squarely. The stance is natural. See figure 9-1. The Marine then engages
the target.

If engaging a target 90 degrees to the left, the Marine turns toward
the target by raising the right foot while pivoting on the ball of the
left foot. The Marine plants the right foot once he is facing the target
squarely. The stance is natural. See figure 9-2. The Marine then engages
the target.

[Illustration: Figure 9-1. Engaging Targets 90 Degrees to the Right.]

[Illustration: Figure 9-2. Engaging Targets 90 Degrees to the Left.]


Engaging Targets 180 Degrees to the Rear

The Marine turns the head toward the target, looking over either the
right or left shoulder, and identifies the target. Once the target is
identified, the Marine maintains focus on the target for the rest of the
presentation. See figure 9-3 on page 9-4.

If the Marine pivots to the right to engage the target, pick up the left
foot, move it across the right foot, while pivoting 180 degrees on the
ball of the right foot, plant the left foot, and squarely face the target
in a natural stance. See figure 9-4 on page 9-4.

If the Marine pivots to the left to engage the target, pick up the right
foot, move it across the left foot, while pivoting 180 degrees on the
ball of the left foot, plant the left foot, and squarely face the target
in a natural shooting stance. See figure 9-5 on page 9-4.

The Marine then engages the target.

[Illustration: Figure 9-3. Engaging Targets 180 Degrees to the Rear.]

[Illustration: Figure 9-4. Engaging Targets 180 Degrees to the Rear
(Right Shoulder).]

[Illustration: Figure 9-5. Engaging Targets 180 Degrees to the Rear (Left
Shoulder).]




CHAPTER 10

LOW LIGHT AND DARKNESS TECHNIQUES


An effective combat marksman must be prepared to detect and engage
targets under a variety of conditions. Factors such as terrain and
opportunity often dictate that the Marine engage combat targets at night
or under low-light conditions.

The fundamentals of marksmanship are employed for engagement of targets
in low light and darkness just as they are in daylight. However, the
principles of night vision and target detection when engaging targets at
night must be applied.


Combat Mindset

In the stress of the combat environment, Marines must eliminate any
hesitation, fear, or uncertainty of action and focus on the actions to
fire well-aimed shots. This is important during low light and darkness
when attention is more easily diverted because the sense of vision is
reduced. This may create a shock of awareness as the Marine relies more
heavily on his other senses. Every noise, movement, and muzzle blast
appears intensified at night. The physical acts of shooting must become
second nature to the Marine, so his focus will not be diverted from
firing well-aimed shots. This is accomplished through mental preparedness
and training until shooting actions become instinctive.


Night Vision Adaptation and Maintenance


Night Vision Adaptation

There are two methods for acquiring night vision.

The first method is to remain in an area of darkness for about 30
minutes. This area can be indoors or outdoors. The major disadvantage of
this approach is that a Marine is not able to perform any tasks while
acquiring night vision in total darkness.

The second method is to remain in a darkened area under a low intensity
red light (similar to the light in a photographer’s darkroom) for about
20 minutes, followed by about 10 minutes in darkness without the red
light. This method produces almost complete night vision adaptation while
permitting the performance of some tasks during the adjustment period.


Night Vision Maintenance

Because the eyes take a long time to adjust to darkness, it is important
to protect night vision once it is acquired. To maintain night vision,
the Marine avoids looking at any bright light and shields the eyes from
parachute flares, spotlights, or headlights. When using a flashlight to
read a map or other material—

    Put one hand over the glass to limit the area illuminated and
    the intensity of the light.

    Keep one eye shut to reduce the amount of night vision lost.

    Cover the light with a red filter to help reduce the loss of
    night vision.


Target Detection Techniques

Once the Marine has acquired night vision, he is prepared to locate
targets. Some of the daylight observation techniques, such as searching
for target indicators, also apply at night or in low light. But night
observation techniques must allow for the limitations of night vision and
the need to protect it.


Off-Center Vision

Because of the placement of the cones in the center of the retina and the
rods around the edges, the angle at which the Marine observes an object
at night affects how well it is seen. Off-center vision is the technique
of keeping the attention focused on an object without looking directly at
it. To maximize the use of the eye’s rods that provide night vision—

    Never look directly at the object being observed.

    Look slightly to the left, right, above, or below the object.

Each Marine must experiment and practice this technique to find the best
off-center angle. Typically, the best off-center angle is 6 to 10 degrees
away from the object or about a fist’s width at arm’s length. See figure
10-1.

[Illustration: Figure 10-1. Off-Center Vision.]


Scanning/Figure Eight Scan

Scanning is the use of off-center vision to observe an area or object and
involves slowly moving the eyes in a series of separate movements across
the objective area. See figure 10-2. To execute a figure eight scan, move
the eyes in a figure eight pattern in short, abrupt, irregular movements
over and around the area. Once a target indicator has been detected,
focus should be concentrated in that area, but not directly at it. It is
more effective to scan from a prone position or a position closer to the
ground than the object being observed, creating a silhouetted view of
the object. When scanning an area, look and listen for the same target
indicators as in daylight: movement, sound (which seems louder at night
than during daylight), and improper camouflage. Also, objects in bright
moonlight/starlight cast shadows just as in sunlight.

[Illustration: Figure 10-2. Figure Eight Scan.]


Effects of Illumination

Both ambient (natural) light and artificial illumination can affect a
Marine’s perception of the target’s distance and size and his night
vision. The following situations produce less of an effect at the close
ranges that pistol engagements occur, but they still affect target
detection and engagement:

    Light behind or between the Marine and the target illuminates
    the front of the target and makes it appear closer than it
    actually is.

    Light beyond the target displays the target in silhouette and
    makes it appear farther away than it actually is.

    The introduction of light requires the eyes to make a sudden,
    drastic adjustment to the amount of light received, causing
    a temporary blinding effect that occurs when night vision is
    interrupted abruptly. Ambient light can also have the same
    blinding effect; e.g., when a bright moon suddenly appears from
    behind clouds.


Acquiring Targets at Night

The Marine must keep both eyes open to get maximum visual coverage of the
target area. Keeping both eyes open also improves depth perception and
peripheral vision.


Sight Alignment/Sight Picture

Sight alignment and sight picture are obtained the same way in darkness
as in daylight. There is normally enough ambient light to perceive
objects as far away as 50 meters, especially if they are moving. However,
when pistol sights are placed on a dark background, such as a camouflaged
target, the Marine may not be able to acquire and align the sights
clearly. Instead, the Marine may have to rely almost entirely on his
presentation, firing position, and grip to get the pistol on target. To
check for sight alignment or acquire the sights:

    Move the pistol just off the edge of the target to an area that
    provides a good contrast.

    Acquire sight alignment.

    Bring the sights back on line with the target while applying
    pressure to the trigger so the shot breaks once the sights are
    on target.


Flashlights

A flashlight can be used in low light and darkness to identify and
illuminate targets. It is also used to acquire sight picture.


Types of Flashlights

There are a variety of flashlights used throughout the Marine Corps.
They come in many different shapes and sizes; however, they are either
straight/tubular or L-shaped.


_Straight/Tubular_

The straight/tubular flashlight is the most common. The body of the
flashlight is a straight/tubular shape with the lens at the head of the
flashlight. The on/off mechanism is located along the body or at the base
of the flashlight.


_L-Shaped_

The L-shaped flashlight has a straight/tubular body, with the head/lens
of the flashlight positioned at a 90-degree angle to the body of the
flashlight. The on/off mechanism is located along the body or at the base
of the flashlight.


Activation Devices

Depending on the type of flashlight, there are several ways that it can
be activated.


_On/Off Button_

On/off buttons are located either along the body of the flashlight or at
the base. On/off buttons are operated in a number of ways, depending on
the flashlight.


_On/Off Switch_

On/off switches are mounted on the body of the flashlight. This switch
has three settings that allow the flashlight to be either on, off, or in
manual mode. In the manual mode, the flashlight is turned on by pressing
and holding the button located next to the on/off switch.


_Rotating Head_

Rotating the head of the flashlight, either clockwise or
counterclockwise, turns the flashlight on. Continuing this motion allows
the width and intensity of the beam to be adjusted.


Types of Lenses


_Clear Lenses_

Clear lenses are used primarily for target detection and to illuminate
the pistol sights. They are the most commonly used lens.


_Colored Lenses_

Colored lenses include red, amber, and blue. These lenses are used
primarily for map reading and signaling, but can be used to illuminate
the pistol’s sights.


Target Detection

When a target is illuminated, the front sight may become silhouetted
against the target, providing the sight picture needed to engage the
target. During target detection, the Marine’s focus should be twofold:
to scan the area to identify possible targets and to assess the area to
formulate a plan for engagement or cover (e.g., identifying the quickest
route to cover, determining the best method for engagement based on
terrain).


_Searches_

The Marine executes a hasty search immediately upon entering a new area
in order to identify a threat that poses immediate danger. To execute a
hasty search—

    Quickly scan the area with the flashlight taking note of
    obvious points throughout the area that could cover or conceal
    the enemy. Wherever the eyes move, the flashlight should move.

    Aim the flashlight beam on the ground about 8 to 10 feet in
    front of the Marine’s location, this allows the eyes to follow
    the beam and quickly establishes a reference point for the
    light. Aiming the beam at the outer edge of the search area
    strains the eyes to find the beam and decreases the field of
    view.

The Marine executes a detailed search after the hasty search. A detailed
search focuses on target indicators identified during the hasty search.
To conduct the detailed search—

    Focus the most direct or intense portion of the flashlight beam
    on the target indicators.

    Move the beam of light slowly across the target indicator from
    right to left or left to right. Wherever the eyes move, the
    flashlight should move.


_Considerations_

During night operations, the Marine should use a flashlight whenever
possible. A flashlight not only helps the Marine locate targets at night,
but the beam can be aimed directly at the target once it is detected
and temporarily blinds the target. This gives the Marine the advantage
to react before the target does. However, the Marine must consider the
following:

    Anytime a flashlight is on, the location may be revealed to
    the enemy. The Marine should keep the flashlight pointed out
    in front of his body to help avoid illuminating himself and
    revealing his position.

    Light shined directly from in front of the Marine at the target
    obscures the Marine.

    Light shined from the side of the Marine at the target
    illuminates the Marine.

    Light can bounce off surfaces and reflect back onto larger
    areas that the light is not focused on. Therefore, whenever a
    Marine shines a flashlight onto a surface, some of the light
    may reflect back and illuminate the Marine.

    When positioned at the outside corner of a room, building, or
    other cover, the Marine should avoid pointing the flashlight
    beam directly at the corner because the beam reflects off the
    corner and illuminates the Marine. To prevent this, the head of
    the flashlight should extend just beyond the corner.

    Many flashlights have adjustable beams that aid in target
    detection. The beam’s intensity must be adjusted to provide the
    best illumination of the area depending on the distance between
    the Marine and the area of observation.

    Diffused light from a wide beam creates a softer light and
    illuminates a greater area, but the beam does not travel a
    great distance. A wide beam is best for observing larger areas
    at close range.

    Concentrated light from a narrow beam illuminates a smaller
    field of view, but the beam travels a greater distance. A
    concentrated beam is effective for observing a specific area
    or an area that is further away. Concentrated light blinds
    the enemy and prevents him from focusing on the Marine or
    determining his location.

    When searching an area, the Marine can alter the position where
    he is holding his flashlight so that the beam is perceived as
    coming from various locations. For example, the Marine can turn
    the flashlight on from a standing position, quickly search for
    targets, turn the flashlight off, assume a kneeling position,
    and search again. This keeps the enemy from obtaining an exact
    location of the Marine’s position.

    Keep both eyes open to get maximum visual coverage of the
    target area. Keeping both eyes open also improves depth
    perception and peripheral vision.


Target Engagement

Once a target is detected using a flashlight, the flashlight can be used
to acquire sight picture and facilitate engagement of the target. The
fundamentals of marksmanship are employed for engagement of targets in
darkness just as they are in daylight. However, the Marine must apply
the principles of night vision and target detection and must be able to
employ a flashlight properly when engaging targets at night.


_Grip_

To engage a target accurately while using a flashlight, the flashlight
must be held to maintain the pistol’s stability, control, and recoil
during firing. Normally, the left hand (two-handed grip) provides the
pistol’s stability and ability to manage recoil. However, when firing
with a flashlight, the left hand holds and operates the flashlight.
Therefore, some stability, control, and management of recoil is lost.


_Securing the Flashlight_

Most flashlights come equipped with a retaining loop located at the base
for ease of transportation. To position the cord properly:

    Feed one end of the cord through the retaining loop of the
    flashlight and tie the ends of the cord together.

    Slip the left hand through the cord loop. The loop should be
    just big enough so that, if the flashlight needs to be dropped,
    it can be retained on the wrist.

    Rotate the flashlight until the cord is twisted to the desired
    tension and length necessary to best stabilize the rear end of
    the flashlight in the hand.

    Grasp the flashlight with the left hand in a position that
    allows it to be operated easily.

If the flashlight has a retaining loop, attaching a cord to the loop
helps support and stabilize the flashlight when the Marine must fire the
pistol with the flashlight in his left hand. The cord also helps retain
the flashlight.


_Acquiring Sight Alignment/Sight Picture_

When holding a flashlight on a target, the tendency is to look at the
target rather than the sights. Sight alignment is still necessary for
effective target engagement. Using a flashlight to illuminate a target
allows the Marine to—

    Acquire sight picture by silhouetting the sights against the
    target.

        The Marine establishes sight picture by focusing the
        sights in the soft, diffused light area of the target.

        At close ranges, colored lenses produce enough light
        on the target to silhouette the sights; at long
        ranges, colored lenses will not provide enough light
        off the target to illuminate the pistol sights. The
        Marine must be able to see the target by some other
        means, (e.g., contrast, moonlight).

    Acquire sight picture by illuminating the sights.

        A colored lens can be held directly over the
        sights to shine light on the top of the pistol to
        illuminate the sights. This allows sight alignment
        to be established without revealing the Marine to
        the enemy. This method can also be used with a clear
        lens to make a precision shot at long ranges but the
        Marine risks being illuminated by the light.

        A colored lens can be shined from directly behind the
        pistol sights to illuminate them. This allows sight
        alignment to be established, but reveals the Marine’s
        position to the enemy.


_Target Engagement Techniques_

_Two-Handed Grip Technique._ This technique is typically used with a
straight/tubular flashlight. The pistol and flashlight must be side
by side and level so the Marine can engage a target without making
adjustments to the pistol or the flashlight. This technique is also
effective for firing multiple shots because the flashlight and pistol
recoil as a unit.

Whenever possible, the flashlight is just in front of the muzzle of
the pistol so that it does not illuminate the pistol. Placement of the
flashlight alongside the pistol may need to be adjusted depending on the
size of the flashlight or the location of the on/off mechanism.

This technique is most often used with an Isosceles position (see fig.
10-3):

    Grasp the flashlight with the left hand, lens pointing down
    range.

    Wrap the thumb and index finger of the left hand around the
    body of the flashlight, thumb resting on the on/off switch to
    allow easy operation of the on/off switch without disrupting
    the grip on the flashlight.

    Extend both arms toward the target and bring the flashlight
    alongside the pistol so the fingers of the left and right hands
    touch.

    Wrap the bottom three fingers of the left hand around the
    fingers of the right hand, incorporating the flashlight into a
    two-handed grip.

    Apply isometric pressure against both hands to aid in
    stabilizing the pistol.

This technique can also be incorporated into a Weaver position; the more
the left hand wraps around the right, the more the body can be angled and
the left elbow bent. Apply push-pull pressure on the grip to stabilize
the pistol. See figure 10-4.

_Cross-Hand Technique._ The cross-hand technique is used primarily with a
Weaver position and can be used with either a straight/tubular flashlight
or an L-shaped flashlight (see fig. 10-5):

    Grasp the flashlight with the left hand, fingers wrapped around
    the top of the flashlight and thumb wrapped around the bottom.

    Place the thumb on the on/off button while maintaining a firm
    grip on the flashlight.

    Extend both arms toward the target and bring the left hand
    under the pistol so that the back of the left hand is resting
    firmly against the back of the right hand.

    Apply isometric pressure against both hands to aid in
    stabilizing the pistol.

    Extend the right arm fully and bend the left arm at the elbow.

[Illustration: Figure 10-3. Two-Handed Grip Technique With Flashlight
(Side and Front View).]

[Illustration: Figure 10-4. Two-Handed Grip Technique With Flashlight
(Weaver Position).]

[Illustration: Figure 10-5. Flashlight Cross-Hand Technique.]


_Considerations for the Carry/Transport_

When searching an area for targets, the Marine moves with the pistol at
the carry or transport dictated by the threat level.

_The Ready._ If enemy contact is expected (contact imminent), the Marine
carries the pistol at the Ready and carries the flashlight in his left
hand and incorporates it into his firing grip. In the Ready, the Marine
can search for targets and readily present the pistol and flashlight to
the target for engagement without making adjustments to either the grip
or the flashlight. See figure 10-6 on page 10-8.

_The Alert._ If enemy contact is likely, the Marine carries the pistol at
the Alert and the flashlight in his left hand and incorporates it into
his firing grip. The Marine must ensure the flashlight is not pointed at
the deck because it illuminates the Marine. If necessary, the head of the
flashlight may have to be tilted up to elevate the beam to increase the
field of view. If the flashlight has been tilted, it has to be lowered so
it is level with the pistol muzzle and the light shines directly on the
target in order to establish sight picture. See figure 10-7 on page 10-8.

_Holster Transport._ If there is no immediate threat, the pistol is
holstered and the Marine carries the flashlight with his left hand to
search for targets. Should a target present itself, the Marine presents
the pistol from the holster and engages the target. Time and distance to
the target dictate whether the Marine incorporates the flashlight and his
left hand into the firing grip.

[Illustration: Figure 10-6. Flashlight Ready Carry (Cross-Hand and
Two-Handed Grip).]

[Illustration: Figure 10-7. Flashlight Alert Carry (Two-Handed Grip and
Cross-Hand).]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTOL MARKSMANSHIP ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


