The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ferns of Hawaii National Park
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ferns of Hawaii National Park

Author: Douglass H. Hubbard

Release date: July 13, 2019 [eBook #59913]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FERNS OF HAWAII NATIONAL PARK ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration: COVER
    _Amaumau ferns in the Kilauea Section, Hawaii National Park_]


                               DEDICATION

  _To_ Mr. Eugene Horner, _Member of the Board of Directors of the_
  Hawaii Natural History Association, _whose interest in Hawaiian ferns
  has extended over more than a half a century, and whose enthusiasm and
  willing assistance in collecting and identifying ferns has been of
  invaluable help, this booklet is dedicated_.

                               PRINTED BY
                  14ND PUBLICATIONS & PRINTING OFFICE
                          PEARL HARBOR, T. H.
                                  1952




                          HAWAII NATURE NOTES

                         THE PUBLICATION OF THE
               NATURALIST DIVISION, HAWAII NATIONAL PARK
               AND THE HAWAII NATURAL HISTORY ASSOCIATION

                      VOL. V    JUNE 1952    NO. 1




                     Ferns of Hawaii National Park


                                  _by_
                          DOUGLASS H. HUBBARD
                           Park Naturalist[1]

    [Illustration: HAWAII·NATURAL·HISTORY·ASSOCIATION]

                  SPECIAL ISSUE    •    PRICE 50 CENTS


[1]_Mr. Hubbard is now Associate Park Naturalist at Yosemite National
    Park_


    [Illustration:                                       G. O. Fagerlund
             _Stately tree ferns border a road in Hawaii National Park_]




                              INTRODUCTION


Ferns are among the most interesting plants in the plant world.
Varieties in Hawaii range from dainty filmy ferns less than one inch in
length to stately tree ferns over 40 feet high, and inhabit areas
varying from dry, barren lava flows to impenetrable rain jungles.

More primitive than flowering plants, ferns reproduce by means of small,
dust-like bodies called spores. These spores are often carried in the
air, and are so lightweight that they can be blown for thousands of
miles by winds. The ferns of Hawaii, or their ancestors, apparently
reached these islands with the help of winds, except for those
introduced recently by man.




                          HAWAII NATIONAL PARK


Hawaii National Park belongs to the American people. When it was set
aside by Congress in 1916 the three volcanoes, Haleakala, Mauna Loa, and
Kilauea were of principal interest. It has become increasingly apparent
that the beautiful forests of native trees, the birds which depend upon
Hawaiian plants for survival, and the magnificent fern jungles are of
equal importance and more in need of protection. Outside of the park,
trees such as the _koa_ (Hawaiian mahogany) and the _ohia_ are being cut
for lumber, and tree ferns, upon whose trunks orchids are grown, are
rapidly being taken for this expanding industry. The National Park
Service has been given the responsibility of keeping its areas in as
nearly an original condition as possible—a little bit of America,
unspoiled. Hawaii National Park—your park—is among the most outstanding
of these. Please help us keep it this way.




                              THIS BOOKLET


This booklet is not intended to be a comprehensive treatment of all the
ferns—some 70 species—which have been found to date in Hawaii National
Park. Rather it is an illustrated guide to the more abundant species
which may be seen by the visitor without wandering far from the beaten
path. Abundance has been used as the basis for arrangement, instead of
scientific classification, and illustrations take the place of technical
descriptions. The more serious observers are referred to the selected
bibliography near the end of this publication.

Some disagreement exists today among botanists as to the proper
scientific names for certain Hawaiian plant species, and many ferns have
been undergoing reclassification. For this reason all of the scientific
names that could be found for the various ferns in this booklet have
been listed on pages 37, 38 and 39.

A brief code has been included to indicate the type of habitat in which
the ferns normally may be found: D=dry, M=moist, D&M=dry and moist.
Numbers in bold-face type are used for that particular fern throughout
the publication. The page numbers refer to the location of the text and
the scientific name for that species.

One inch squares are used for background scale in many of the
illustrations.

All photographs are by the author unless otherwise credited.




                               TREE FERNS


The five species of Hawaiian tree ferns recognized by botanists will
appear quite similar to most visitors. The illustrations below show
several of the differences. Most common of the tree ferns are the two
species called HAPUU (10, 11) which do not have the coarse bristles of
the HAPU III (9) which sometimes grow to a height of 35 feet, including
the fronds. The fourth species, the MEU (12), is not common, and is
found only on the island of Hawaii. A fifth species is frequent in the
highlands of Kauai.

The reproductive bodies of the tree ferns are borne in small, bead-like
capsules on the margins of the leaf segments (see illustration below).
These capsules, which open by means of small lids, may be responsible
for the generic name of the ferns, _Cibotium_, from a Greek word meaning
a small vessel.

The buds of these ferns are covered with the silky PULU, discussed
below. According to Hillebrand (5, p. 546) ferns of the genus _Cibotium_
range over Mexico and Central America, the Philippine Islands, Sumatra,
South China and India. It is an interesting speculation as to which of
these places provided the spores which gave the Hawaiian tree ferns
their beginning.

Much of what appears to be the trunk on these and many other ferns is in
reality a useful mass of aerial roots which absorb moisture and protect
the tree trunk from damage. These roots also offer a fertile place for
seeds of many other plants to take root and grow. So common is it to
find ohia trees growing on tree fern trunks that the ferns are often
called _mother of ohia_. Unappreciative of the support given them in
their early growth the trees often send roots to earth which become so
large that the fern finally is killed. Much starch is present in the
trunks of tree ferns. This was resorted to by the Hawaiians for food in
time of famine. Young fronds of the tree ferns are used in preparing
several exotic dishes today, and many Park ferns have suffered severely
by having the new growth removed for this purpose.

    [Illustration: Multi-branched fronds characterize tree-ferns]

    [Illustration: Frond segments, segment closeups, and frond stalk
    sections of MEU (12) (left), HAPU III (9) (center), and HAPUU (11)
    tree ferns.]




                                  PULU


The young fronds of certain ferns, especially tree ferns, are covered
with a bronze-colored silky floss called “pulu.” Used by the ancient
Hawaiians as an absorbent, for surgical dressings, and even in embalming
their dead, pulu became an item of export importance to the mainland
from the 1860’s to 1884. During this period some 4,271,119 pounds were
shipped, according to Degener (2). It was used primarily for stuffing
mattresses, pillows, and upholstery. Carl P. Russell in his _One-Hundred
Years in Yosemite_ (1947, p. 102) quotes Caroline M. Churchill, a
visitor to Leidig’s, a Yosemite hostelry established in 1869: “At this
place the beds are cleanly and wholesome, although consisting of pulu
mattresses placed upon slat bedsteads.”

The remains of the old pulu factory may be seen today in Kilauea section
about 1.8 miles below Makaopuhi Crater on the trail to Napau Crater.
Here the pulu was dried and baled before being taken seaward over the
pali to Keauhou Landing for loading onto mainland-bound vessels.

Although a high percentage of pulu was gathered from Kilauea ferns, the
industry fortunately terminated about 1885, and no more ferns were cut
for the small amount of pulu obtained from each. The hike to the pulu
factory is not strenuous, and is one of the most interesting in Hawaii
National Park.

    [Illustration: {_Pulu._}]




                            AMAUMAU AND AMAU


The most abundant ferns growing beneath the larger tree ferns are
AMAUMAU (40) and the AMAU (41). Found frequently in both the Kilauea and
Haleakala sections of the Park, the amaumau is usually larger than the
less common amau and the fronds are not as hairy. The easiest method of
identification, however, is by comparing the undersides of the frond
segments (see illustration). The amaumau is smooth while the amau is
prominently veined. Usually smaller than the true tree ferns, and known
only from the Hawaiian Islands, ferns of this genus may reach heights as
great as 12 feet. A comparison of the photographs of these ferns with
the tree ferns will show that the entire frond of the AMAU or AMAUMAU
resembles a single segment of the many-branched frond of the tree fern.

The AMAUMAU fern has a high resistance to heat and drought, and may
often be seen growing on the Kau Desert near Kilauea crater. It is one
of the first plants to take root on new lava flows, in company with the
ohia tree. The illustration below shows a specimen growing on the 1877
lava which forms the floor of Keanakokoi crater.

Fowler (4, p. 16) states that the Hawaiians prepared a red dye used on
KAPA cloth from the outer part of the trunk of the amaumau. Leaves of
the amau provided a lining and thatching for houses, and the young
leaves and pith of the stems were occasionally cooked for food.

    [Illustration: {Amaumau _growing on lava._}]

    [Illustration: {_Underside of frond segments of_ AMAUMAU _and_
    AMAU.}]

    [Illustration: _In the rain forest near the old Pulu Factory. At
    least six different kind of ferns may be seen in this photograph._]

    [Illustration: Wawaeiole or Clubmoss. D&M, (58-61) (pages 36 and
    39)]

    [Illustration: Uluhe or False Staghorn. D&M, (4) (pages 32 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Palaa. D, (14) (pages 32 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Pamoho. M, (48) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: _Pamoho at the mouth of the Thurston Lava Tube_]

    [Illustration: Palapalai o kaumaapua. M, (34) (pages 34 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Loulu. M, (19) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Laukahi or Cliffbrake. D, (20) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Lance fern or DORYOPTERIS. D, (21) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Owalii or Maidenhair Spleenwort. D, (47) (pages 35
    and 38)]

    [Illustration: Kilau or Bracken. D, (15) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Pipi. D, (63) (pages 36 and 39)]

    [Illustration: Moa. M, (62) (pages 36 and 39)]

    [Illustration:                                           Werner Stoy
    _Dry-land ferns and grasses form the ground cover at this overlook
    above the Koolau Gap, with Hanakauhi, “Maker of the Mist”, in the
    distance. Haleakala Section, Hawaii National Park._]

    [Illustration: Nianiau or Sword Ferns. From the left, Narrow
    Swordfern (25), Scaly Swordfern (26), and Common Swordfern (24).]

    [Illustration: Adder’s Tongue. (Pages 32 and 37)
    _Ophioglossum pendulum_ (3)]

    [Illustration: _Ophioglossum petiolatum_ (1) left
    _Ophioglossum nudicaule_ (2)]

    [Illustration: Common _epiphytes_, or air plants]

  1. Kihi. M, (54) (pages 36 and 38)
  2. Pai. M, (55) (pages 36 and 38)
  3. Ekaha akolea. M, (51) (pages 36 and 38)
  4. Grammitis hookeri. M, (52) (pages 36 and 38)
  5. Amphoradenium sarmentosum. M, (56) (pages 36 and 38)
  6. Wahini noho mauna. M, (57) (pages 36 and 38)
  7. Palailaulii. M, (5) (pages 32 and 37)
  8. Palaihinahina. M, (6) (pages 32 and 37)
  9. Ohiaku. M, (7) (pages 32 and 37)
  10. Kilau. M, (8) (pages 32 and 37)

    [Illustration: {Epiphytes, #7-9}]

    [Illustration: {Epiphyte, #10}]

    [Illustration: _Amaumau ferns form beautiful patterns as they send
    out new fronds. Kilauea Section, Hawaii National Park._]

    [Illustration: Ekaha or Birdnest Fern. M, (42) (pages 35 and 38).
    The dark areas on undersurfaces are spores.]

    [Illustration: _Cyclosorus sandwicensis._ M, (36) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: The Elephant-Tongue ferns: From the left,
    _Elaphoglossum reticulatum_, small form (31), _E. aemulum_ (28), _E.
    gorgoneum_ (29), _E. reticulatum_, large form (28), and _E. hirtum_
    (30) (pages 34 and 38). All are called “EKAHA.” The dark surfaces
    are spores.]

    [Illustration: Palapalai. D&M, (13) (pages 32 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Iwaiwa. D, (49) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: _Asplenium contiguum._ M, (43) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: _Asplenium Macraei._ M, (46) (pages 35 and 38).
    Iwaiwa o kane. D, (44) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Piipiilau manamana. M, (45) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Owalii or Cretan Brake. D&M, (16) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Waimakanui. D, (17) (pages 33 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Kaapeape. D, (27) (pages 34 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Laukahi. D, (32) (pages 34 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Above and below: Ae or _pellucid polypody_. D&M, (50)
    (pages 36 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Ae.]

    [Illustration: Kolokolo. M, (53) (pages 36 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Iwaiwa or Maidenhair. M, (23) (pages 34 and 37)]

    [Illustration: Akolea. M, (38) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Hoio. M, (39) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Kikaweo. M, (35) (page 38)]

    [Illustration: _Cyclosorus dentatus._ M, (37) (pages 35 and 38)]

    [Illustration: Silver Fern. D, (22) (pages 33 and 37)]


                          (1-3) ADDER’S TONGUE

Sharp-eyed observers may find in cracks near Halemaumau and along the
Chain of Craters Road the adder’s tongue, a small, delicate plant with a
“head” which resembles a pointed tongue. Fowler (4) found the LAUKAHI
growing on trees near Keanakakoi and Makaopuhi craters. Hawaiians are
said to have prepared a cough remedy from the LAUKAHI. Near the 6,000
foot level on the slopes of Haleakala may be found a species of
_Ophioglossum_ according to Hillebrand (5).


                      (4) ULUHE OR FALSE STAGHORN

An attractive native fern which often becomes a pest by choking out
other plants is the ULUHE, common in openings throughout the eastern
half of the park. This fern often forms thickets so dense as to be
virtually impenetrable. Seeds of native plants which germinate beneath
these thickets may not be able to penetrate to sunlight. A fire hazard
is also presented by the dried fronds. An infusion was prepared from the
ULUHE, which the Hawaiians drank as an emetic, according to Fowler (4,
p. 10). Hillebrand (5, p. 545) states that this fern is “common on all
islands from 600 feet above the sea (Hilo district) to 3,000 feet....
The species occurs in most tropical countries of both hemispheres and in
many islands of the Pacific.”


                         (5-8) THE FILMY FERNS

Sharp eyes will be needed to detect the filmy ferns, since they normally
are found on tree trunks and rocks in the jungles, and may easily be
confused with the mosses with which they commonly grow. Compare the size
of the dainty PALAILAULII, which is about one inch long, with the tree
ferns, which often reach a height of 40 feet.


                             (13) PALAPALAI

An attractive fern with lace-like fronds, the PALAPALAI prefers the
outskirts of woods and open places. It is abundant in Kipuka Puaulu in
the Kilauea Section. The PALAPALAI is common in moderately wet areas
and, according to Hillebrand (5, p. 625) is found on all inhabited
Hawaiian Islands, as well as in India, Ceylon, Malaysia, Japan and
Formosa.


                               (14) PALAA

The PALAA was called the most common of all Hawaiian ferns by Hillebrand
(5, p. 627). In addition to Hawaii, he states that it is spread over all
tropical Polynesia and Asia, extending as far east as Madagascar and
north to Japan. Thriving in dry areas as well as moist, the PALAA is
common near Hilina Pali and in the vicinity of steam cracks around
Kilauea. It is one of the most abundant ferns along the Steaming Bluffs.
A red dye was extracted from the leaves by the old Hawaiians.


                         (15) KILAU OR BRACKEN

One of the most common ferns in dry areas in the Park is the KILAU, or
bracken fern. It often may be seen growing among tall grass, and is
abundant in the vicinity of Kipuka Puaulu and Kipuka Nene. It extends to
about the 9,000-foot level on the slopes of Mauna Loa.


                      (16) OWALII OR CRETAN BRAKE

Fairly common in the Kilauea Section, this fern may be found in Kipuka
Puaulu, along the Sandalwood Trail, and in the vicinity of the Thurston
Lava Tube. Note the dark rows of spores along the outer edges of the
leaves.


                            (17) WAIMAKANUI

Although not listed as a common fern, the WAIMAKANUI may be seen in open
areas in Kipuka Puaulu, as may the other ferns on the same page. It is
the same genus as the OWALII, described above.


                               (19) LOULU

This attractive fern is common near the entrance to the Thurston Lava
Tube. Found in moist localities at 3,000 to 5,000 feet elevation in the
Kilauea section, it normally grows as a short-stemmed plant, but may
reach heights of more than three feet. Hillebrand (5, p. 550) states
that it occurs also on Maui and Kauai at these elevations.


                       (20) LAUKAHI OR CLIFFBRAKE

Found in both sections of Hawaii National Park, the laukahi is found
most frequently in dry areas. In the Kilauea section it has been found
at elevations ranging up to 9,500 feet. The segments of the fronds,
known technically as PINNAE, are blue-gray in color and are often shaped
like a clover leaf, particularly when the fern is growing in shade. The
PINNAE are usually rolled up lengthwise, hiding the reproductive
structures. Hillebrand (5, p. 633) lists this species as occurring on
Maui, Hawaii and Kauai, and over the High Andes from Chile to Mexico.


                     (21) DORYOPTERIS OR LANCE FERN

Native only to the Hawaiian Islands but having no Hawaiian name, the
lance fern is common from Hilina Pali to the seacoast and throughout the
Kau Desert. The plants are small, tufted, and from six to fifteen inches
high. They often are abundant around the bases of lava outcroppings.


                            (22) SILVERFERN

A non-native plant which escaped from garden cultivation, the silverfern
often grows in large clumps in dry washes in the Hilina Pali area, and
extends out onto the Kau Desert. Also called “goldfern” these plants
derive their name from a waxy gold or silver-colored powder on the
underside of the fronds.


                       (23) IWAIWA OR MAIDENHAIR

Maidenhair fern, often used in floral decoration, is a plant familiar to
many. Preferring shady, moist places it is common in the vicinity of
Hilina Pali. The black glossy stalks provided ornamentation for Hawaiian
baskets and hats. The native species apparently is being replaced by a
non-native which was introduced about 50 years ago.


                     (24-26) NIANIAU OR SWORD FERN

The sword fern is a familiar plant in tropical and sub-tropical areas. A
common house fern, its scientific name, _Nephrolepis_, means
“kidney-scale” in Greek. The fern was so named because the spore dots on
the underside of the leaflets are protected by a kidney-shaped tissue
called an _indusium_. In the Haleakala section, _Puu Nianiau_, the hill
below the lodge, received its name from these ferns, which are also
called “OKUPUKUPU.” They are common in humid regions of the park,
particularly in the vicinity of steam cracks near Kilauea. The three
species illustrated have been found in the Park. Several large stands
may be seen in Kipuka Puaulu (Bird Park).


                             (27) KAAPEAPE

The KAAPEAPE may be recognized by the three pointed terminal leaflet and
remaining leaflets which are shaped like spear points. A species found
in India and China as well as the Hawaiian Islands, the kaapeape is
fairly common in Kipuka Puaulu. Note the irregular spore dots, often
abundant on the undersides of the leaves.


                     (28-31) EKAHA OR MAUI’S PADDLE

Common throughout forested areas in the park are the plants known
scientifically as _Elaphoglossum_, (Greek for “elephant-tongue”). They
are usually found growing as _epiphytes_ or air plants on the trunks of
trees. The resemblance to a paddle was recognized by the Hawaiians as
the name HOEA MAUI or “Maui’s paddle” indicates. In contrast to this
smooth, shiny species is the fuzzy EKAHA. According to Hillebrand, (5,
p. 549) these plants are found on all the inhabited Hawaiian Islands and
in tropical America, Tahiti, India, tropical Africa, Madeira and the
Azores. Six species of _Elaphoglossum_ have been found in the Kilauea
section.


                              (32) LAUKAHI

The LAUKAHI is a fairly common, low fern in the vicinity of Kipuka
Puaulu, but is considered rare in other portions of the Park. Fagerlund
(3, p. 19) lists it as having been collected in a lava tube at 8,800
feet on Mauna Loa.


                       (34) PALAPALAI O KAUMAAPUA

One of the most interesting things about this fern is the fact that the
frond tapers in both directions—toward the tip and toward the base. This
may be seen in the illustration. This species is fairly abundant in the
crater near the Thurston Lava Tube.


                      (36) CYCLOSORUS SANDWICENSIS

Although this fern is a native Hawaiian species, no Hawaiian name for it
could be found. It prefers shade and moist areas and is fairly common in
the Thurston Lava Tube and Kilauea Iki trails.


                        (37) CYCLOSORUS DENTATUS

The fern known technically as _Cyclosorus dentatus_ is not native to
Hawaii, but apparently was considered common on Oahu after 1900,
according to Wagner (6, p. 110). It may be found in moist areas in and
near the Park.


                              (38) AKOLEA

One of the most dainty of ferns, the AKOLEA is found in wet areas in the
vicinity of the Thurston Lava Tube. It is a common fern on the Kulani
Trail, just outside of the Park.


                               (39) HOIO

Common in moist areas in the Kilauea section, the HOIO prefers shade.
The fronds are large, often 3 to 4 feet long. Below the branches the
midribs are dark brown and smooth, but clothed with dark scales at their
bases. Spore dots are abundant.


                      (42) EKAHA OR BIRDNEST FERN

Of all Hawaiian fern species, few are more beautiful than the birdnest
fern, whose fronds often reach a length of six feet. Although it has not
been described from the Park, it has been included because it is
abundant in the Puna District, and probably will be found in the
Kalapana Extension of the Park. It normally grows in trees, but it may
also attach itself to rocks. When this happens the young birdnest ferns
are often called “rock ferns.” The dark areas on the underside of the
leaves in the illustration are spores.


                         (43-46, 49) ASPLENIUM

Among the most attractive, the _Asplenium_ ferns are also among the most
diversified Hawaiian plants as far as appearance is concerned. Showing
wide variety in choice of habitat they range from moist jungles to arid
lava flows. A number of the species may be recognized by the similarity
in shape of the leaf segments, and the long, parallel rows of spores,
but all do not show these characteristics. Nine species have been found
in the Kilauea Section of the Park.


                  (47) OWALII OR MAIDENHAIR SPLEENWORT

The maidenhair spleenwort has adapted itself to a dry existence. It is
abundant on barren lava flows where few other plants grow, and ranges up
to an elevation of about 10,000 feet.


                              (48) PAMOHO

A fern which lives in moist shady craters and lava tubes, the PAMOHO may
be seen growing on the cliff at the mouth of the Thurston Lava Tube.


                      (50) AE OR PELLUCID POLYPODY

A common plant throughout the open forests of the Kilauea Section, this
fern may be seen growing in abundance at the bases of ohia trees.
Superficially resembling a sword fern, the sharp twists to the leaf
segments differentiate it from them. An interesting thing about this
species is that it has also adapted itself to a life as an epiphyte, or
air plant, in the rain forests, at which time it develops a heavy
root-stock and has a much different appearance, as may be seen in the
illustrations.


                       (51-57) KIHI AND RELATIVES

The six ferns illustrated were formerly grouped under the genus
_Polypodium_, but several have recently been reclassified and placed in
new genera. The plants illustrated normally grow as _epiphytes_, or air
plants on tree trunks and rocks in the rain forests of the Kilauea
Section. That the Hawaiians recognized them as distinct plants is
indicated in the fact that they were given different Hawaiian names.


                     (58-61) WAWAEIOLE OR CLUBMOSS

Clubmosses are sometimes called “living fossils.” Many deposits of the
continental United States are formed from giant relatives of these
plants. The name “clubmoss” is derived from the spore-bearing bodies,
which are club-shaped. Most abundant is the nodding clubmoss but at
least three other species may be found in the Kilauea and Haleakala
sections.

Degener (2) reports that the Hawaiians used the wawaeiole (“rat’s foot”)
as a relief for rheumatism, the sufferer bathing in water in which the
plants had been boiled for about three hours.


                          (62-63) MOA OR PIPI

The _Psilotum_ is a primitive plant, of which two species are found in
the Hawaiian Islands. One is the MOA, which usually grows on the ground
and has stems which fork many times near the ends. The second, the PIPI,
often grows upon the trunks of trees and ferns. This species normally
grows perpendicular to the trunk, then curves abruptly earthward like
the tail of a horse. Degener (2, p. 18) states that the MOA was used by
the Hawaiians in making a medicine for treatment of a fungus disease, as
an emetic, and that the spores were used as a powder to relieve chafing
from the malo, or loincloth.




               SCIENTIFIC NAMES OF FERNS DESCRIBED HEREIN


(Numbers follow common names in the captions. Because of numerous recent
studies of ferns, various name changes have been necessary, and on some
names there is still disagreement. The following list adopts mainly the
nomenclature of the GENERA FILICUM by Prof. Edwin B. Copeland, 1947. The
indented names are ones which have been used for the same plants in the
past.)


                         FAMILY OPHIOGLOSSACEAE

  (1) _Ophioglossum petiolatum_ Hooker
  (2) _Ophioglossum nudicaule_ Linnaeus fils
  (3) _Ophioglossum pendulum_ esp. _falcatum_ (Presl) Clausen (LAUKAHI)
      _O. falcatum_ (Presl) Fowler
      _O. pendulum_ L.
      _Ophioderma falcatum_ Degener


                         FAMILY GLEICHENIACEAE

  (4) _Dicranopteris emarginata_ (Brackenridge) Robinson (ULUHE)
      _D. sandwicensis_ Degener
      _Gleichenia emarginata_ (Brackenridge) Robinson


                        FAMILY HYMENOPHYLLACEAE

  (5) _Hymenophyllum obtusum_ Hooker and Arnott (PALAILAULII)
      _Sphaerocionium obtusum_ (H.&A.) Copeland
  (6) _Hymenophyllum lanceolatum_ Hooker and Arnott (PALAIHINAHINA)
      _Sphaerocionium lanceolatum_ (H.&A.) Copeland
  (7) _Hymenophyllum recurvum_ Gaudichaud (OHIAKU)
      _Mecodium recurvum_ (Gaud.) Copeland
  (8) _Trichomanes davallioides_ Gaudichaud (KILAU)
      _Vandenboschia davallioides_ (Gaud.) Copeland


                           FAMILY PTERIDACEAE

  (9) _Cibotium Chamissoi_ Kaulfuss (HAPU III)
      _C. Menziesii_ Hooker
  (10) _Cibotium splendens_ (Gaudichaud) Krajina (HAPUU)
      _C. Chamissoi_ Kaulfuss
  (11) _Cibotium glaucum_ (Smith) Hooker and Arnott (HAPUU)
  (12) _Cibotium hawaiiense_ Nakai and Ogura (MEU)
      _Cibotium St. Johnii_ Krajina
  (13) _Microlepia setosa_ (Smith) Alston (PALAPALAI)
      _M. strigosa_ (Thunberg) Presl
  (14) _Sphenomeris chusana_ (Linnaeus) Copeland (PALAA)
      _Stenoloma chinensis_ (L.) Beddome
      _Odontosoria chinensis_ (L.) J. Smith
      _Microlepia tenuifolia_ Mettenius
  (15) _Pteridium aquilinum_ (L.) Kuhn (KILAU, BRACKEN)
      _Pteris aquilina_ L.
  (16) _Pteris cretica_ Linnaeus (OWALII)
  (17) _Pteris excelsa_ Gaudichaud (WAIMAKANUI)
  (18) _Pteris vittata_ Linnaeus (KILAUOPUEO)
      _Pteris longifolia_ L.
  (19) _Coniogramme pilosa_ (Brackenridge) Hieronymus (LOULU)
      _Gymnogramme javanica_ Hillebrand
  (20) _Pellaea ternifolia_ (Cavanilles) Link (LAUKAHI)
  (21) _Doryopteris decora_ Brackenridge (LANCE FERN)
  (22) _Pityrogramma calomelanos_ (Linnaeus) Link (SILVER FERN)
      _Ceropteris ochracea_ (Presl) Robinson
  (23) _Adiantum cuneatum_ Langsdorff and Fischer (IWAIWA, MAIDENHAIR)


                          FAMILY DAVALLIACEAE

  (24) _Nephrolepis exaltata_ (Linnaeus) Schott (NIANIAU, COMMON
              SWORDFERN)
  (25) _Nephrolepis cordifolia_ (Linnaeus) Presl (NARROW SWORDFERN)
  (26) _Nephrolepis hirsutula_ (Forster) Presl (SCALY SWORDFERN)


                           FAMILY ASPIDIACEAE

  (27) _Cyrtomium caryotideum_ (Wallich) Presl (KAAPEAPE)
      _Aspidium caryotideum_ Wallich
      _Phanerophlebia caryotidea_ (Wall.) Copeland
  (28) _Elaphoglossum aemulum_ (Kaulfuss) Brackenridge (EKAHA)
      _E. conforme_ (Swartz) Schott
      _Acrostichum conforme_ Swartz
  (29) _Elaphoglossum gorgoneum_ (Kaulfuss) Brackenridge (EKAHA)
  (30) _Elaphoglossum hirtum_ (Swartz) C. Christensen (EKAHA)
    _Acrostichum squamosum_ Hillebrand
  (31) _Elaphoglossum reticulatum_ (Kaulfuss) Gaudichaud (EKAHA)
  (32) _Dryopteris paleacea_ (Swartz) C. Christensen (LAUKAHI)
      _Aspidium filix-mas_ var. _parallelogrammum_ Kuntze
  (33) _Dryopteris glabra_ (Brackenridge) O. Kuntze (KILAU)
      _Aspidium glabrum_ (Brack.) Mettenius
  (34) _Lastrea globulifera_ Brackenridge (PALAPALAI O KAUMAAPUA)
      _Aspidium globuliferum_ (Brack.) Mann
  (35) _Cyclosorus cyatheoides_ (Kaulfuss) Farwell (KIKAWEO)
      _Dryopteris cyatheoides_ (Kaulf.) O. Kuntze
      _Aspidium cyatheoides_ Kaulf.
  (36) _Cyclosorus sandwicensis_ (Brackenridge) Copeland
      _Dryopteris stegnogrammoides_ (Baker) C. Christensen
      _Phegopteris polycarpa_ (Hooker & Arnott) C. Chr.
  (37) _Cyclosorus dentatus_ (Forskal) Ching
      _Dryopteris dentata_ (Forsk.) O. Kuntze
  (38) _Athyrium microphyllum_ (Smith) Alston (AKOLEA)
      _A. Poiretianum_ (Gaudichaud) Presl
      _Asplenium aspidioides_ Hillebrand
      _A. multisectum_ Brackenridge
  (39) _Athyrium sandwichianum_ Presl (HOIO)
      _Diplazium sandwichianum_ (Presl) Diels
      _Asplenium sandwichianum_ (Presl) Hooker


                          FAMILY BLENCHNACEAE

  (40) _Sadleria cyatheoides_ Kaulfuss (AMAUMAU)
  (41) _Sadleria pallida_ Hooker & Arnott (AMAU)
    _S. Hillebrandii_ Robinson


                          FAMILY ASPLENIACEAE

  (42) _Asplenium nidus_ Linnaeus (EKAHA, BIRDNEST FERN)
      _Neottopteris nidus_ (L.) J. Smith
      _Thamnopteris nidus_ Presl
  (43) _Asplenium contiguum_ Kaulfuss
  (44) _Asplenium rhipidoneuron_ Robinson (IWAIWA O KANE)
      _A. furcatum_ Hillebrand
  (45) _Asplenium lobulatum_ Mettenius (PIIPIILAU MANAMANA)
      _A. pseudofalcatum_ Hillebrand
  (46) _Asplenium Macraei_ Hooker and Greville
      _A. erectum_ Hillebrand
  (47) _Asplenium trichomanes_ Linnaeus (OWALII)
      _A. densum_ Brackenridge
  (48) _Asplenium unilaterale_ Lamarck (PAMOHO)
      _A. resectum_ Smith
  (49) _Asplenium adiantum-nigrum_ Linnaeus (IWAIWA)


                          FAMILY POLYPODIACEAE

  (50) _Polypodium pellucidum_ Kaulfuss (AE)
      (The variety of exposed places is var. _vulcanicum_ Skotts.)
  (51) _Pleopeltis Thunbergiana Kaulfuss_ (EKAHA AKOLEA)
      _Polypodium lineare_ Thunberg


                         FAMILY GRAMMITIDACEAE

  (52) _Grammitis Hookeri_ (Brackenridge) Copeland
      _Polypodium Hookeri_ Brackenridge
  (53) _Grammitis tenella_ Kaulfuss (KOLOKOLO)
      _Polypodium pseudogrammitis_ Gaudichaud
  (54) _Xiphopteris Saffordii_ (Maxon) Copeland (KIHI)
      _Polypodium Saffordii_ Maxon
      _P. serrulatum_ Hillebrand
  (55) _Amphoradenium hymenophylloides_ (Kaulfuss) Copeland (PAI)
      _Polypodium hymenophylloides_ Kaulfuss
  (56) _Amphoradenium sarmentosum_ (Brackenridge) Copeland
      _Polypodium sarmentosum_ Brackenridge
  (57) _Amphoradenium tamariscinum_ (Kaulfuss) Copeland (WAHINI NOHO
              MAUNA)
      _Polypodium tamariscinum_ Kaulfuss


                          FAMILY LYCOPODIACEAE

  (58) _Lycopodium cernuum Linnaeus_ (WAWAEIOLE)
  (59) _Lycopodium phyllanthum_ Hooker & Arnott (WAWAEIOLE)
      _Lycopodium pachystachyon_ Spring
  (60) _Lycopodium polytrichoides_ Kaulfuss (WAWAEIOLE)
  (61) _Lycopodium venustulum_ Gaudichaud (WAWAEIOLE)


                           FAMILY PSILOTACEAE

  (62) _Psilotum complanatum Swartz_ (MOA)
  (63) _Psilotum nudum_ (Linnaeus) Beauvois (PIPI)
      _Psilotum triquetrum_ Swartz




                         SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY


  (1) Copeland, Edwin B. _Genera Filicum._ Waltham, Mass., 1947.
  (2) Degener, Otto. _Plants of Hawaii National Park._ Honolulu, 1930.
  (3) Fagerlund, Gunnar, and Arthur L. Mitchell. _A Checklist of the
              Plants Hawaii National Park, Kilauea-Mauna Loa Section._
              Hawaii National Park, 1944.
  (4) Fowler, Robert. “Annotated List of Ferns of the Kilauea-Mauna Loa
              Section of Hawaii National Park.” _American Fern Journal_,
              Vol. 30, No. 1, 1940.
  (5) Hillebrand, W. F. _Flora of the Hawaiian Islands._ New York, 1888.
  (6) Wagner, W. H., Jr. “Ferns Naturalized in Hawaii.” _Occasional
              Papers of Bernice P. Bishop Museum_, Vol. XX, No. 8.
              Honolulu, 1950.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  Adder’s tongue                                              17, 32, 37
  _Adiantum_                                                  29, 34, 37
  Ae                                                          28, 36, 38
  Akolea                                                      29, 35, 38
  Amau                                                                 7
  Amaumau                                                       7, 20-21
  _Amphoradenium_                                             18, 36, 38
  _Asplenium_                                         10, 13, 24, 35, 38
  _Athyrium_                                                  29, 35, 38


                                   B
  Bird nest fern                                              22, 35, 38
  Bracken                                                     13, 33, 37


                                   C
  _Ceropteris_                                                31, 33, 37
  _Cibotium_                                                    4, 5, 37
  Cliffbrake                                                  12, 33, 38
  Clubmoss                                                     8, 36, 39
  _Coniogramme_                                               11, 33, 37
  Cretan brake                                                26, 33, 37
  _Cyclosorus_                                            22, 31, 35, 38
  _Cyrtomium_                                                 27, 34, 37


                                   D
  _Dicranopteris_                                              9, 32, 37
  _Diplazium_                                                 30, 35, 38
  Doryopteris                                                 12, 33, 37
  _Dryopteris_                                                27, 34, 38


                                   E
  Ekaha                                                   22, 23, 34, 38
  Ekaha akolea                                                18, 36, 38
  _Elaphoglossum_                                             23, 34, 38
  Epiphytes                                                           18


                                   F
  False staghorn                                               9, 32, 37


                                   G
  _Gleichenia_                                                 9, 32, 37
  Gold fern                                                   31, 33, 37
  _Grammitis_                                                 18, 36, 38


                                   H
  Hapu iii                                                      4, 5, 37
  Hapuu                                                         4, 5, 37
  Haleakala                                                        3, 15
  Hawaii National Park                                                 3
  Hoi                                                         30, 35, 38
  _Hymenophyllum_                                             18, 32, 37


                                   I
  Indusium                                                            34
  Iwaiwa                                                      24, 35, 38
  Iwaiwa O Kane                                               25, 35, 38


                                   K
  Kaapeape                                                    27, 34, 37
  Kapa cloth                                                           7
  Keanakakoi Crater                                                    7
  Kihi                                                        18, 36, 38
  Kikaweo                                                         30, 38
  Kilau                                               13, 18, 32, 33, 37
  Kilauea                                                              3
  Kipuka Puaulu                                                   33, 34
  Koa                                                                  3
  Kolokolo                                                    28, 36, 38


                                   L
  Lance fern                                                  12, 33, 37
  Laukahi                                         12, 27, 33, 34, 37, 38
  Loulu                                                       11, 33, 38
  _Lycopodium_                                                 8, 36, 39


                                   M
  Maidenhair                                                  29, 34, 37
  Maidenhair spleenwort                                       13, 35, 38
  Makaopuhi Crater                                                 6, 32
  Maui’s paddle                                               23, 34, 38
  Mauna Loa                                                            3
  Meu                                                           4, 5, 37
  _Microlepia_                                                23, 32, 37
  Moa                                                         14, 36, 39
  Mother of ohia                                                       4


                                   N
  Napau Crate                                                          6
  National Park Service                                                3
  _Neottopteris_                                              22, 35, 38
  _Nephrolepis_                                               16, 34, 37
  _Nianiau_                                                   16, 34, 37


                                   O
  _Odontosoria_                                               14, 32, 37
  Ohiaku                                                      18, 32, 37
  _Ophioderma_                                                17, 32, 37
  _Ophioglossum_                                              17, 32, 37
  Owalii                                          13, 26, 33, 35, 37, 38


                                   P
  Pai                                                         18, 36, 38
  Palaa                                                    9, 14, 32, 37
  Palaihinahina                                               18, 32, 37
  Palailaulii                                                 18, 32, 37
  Palapalai                                       11, 23, 32, 34, 37, 38
  Pamoho                                                      10, 35, 38
  _Pellaea_                                                   12, 33, 38
  Pellucid polpody                                            28, 36, 38
  Piipiilau manamana                                          25, 35, 38
  Pinnae                                                              33
  Pipi                                                        14, 36, 39
  _Pityrogramma_                                              31, 33, 37
  _Polypodium_                                            18, 28, 36, 38
  _Psilotum_                                                  14, 36, 39
  _Pteridium_                                                 13, 33, 37
  _Pteris_                                                    26, 33, 37
  Pulu                                                              4, 6
  Pulu Factory                                                      6, 8


                                   S
  _Sadleria_                                                    7, 20-21
  Silverfern                                                  31, 33, 37
  _Spenomeris_                                                14, 32, 37
  Spores                                                               3
  Staghorn, false                                              9, 32, 37
  _Stenoloma_                                                 14, 32, 37
  Sword fern                                                  16, 34, 37


                                   T
  Thurston Lava Tube                                          10, 33, 34
  Tree fern                                                  2, 4, 5, 37
  _Trichomanes_                                               18, 32, 37


                                   U
  Uluhe                                                        9, 32, 37


                                   W
  Wahini noho mauna                                           18, 36, 38
  Waimakanui                                                  26, 33, 37
  Wawaeiole                                                    8, 36, 39


                                   X
  _Xiphopteris_                                               18, 36, 38


                          THE PURPOSES OF THE
                   HAWAII NATURAL HISTORY ASSOCIATION
                      Hawaii National Park, Hawaii

Formed for the purpose of cooperating with the National Park Service by
assisting the Naturalist Department of Hawaii National Park in the
development of a better public understanding of the volcanology,
geology, plant life, history, and related interests in Hawaii National
Park and surrounding areas, the Association aids in the development of
the Hawaii National Park Museum and library, offers publications, motion
and still colored pictures of volcanoes and natural history of this area
for sale to park visitors, and cooperates in the publication of Hawaii
Nature Notes.

Revenue derived from the activities of the Hawaii Natural History
Association is devoted entirely to the purposes outlined above. Any
person interested in furthering these purposes may become a member upon
payment of one dollar. Gifts and donations are accepted for museum or
library development, or general use.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Added captions (derived from the text, and enclosed in {brackets}) to
  several illustrations.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FERNS OF HAWAII NATIONAL PARK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


