The Project Gutenberg eBook of Historical Record of the Seventh, or the Queen's Own Regiment of Hussars
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Historical Record of the Seventh, or the Queen's Own Regiment of Hussars

Author: Richard Cannon

Release date: January 6, 2017 [eBook #53900]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTH, OR THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF HUSSARS ***

  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  More detail can be found at the end of the book.




  HISTORICAL RECORDS

  OF

  THE BRITISH ARMY.




GENERAL ORDERS.


  _HORSE-GUARDS_,
  _1st January, 1836._

His Majesty has been pleased to command, that, with a view of doing
the fullest justice to Regiments, as well as to Individuals who
have distinguished themselves by their Bravery in Action with the
Enemy, an Account of the Services of every Regiment in the British
Army shall be published under the superintendence and direction
of the Adjutant-General; and that this Account shall contain the
following particulars, viz.

  ---- The Period and Circumstances of the Original Formation of
  the Regiment; The Stations at which it has been from time to time
  employed; The Battles, Sieges, and other Military Operations,
  in which it has been engaged, particularly specifying any
  Achievement it may have performed, and the Colours, Trophies,
  &c., it may have captured from the Enemy.

  ---- The Names of the Officers and the number of Non-Commissioned
  Officers and Privates, Killed or Wounded by the Enemy, specifying
  the Place and Date of the Action.

  ---- The Names of those Officers, who, in consideration of their
  Gallant Services and Meritorious Conduct in Engagements with the
  Enemy, have been distinguished with Titles, Medals, or other
  Marks of His Majesty's gracious favour.

  ---- The Names of all such Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers
  and Privates as may have specially signalized themselves in
  Action.

  And,

  ---- The Badges and Devices which the Regiment may have been
  permitted to bear, and the Causes on account of which such Badges
  or Devices, or any other Marks of Distinction, have been granted.

  By Command of the Right Honourable
  GENERAL LORD HILL,
  _Commanding-in-Chief_.

  JOHN MACDONALD,
  _Adjutant-General_.




PREFACE.


The character and credit of the British Army must chiefly depend
upon the zeal and ardour, by which all who enter into its service
are animated, and consequently it is of the highest importance that
any measure calculated to excite the spirit of emulation, by which
alone great and gallant actions are achieved, should be adopted.

Nothing can more fully tend to the accomplishment of this desirable
object, than a full display of the noble deeds with which the
Military History of our country abounds. To hold forth these bright
examples to the imitation of the youthful soldier, and thus to
incite him to emulate the meritorious conduct of those who have
preceded him in their honourable career, are among the motives that
have given rise to the present publication.

The operations of the British Troops are, indeed, announced in the
"London Gazette," from whence they are transferred into the public
prints: the achievements of our armies are thus made known at the
time of their occurrence, and receive the tribute of praise and
admiration to which they are entitled. On extraordinary occasions,
the Houses of Parliament have been in the habit of conferring on
the Commanders, and the Officers and Troops acting under their
orders, expressions of approbation and of thanks for their skill
and bravery, and these testimonials, confirmed by the high honour
of their Sovereign's Approbation, constitute the reward which the
soldier most highly prizes.

It has not, however, until late years, been the practice (which
appears to have long prevailed in some of the Continental armies)
for British Regiments to keep regular records of their services
and achievements. Hence some difficulty has been experienced in
obtaining, particularly from the old Regiments, an authentic
account of their origin and subsequent services.

This defect will now be remedied, in consequence of His Majesty
having been pleased to command, that every Regiment shall in future
keep a full and ample record of its services at home and abroad.

From the materials thus collected, the country will henceforth
derive information as to the difficulties and privations which
chequer the career of those who embrace the military profession. In
Great Britain, where so large a number of persons are devoted to
the active concerns of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, and
where these pursuits have, for so long a period, been undisturbed
by the _presence of war_, which few other countries have escaped,
comparatively little is known of the vicissitudes of active
service, and of the casualties of climate, to which, even during
peace, the British Troops are exposed in every part of the globe,
with little or no interval of repose.

In their tranquil enjoyment of the blessings which the country
derives from the industry and the enterprise of the agriculturist
and the trader, its happy inhabitants may be supposed not often to
reflect on the perilous duties of the soldier and the sailor,--on
their sufferings,--and on the sacrifice of valuable life, by which
so many national benefits are obtained and preserved.

The conduct of the British Troops, their valour, and endurance,
have shone conspicuously under great and trying difficulties; and
their character has been established in Continental warfare by the
irresistible spirit with which they have effected debarkations in
spite of the most formidable opposition, and by the gallantry and
steadiness with which they have maintained their advantages against
superior numbers.

In the official Reports made by the respective Commanders, ample
justice has generally been done to the gallant exertions of the
Corps employed; but the details of their services, and of acts of
individual bravery, can only be fully given in the Annals of the
various Regiments.

These Records are now preparing for publication, under His
Majesty's special authority, by Mr. RICHARD CANNON, Principal Clerk
of the Adjutant-General's Office; and while the perusal of them
cannot fail to be useful and interesting to military men of every
rank, it is considered that they will also afford entertainment and
information to the general reader, particularly to those who may
have served in the Army, or who have relatives in the Service.

There exists in the breasts of most of those who have served,
or are serving, in the Army, an _Esprit de Corps_--an attachment
to every thing belonging to their Regiment; to such persons a
narrative of the services of their own Corps cannot fail to prove
interesting. Authentic accounts of the actions of the great,--the
valiant,--the loyal, have always been of paramount interest with
a brave and civilized people. Great Britain has produced a race
of heroes who, in moments of danger and terror, have stood, "firm
as the rocks of their native shore;" and when half the World has
been arrayed against them, they have fought the battles of their
Country with unshaken fortitude. It is presumed that a record of
achievements in war,--victories so complete and surprising, gained
by our countrymen,--our brothers,--our fellow-citizens in arms,--a
record which revives the memory of the brave, and brings their
gallant deeds before us, will certainly prove acceptable to the
public.

Biographical memoirs of the Colonels and other distinguished
Officers, will be introduced in the Records of their respective
Regiments, and the Honorary Distinctions which have, from time to
time, been conferred upon each Regiment, as testifying the value
and importance of its services, will be faithfully set forth.

As a convenient mode of Publication, the Record of each Regiment
will be printed in a distinct number, so that when the whole shall
be completed, the Parts may be bound up in numerical succession.




  HISTORICAL RECORD

  OF

  THE SEVENTH,

  OR

  THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF

  HUSSARS:

  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF

  THE ORIGIN OF THE REGIMENT IN 1690,

  AND OF ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES TO 1842.


  _ILLUSTRATED WITH A PLATE OF THE UNIFORM._


  LONDON:
  JOHN W. PARKER, WEST STRAND.

  M.DCCC.XLII.




  LONDON:
  HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS,
  ST. MARTIN'S LANE




[Illustration: Seventh (or Queen's Own) Hussars.

  To face Title-page.]




  THE SEVENTH,

  OR

  THE QUEEN'S OWN HUSSARS,

  BEAR ON THEIR APPOINTMENTS THE WORDS

  "PENINSULA," AND "WATERLOO,"

  TO COMMEMORATE
  THEIR GALLANTRY IN SPAIN AND THE SOUTH OF FRANCE,
  IN 1813 AND 1814,

  AND AT THE MEMORABLE BATTLE OF WATERLOO,
  IN 1815.




CONTENTS.


  Year                                                        Page

  1689 Several Independent Troops of Horse and Dragoons
         raised in Scotland                                     10

  ---- Battle of Killicrankie                                   11

  1690 The Independent Troops formed into two regiments
         of Cavalry                                             12

  ---- Their Services during the Campaign of 1690               --

  ---- The two Regiments incorporated, and constituted a
         regiment of Dragoons, now SEVENTH HUSSARS     13

  1694 Proceeds to the Netherlands                              14

  1695 Action at Moorsleede                                     16

  ---- Covering the Siege of Namur                              16

  1696 Serves under the Prince of Vaudemont                     18

  1697 ---------------- Elector of Bavaria                      --

  ---- Embarks for England                                      19

  1698 Marches to Scotland                                      --

  1711 Embarks for Holland                                      21

  ---- Serves under the Duke of Marlborough                     --

  1712 ---------------- Duke of Ormond                          --

  1713 Proceeds to Ireland                                      23

  1714 Reduced after the Peace of Utrecht                       --

  1715 Re-Established                                           --

  ---- Styled _Her Royal Highness the Princess of
         Wales's Own Royal Regiment of Dragoons_                26

  ---- Battle of Dumblain                                       27

  1716 Marches to England                                       28

  1721 Returns to Scotland                                      29

  1722 Proceeds to England                                      --

  1727 Styled the _Queen's Own Regiment of Dragoons_            30

  1733 Marches to Scotland                                      31

  1735 Returns to England                                       --

  1740 Encamped near Newbury                                    31

  1741 Proceeds to Scotland                                     32

  1742 Returns to England--Embarks for Flanders                 --

  1743 Battle of Dettingen                                      33

  1745 --------- Fontenoy                                       35

  1746 --------- Roucoux                                        36

  1747 --------- Val                                            37

  1749 Returns to England                                       38

  1751 Description of the Clothing and Standards                39

  1754 Proceeds to Scotland                                     41

  1755 A Light Troop added to the Establishment                 --

  1758 Expedition to St. Maloes                                 42

  ---- Capture of Cherbourg                                     43

  1760 Proceeds to Germany                                      --

  ---- Battle of Warbourg                                       44

  1761 --------- Kirch-Denkern                                  46

  ---- Skirmishes at Eimbeck and Foorwohle                      --

  1762 Battle of Groebenstein                                   47

  1763 Returns to England--Light Troop Disbanded                48

  1766 Drummers replaced by Trumpeters                          49

  1768 Proceeds to Scotland                                     --

  1769 Returns to England                                       --

  1773 Proceeds to Scotland                                     --

  1774 Returns to England                                       --

  1778 Encamped near Bury St. Edmunds                           50

  1779 Proceeds to Scotland                                     --

  1781 Returns to England                                       --

  1783 _Constituted a Corps of Light Dragoons_                  51

  1784 _Blue_ Clothing adopted                                  51

  1786 _Blue_ Cloaks ----                                       53

  1793 Embarks for Flanders                                     54

  ---- Attack on Lannoy                                         55

  1794 Action at Prémont                                        56

  ---- Battle of Cateau                                         --

  ---- --------- Tournay                                        57

  ---- Actions at Roubaix and Mouvaux                           58

  ---- Second Battle of Tournay                                 62

  ---- Skirmish near Breda                                      --

  1794 Skirmish near Nimeguen                                   63

  1795 Retreats through Holland to Germany                      --

  ---- Embarks for England                                      64

  1799 ----------- Holland                                      --

  ---- Battle of Bergen                                         65

  ---- --------- Egmont-op-Zee                                  --

  ---- Actions at Beverwyck and Wyck-op-Zee                     66

  ---- Embarks for England                                      67

  1807 Equipped as a _Regiment of Hussars_                      68

  1808 Embarks for Spain                                        --

  ---- Action at Sahagun                                        70

  ---- ------ near Carrion                                      --

  ---- ------ Benevente                                         71

  1809 Retreats to Corunna--Embarks for England                 73

  1810 Proceeds to Ireland                                      74

  1813 Returns to England                                       --

  ---- Embarks for Spain                                        --

  ---- Passage of the Bidassoa                                  75

  1814 Battle of Orthes                                         76

  ---- --------- Toulouse                                       77

  ---- Returns to England                                       78

  1815 Embarks for Flanders                                     --

  ---- Battle of Quatre-Bras                                    79

  ---- Action at Genappe                                        79

  ---- Battle of Waterloo                                       80

  ---- Capture of Cambray                                       82

  ---- Advances to Paris                                        --

  1816 Forms part of the Army of Occupation                     --

  1818 Returns to England                                       83

  1819 Marches to Scotland                                      --

  1820 Embarks for Ireland                                      --

  1823 Returns to England                                       84

  1826 Proceeds to Scotland                                     --

  1828 Embarks for Ireland                                      85

  1830 _Scarlet Pelisses_ adopted                               --

  1831 Returns to England                                       --

  1833 Proceeds to Scotland                                     --

  1834 Returns to England                                       86

  1837 Embarks for Ireland                                      86

  1838 Four service troops embark for Canada                    --

  ---- Employed against the Insurgents in Lower Canada          --

  1841 Resumes wearing _Blue Pelisses_                          --

  1842 The Conclusion                                           87




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS.

  1690 Robert Cunningham                                        89

  1696 William, Lord Jedburgh                                   90

  1707 Patrick, Lord Polwarth                                   91

  1709 Honorable William Kerr                                   --

  1741 John Cope                                                92

  1760 John Mostyn                                              93

  1763 Sir George Howard, K.B.                                  94

  1779 Sir Henry Clinton, K.B.                                  --

  1795 David Dundas                                             96

  1801 Marquis of Anglesey, K.G., G.C.B., K.St.P.,
         G.C.H.                                                 99


       SUCCESSION OF LIEUTENANT-COLONELS                       101


       SUCCESSION OF MAJORS                                    102


The Plate of the Uniform in 1842, to follow the Title-Page.




  HISTORICAL RECORD

  OF

  THE SEVENTH,

  OR,

  THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT
  OF
  HUSSARS.


[Sidenote: 1688]

THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF HUSSARS was originally a corps of
heavy cavalry, and was formed of independent troops of horse and
dragoons, raised in Scotland during the commotions which followed
the Revolution of 1688, when a number of patriotic Scots arrayed
themselves, under the banners of William and Mary, and fought
against the adherents of King James II., who sought to establish
papacy and arbitrary government.

[Sidenote: 1689]

After King James's flight to France, England became comparatively
tranquil, and the establishment of the Prince and Princess of
Orange on the throne, in February, 1689, was hailed with public
rejoicings. In Scotland, the Catholic clans, and other partisans of
King James were numerous; and, while the chivalrous Viscount Dundee
aroused the Highlanders to arms, the Duke of Gordon held the castle
of Edinburgh, of which he was governor, in the interest of the
Stuart dynasty.

King William sent Major-General Mackay, an experienced officer,
who had served in the armies of France and Holland, to take the
command of the forces in Scotland; and, while Viscount Dundee was
organising a plan of co-operation among the clans, additional corps
were embodied by the government.

The Earl of Annandale, who was one of the first of the Scottish
noblemen to advocate the principles of the Revolution, raised
a troop of horse; a second was raised by the Lord Belhaven, a
nobleman distinguished for his steady opposition to the tyrannical
measures of King Charles II., and King James II.; and a third
troop was raised by William, Laird of Blair: independent troops of
dragoons were also embodied by several gentlemen who were zealous
for the interests and welfare of their country; also several
regiments and independent companies of foot.

While these corps were being embodied, Viscount Dundee descended
from the mountains with several bands of Highlanders, seized
on the town of Perth, and took the Laird of Blair, and his
lieutenant, the Laird of Pollock, prisoners. These gentlemen were
carried about like felons, in an ungenerous triumph, for six weeks,
and afterwards sent to the Isle of Mul, where the Laird of Blair
died, in consequence of the barbarous treatment he received.

The Earl of Annandale's and Lord Belhaven's troops of horse, having
been completed and equipped, took the field, and formed part of the
force under Major-General Mackay, which engaged the Highlanders and
Irish, under Viscount Dundee, at the pass of _Killicrankie_, on
the 27th of July, 1689, and were the only cavalry corps with the
army on that occasion[1]. For a short time after the commencement
of the action, the advantage was on the side of Major-General
Mackay. When the infantry began to give way before the superior
numbers of the clans, the two troops of horse were ordered
forward,--one on the right, and the other on the left,--to attack
the flanks of the opposing army; but, being untrained men, instead
of dashing, sword in hand, upon the adverse ranks, they halted at
a short distance, and commenced a straggling fire with carbines
and pistols. This mode of attacking a body of men on foot of very
superior numbers, could not fail to prove disastrous; and the two
troops were speedily driven from the field with loss. The army
was defeated; but the ability evinced by Major-General Mackay, in
conducting the retreat, and in assembling another army, with the
loss of the Jacobite commander, Viscount Dundee, who was killed at
the commencement of the action, occasioned the result to be less
disastrous than was anticipated, and the Highlanders were forced to
take refuge in their mountain fastnesses.

[Sidenote: 1690]

In the beginning of 1690 the newly-raised horse were formed into
a regiment, of only three troops, of which the Earl of Eglintoun
was appointed colonel,--the Honorable William Forbes (eldest
son of Lord Forbes), lieut.-colonel,--and Sir George Gordon, of
Edinglassie, major; the dragoons were also formed into a regiment
of three troops, under the command of Lord Cardross,--Jackson,
lieut.-colonel, and--Guthrie, major; at the same time three of the
newly-raised regiments of foot were incorporated into one, which
were placed under the orders of Colonel Cunningham.

During the subsequent contest the two cavalry corps performed
much harassing and faithful service; they took part in several
skirmishes, and evinced intrepidity and valour; the clans were
repulsed and driven back to the mountains; garrisons were placed
in the heart of the Highland districts, and the adherents of King
James lost all hope of success.

In the following winter the Scots army was remodelled; several
corps of infantry were disbanded; and the two regiments of cavalry,
of three troops each, were incorporated and constituted a regiment
of dragoons, of six troops of fifty men each, of which ROBERT
CUNNINGHAM was appointed colonel by commission dated the 30th
of December, 1690; William Forbes was appointed lieut.-colonel;
and Patrick Hume, major. The corps thus formed now bears the
distinguished title of the SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN, REGIMENT OF
HUSSARS, and its services form the subject of the following pages.
Until the reign of King George II., it was distinguished by the
name of its colonel.

[Sidenote: 1691]

[Sidenote: 1692]

Being constituted of men of approved fidelity and devotion to the
principles of the Revolution, CUNNINGHAM'S regiment was held in
estimation by the government; it was quartered near the confines
of the Highlands, to hold in check the disaffected clans; and was
afterwards removed to the vicinity of Edinburgh. In August, 1691,
a proclamation was published, proffering indemnity and pardon to
all persons who would submit to the government and take the oath
of allegiance to King William and Queen Mary. Before the end of
January, 1692, the heads of clans had ratified their submission,
and hostilities ceased in Scotland.

[Sidenote: 1693]

The British monarch had, in the mean time, engaged in a war with
Louis XIV., and on His Majesty's return to England, after the
termination of the campaign of 1693, the two Scots regiments of
dragoons (Livingstone's, now Second, or the Scots' Greys, and
CUNNINGHAM'S, now SEVENTH HUSSARS) were selected to proceed on
foreign service.

[Sidenote: 1694]

CUNNINGHAM'S dragoons commenced their march from Scotland in
February, 1694, and on arriving at Berwick they were placed on the
English establishment; at the same time exertions were made to
complete an augmentation of two troops, and of ten additional men
and horses to each of the six old troops. The augmentation troops
left Scotland in the spring, and the six old troops continued their
march southward until they arrived at London, where the eight
troops were united in May, and the whole embarked at Greenwich for
the Netherlands.

The regiment, commanded by its colonel, Robert Cunningham, landed
at Williamstadt, in North Brabant, on the 31st of May; advanced up
the country to the vicinity of Arschot, and was reviewed by King
William on the 16th of June, together with Livingstone's regiment:
and the hardy and warlike appearance of the Scots troopers
elicited the commendations of His Majesty, and of the British and
foreign general officers present at the review.

After several marches the regiment was encamped at Mont St.
André, where an army of eighty-eight thousand men of several
nations was assembled under the command of the British monarch,
and CUNNINGHAM'S dragoons were formed in brigade with Eppinger's
(foreign), Essex's (now fourth), and Wynne's (late fifth),
regiments of dragoons, under the orders of Brigadier-General
Wynne. No general engagement occurred; and after taking part in
the operations of a toilsome campaign, the regiment went into
cantonments for the winter among the Flemish peasantry, in the
villages between Ghent and Sas van Ghent.

[Sidenote: 1695]

From its winter quarters, the regiment marched in April, 1695, to
Dixmude, in West Flanders; it joined the army in May, at the camp
at Arseele, and was formed in brigade with Dopf's (Dutch) dragoons
under Brigadier-General Wynne.

In the beginning of June, the army advanced to Becelaer. On the
14th of that month five hundred dragoons (among whom was a large
detachment from CUNNINGHAM'S regiment) under the command of the
Earl of Portland and Brigadier-General Wynne, left the camp with
the view of intercepting a numerous French force, which was
moving quietly across the country to attack the bread-waggons of
the confederate army, on their way from Bruges to the camp. On
arriving at _Moorsleede_, the French detachment was found in the
village, with the streets barricaded with waggons and implements
of husbandry. The dragoons instantly dismounted and attacked the
barricades with signal gallantry, CUNNINGHAM'S men evincing true
Scottish heroism; and in a few moments the French gave way and
fled, leaving a number of killed and wounded behind them, and one
captain and thirty men prisoners. Count de Soissons, brother of
Prince Eugene of Savoy, served as a volunteer on this occasion, and
expressed, in the strongest terms, his admiration of the valour
of the dragoons. Lieutenant Webb, and several men were killed;
Captains Collins and Holgate were wounded. Brigadier-General Wynne,
who commanded the brigade of which CUNNINGHAM'S dragoons formed
part, received a severe wound of which he afterwards died.

When King William undertook the siege of the important fortress
of _Namur_, the regiment formed part of the covering army under
Charles Henry of Lorraine, Prince of Vaudemont, and on the evening
of the 14th of July, it was formed in order of battle, while the
immense columns of the enemy, commanded by Marshal Villeroy, were
seen in the open grounds in front. The two armies confronted
each other during the night, and the French commander, having
an immense superiority of numbers, detached a division to turn
the right flank of the confederate army. The Prince ordered a
retreat, which he masked with judgment; the cavalry advancing to
the front--the dragoons dismounting and forming on foot at extended
files, while the artillery, and infantry, with their pikes trailed
and colours furled, quietly withdrew. The enemy prepared for the
attack, and sent forward a cloud of light musketeers to commence
the action; but the dragoons retired a few paces and mounted their
horses, and when the enemy thought to have commenced the battle,
the skeleton squadrons withdrew; presenting to the astonished
French what appeared to be the magic spectacle of an army vanishing
out of sight. The enemy's horsemen galloped forward in pursuit;
but the allies effected their retreat in good order to Ghent, from
whence CUNNINGHAM'S dragoons were detached, with Rosse's troopers,
and twelve battalions of infantry under Lieut.-General Sir Henry
Bellasis, to cover Nieuport, a place celebrated for the victory
gained by the English and Dutch, over the Spaniards under Archduke
Albert, on the 2nd of July, 1600[2].

The regiment was stationed between Bruges and Nieuport, until
Marshal Villeroy advanced towards Namur with the view of raising
the siege, when it proceeded to Brussels, which city the French
had, a short time previously, bombarded. The enemy's designs
were frustrated; Namur was captured; the regiment left Brussels,
and, after encamping a short time on the Bruges canal, went into
cantonments in the villages on the banks of the canal of Ostend, in
the Pays du Nord.

[Sidenote: 1696]

When the army took the field to serve the campaign of 1696, the
excellent condition of this corps excited admiration; it mustered
four strong squadrons, and when King William saw the regiment,
he promoted its colonel, ROBERT CUNNINGHAM, to the rank of
brigadier-general.

During the summer of this year the regiment served with the army of
Flanders under the Prince of Vaudemont, and was brigaded with the
regiments of Eppinger and Miremont, commanded by its colonel. It
was employed in defensive operations for the preservation of Ghent,
Bruges, and the maritime towns of Flanders. It passed the winter in
the villages behind the Bruges canal.

On the 1st of October, 1696, Brigadier-General Cunningham was
succeeded in the colonelcy by WILLIAM, LORD JEDBURGH, eldest son of
the Marquis of Lothian.

[Sidenote: 1697]

The regiment, bearing the title of JEDBURGH'S dragoons, served the
campaign of 1697 in Flanders with the army commanded by the Elector
of Bavaria, and was formed in brigade with the regiments of
Nassau-Sarbruck, and Opdam, under the orders of Brigadier-General
Pyper. It took part in several operations; and in May joined King
William's army in Brabant, but, subsequently, returned to Flanders.
In September tranquillity was restored in Europe by the treaty of
Ryswick.

During the winter JEDBURGH'S dragoons embarked from Flanders, and
after landing at Harwich in December, proceeded to London, where
they occupied quarters for several weeks; at the same time their
numbers were reduced to a peace establishment.

[Sidenote: 1698]

The regiment left its cantonments in Southwark, in February, 1698,
on route for Scotland, where it arrived towards the end of March.

[Sidenote: 1702]

[Sidenote: 1703]

[Sidenote: 1704]

[Sidenote: 1705]

[Sidenote: 1706]

The accession of Queen Anne, in 1702, was followed by another
war on the continent; but the exertions made by the friends of
the Pretender to effect his elevation to the throne, rendered it
necessary to detain an efficient force at home, and Jedburgh's
was one of the corps selected to remain in Scotland, where it
was stationed, while the army under the renowned Marlborough was
gaining laurels in Germany and the Netherlands[3], the fields of
Blenheim, Ramilies, &c., giving dreadful proof of British valour.

[Sidenote: 1707]

In April, 1707, Patrick Lord Polwarth was appointed colonel of the
regiment, in succession to the Marquis of Lothian, who was removed
to the colonelcy of the Scots foot guards.

[Sidenote: 1708]

The king of France having fitted out a fleet and embarked troops
in the early part of 1708, for the invasion of Britain by the
Pretender, Lord Polwarth's regiment was held in readiness to take
the field at a moment's notice, and the establishment was augmented
to fifty-four men per troop; but the French fleet was driven from
the Scottish coast, and the country was preserved from the horrors
of civil war.

[Sidenote: 1709]

In October, 1709, Lord Polwarth was succeeded in the colonelcy by
William Kerr, brother of the duke of Roxburgh.

[Sidenote: 1710]

[Sidenote: 1711]

The gallant achievements of the forces under the great duke of
Marlborough had, in the mean time, removed the theatre of war from
the frontiers of Holland to the confines of France; Louis XIV.
assembled an immense army to preserve the interior of his kingdom
from the power of his opponents; and Queen Anne sent additional
corps to the scene of contest. KERR'S dragoons were selected to
proceed to the Netherlands; their establishment was augmented, in
March, 1711, to sixty men per troop; and in the same month they
embarked at Leith, but were driven back to the Frith and detained
by contrary winds until the end of April, when they sailed for
Holland.

Having been detained by the weather, the regiment did not arrive
until the army had taken the field, and the men and horses had
suffered by being so long on board of ship; they consequently
remained in Holland for a short time in quarters of refreshment,
and afterwards commenced their march for the frontiers; but when
passing through Brabant, they were ordered to halt at Brussels. The
regiment appears to have remained in reserve during the campaign of
this year.

[Sidenote: 1712]

Taking the field in the spring of 1712, the regiment formed part of
the army commanded by his grace the duke of Ormond, which advanced
to the confines of France, and was ready to carry the war into
Picardy; but the French monarch, finding his generals overmatched,
and his armies beaten and dispirited, agreed to the conditions of
a treaty of peace. A suspension of hostilities was proclaimed, and
the army retired to Ghent, and after encamping a short period went
into quarters.

[Sidenote: 1713]

In the summer of 1713 the regiment was ordered to embark at Dunkirk
for Ireland. The royal dragoons had, in the mean time, returned
from Spain dismounted[4], and the government, contemplating the
disbanding of KERR'S regiment, directed its horses to be embarked
for Dover and delivered to the royal dragoons. The following order
was received on this subject:--

  "ANNE R.

  "OUR will and pleasure is, that upon the embarkation of our
  regiment of dragoons under your command, for our kingdom
  of Ireland, you cause all the horses belonging to the
  non-commissioned officers and private dragoons thereof to be
  delivered over to such person or persons as shall be appointed to
  receive the same; your said regiment being to continue unmounted
  until further orders.

  "Given at our court at Kensington, this 6th day of June, 1713, in
  the twelfth year of our reign.

  "By Her Majesty's command,
  "WILLIAM WYNDHAM."

  _To our trusty and well-beloved Colonel William Kerr,
  commanding one of our regiments of dragoons,
  Flanders._

The regiment arrived at Dunkirk on the 15th of August, and having
delivered up its horses, embarked for Ireland on the 21st of that
month.

[Sidenote: 1714]

After the conclusion of the treaty of Utrecht, the strength of
the army was reduced, and Colonel KERR'S regiment of dragoons was
disembodied in Ireland in the spring of 1714.

[Sidenote: 1715]

At the time this regiment was reduced, the royal dragoons and Scots
greys were augmented, and many men from Kerr's dragoons entered
these two veteran corps. Few months, however, elapsed after the
decease of Queen Anne, (1st August, 1714,) and the accession of
King George I., when a change took place in the circumstances of
the British court. His Majesty arrived from Hanover on the 17th
of September. The result of the measures pursued by the ministry
of Queen Anne, during the last three years of her reign, was soon
manifested in the prevalence of Jacobin principles, and the king
found it necessary to augment the army. One of the first acts
of His Majesty on this occasion, was the restoration of KERR'S
regiment of dragoons, now the SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN HUSSARS, by a
warrant under the sign manual, of which the following is a copy:--

  "GEORGE R.

  "WHEREAS we have thought fit that a regiment of dragoons be
  immediately formed to be under your command, to consist of
  one colonel, one lieut.-colonel, one major, one chaplain, one
  adjutant, one chirurgeon, and six troops, each consisting of one
  captain, one lieutenant, one cornet, one quarter-master, one
  serjeant, two corporals, one drummer, one hautboy, and thirty
  private dragoons, (including two for widows.) And, WHEREAS we
  have directed our right trusty and right well-beloved cousin
  Thomas, Earl of Strafford, to deliver over unto you the two
  youngest captains, two youngest lieutenants, two youngest
  cornets, and the two youngest quarter-masters, together with the
  non-commissioned officers and private men of the two youngest
  troops of our royal regiment of dragoons under his command,
  with the horses, arms, clothing, and accoutrements; and also
  our right trusty and right well-beloved cousin David, Earl of
  Portmore, to deliver unto you the three youngest captains, three
  youngest lieutenants, three youngest cornets, and three youngest
  quarter-masters, together with the non-commissioned officers
  and private men of the three youngest troops of our regiment of
  dragoons under his command, with their horses, arms, clothes,
  and accoutrements; our will and pleasure is, that you receive
  from the said Earl of Strafford, and the said Earl of Portmore,
  the commissioned and non-commissioned officers and private men
  directed to be delivered over unto you as aforesaid, towards
  forming the said regiment of dragoons. And we do hereby authorize
  you, by the beat of drum, or otherwise, to raise so many
  volunteers as shall be wanting to complete and fill up the said
  regiment to six troops, each consisting of the numbers aforesaid.
  And all magistrates, justices of the peace, constables, and
  other of our officers, whom it may concern, are required to be
  assisting unto you, in providing quarters, impressing carriages,
  and otherwise, as there shall be occasion.

  "Given at our court at St. James', this 3rd day of February,
  1714-15, in the first year of our reign.

  "By His Majesty's Command,
  "WILLIAM PULTENEY."

  _To our trusty and well-beloved
  Colonel William Kerr._

In compliance with this order, Captains Lewis Dollon's and Peter
Renourds' troops from the royal dragoons, and Captains William
Crawford's, George Dunbar's and James Levingtone's troops from
the greys, (being augmentation troops raised when KERR'S regiment
was disembodied,) with a sixth troop raised near London, were
constituted a regiment, which now bears the designation of SEVENTH,
OR QUEEN'S OWN HUSSARS; but was then styled "KERR'S DRAGOONS."

Soon after its second formation, the regiment marched into quarters
in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and the county of Durham; and in July His
Majesty was pleased to confer upon it the distinguished title of
"HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS OF WALES' OWN ROYAL REGIMENT OF
DRAGOONS"[5] in honour of Wilhelmina Carolina, consort of his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales.

The augmentation of the army, and other measures adopted by
the government for the preservation of tranquillity, did not
sufficiently intimidate the disaffected so as to prevent an appeal
to arms. In the early part of September the Earl of Mar raised
the standard of the Pretender in the Highlands, and summoned the
friends of the Stuart dynasty to his aid. At the same time, the
PRINCESS OF WALES'S dragoons were ordered to march to Scotland and
join the troops commanded by Major-General Whetham, encamped at
Stirling.

At this camp the regiment remained several weeks; additional forces
arrived; the establishment was augmented, and the Duke of Argyle
took the command of the army. The rebel forces, ten thousand
strong, advancing with the view of penetrating southward, the
King's troops, not four thousand men, proceeded to the vicinity of
_Dumblain_, to oppose the progress of the clans. On the morning
of Sunday, the 13th of November, the two armies confronted each
other on Sheriff-muir, and the PRINCESS OF WALES', with Carpenter's
(third), and a squadron of the Inniskilling (sixth) dragoons
were on the left of the line, under Major-General Sabine and
Brigadier-General Newton. The action commenced on the right, where
the royal forces overthrew their opponents and chased them from
the field. On the left the fortune of the day was in favour of
the rebels; six hundred select Highlanders surprised the infantry
in the act of forming, and put them into confusion. The gallant
Colonel KERR led his regiment of dragoons (the SEVENTH) to the
charge with signal intrepidity; his horse was killed under him;
but he speedily mounted another, and his brave troopers, with some
gentlemen volunteers and Carpenter's squadrons, drove the rebel
horsemen before them, capturing a standard. Colonel KERR had a
second horse killed under him, and a rebel trooper fired a pistol
at his breast, which did him no harm, although his coat was torn.
The royal infantry on the left were unable to recover from the
disorder into which they had fallen; they retired before the clans;
their communication with the remainder of the army was cut off; and
mingling with the cavalry, both became confused, and fell back a
short distance to gain an opportunity of re-forming their ranks.
They retired beyond Dumblain, and took possession of the passes,
to prevent the clans penetrating to Stirling. Meanwhile, the right
wing of the king's army had returned from the pursuit of the left
wing of the rebel forces: the Earl of Mar withdrew with the clans
during the night, and the Duke of Argyle returned with the royal
forces to Stirling.

Colonel KERR lost three horses on this occasion; the regiment had
also two troop horses killed, and one man and four horses wounded.

[Sidenote: 1716]

In January, 1716, the royal army, having been augmented, advanced
against the rebels, who fled in every direction. The Pretender and
his principal officers escaped to the continent; the common men
dispersed; and the rebellion being suppressed, the regiment went
into quarters in Fife.

In the following spring, the PRINCESS OF WALES' dragoons returned
to England, and occupied quarters in Yorkshire; but proceeded
southward during the summer; and in December one troop was ordered
to attend His Majesty on his landing from Hanover.

[Sidenote: 1717]

[Sidenote: 1718]

The regiment occupied quarters in Lincolnshire in the summer of
1717; passed the following winter in Yorkshire; and in July, 1718,
was reviewed by Major-General Macartney, at Leicester.

[Sidenote: 1719]

[Sidenote: 1720]

In July, 1719, one troop was employed in suppressing riots at
Halifax. In December, 1720, the regiment was occupying quarters
in Lancashire, and received orders not to permit any person to land
from the Isle of Man, in consequence of a report that the plague
was in that island.

[Sidenote: 1721]

[Sidenote: 1722]

[Sidenote: 1723]

[Sidenote: 1724]

The regiment marched to Scotland in April, 1721; it returned to
England in April, 1722; and after encamping several months near
Manchester, went into quarters in the town. It encamped near
York in June, 1723, from whence it marched, in the autumn, into
Berkshire; and in January, 1724, detachments were employed on
revenue duty on the Hampshire and Dorsetshire coast; in April
following, the remainder marched into Yorkshire and Durham.

[Sidenote: 1725]

[Sidenote: 1726]

Lieut.-General Carpenter reviewed the regiment at York, in
September, 1725; and Lieut.-General Sir Charles Wills, in April,
1726.

[Sidenote: 1727]

On the prospect of war between Holland and the Emperor of Germany,
the regiment was augmented, in February, 1727, to nine troops,
and four regiments of cavalry and eight of infantry were held in
readiness to assist the Dutch; but no embarkation took place.

King George I. died in June of this year, on his journey to
Hanover; and his son, George, Prince of Wales, succeeded to the
throne: the Princess of Wales became Queen, and this regiment was
honoured with the title of "THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF DRAGOONS."
It marched to the vicinity of Hounslow in October, and was reviewed
on the heath, on the 28th of that month, by King George II., who
was pleased to express his high approbation of its appearance
and discipline. After the review it marched into cantonments in
Dorsetshire and Somersetshire, with a detachment on revenue duty on
the Sussex coast.

[Sidenote: 1728]

A detachment attended the Princess Amelia at Bath, in May, 1728;
in July the regiment was reviewed at Salisbury; and in the autumn
another detachment was ordered to attend the Princess Amelia at
Bath.

[Sidenote: 1729]

[Sidenote: 1730]

[Sidenote: 1731]

In 1729 the establishment was reduced from nine to six troops.
In 1730 the regiment occupied cantonments in Dorsetshire,
Somersetshire, and Wiltshire; and was reviewed on Hounslow-heath,
on the 15th of May, 1731, by King George II., attended by several
noblemen and general officers; its warlike appearance, the
condition of the horses, and the discipline of the regiment, were
commended.

[Sidenote: 1732]

[Sidenote: 1733]

[Sidenote: 1734]

After the review, the QUEEN'S OWN DRAGOONS returned to their
former quarters; in 1732 they were removed to Gloucestershire and
Herefordshire; and in April, 1733, they commenced their march for
Scotland, where they remained during the following year.

[Sidenote: 1735]

[Sidenote: 1736]

[Sidenote: 1737]

[Sidenote: 1738]

[Sidenote: 1739]

Returning to England in April, 1735, the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons
proceeded into quarters in Leicestershire and Staffordshire, with
detachments on revenue duty on the coasts of Lincolnshire and
Norfolk, in which duties they were employed during the remainder
of that and in the two succeeding years; and in 1738 they marched
into quarters in Herefordshire and Gloucestershire. In 1739 they
furnished detachments on coast duty in Sussex; at the same, war
having been declared against Spain, the establishment was augmented
to four hundred and thirty-five men.

[Sidenote: 1740]

[Sidenote: 1741]

During the summer of 1740, the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons were encamped,
with four other regiments of cavalry and four of infantry, near
Newbury, under the orders of Lieut.-General Wade; and subsequently
near Kingsclear; in October the regiment marched from the camp to
cantonments in Gloucestershire and Monmouthshire. In 1741 they
marched into Scotland.

The Honourable William Kerr, after commanding the regiment upwards
of thirty years with reputation to himself, and advantage to the
service, was succeeded in the colonelcy by Major-General Sir John
Cope, K.B., by commission, dated the 12th of August, 1741.

In the mean time, the death of Charles VI., Emperor of Germany, had
been followed by war on the continent; and the Elector of Bavaria,
aided by the French monarch, was endeavouring to deprive the
Archduchess, Maria Theresa, of the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia.

[Sidenote: 1742]

The QUEEN'S OWN dragoons left Scotland in April, 1742: and soon
after their arrival in England, they were selected to form part
of an army of sixteen thousand men, sent to the Netherlands
under the command of Field-Marshal the Earl of Stair, to support
the interests of the Queen of Hungary and Bohemia. The regiment
embarked in the early part of August; and after landing at Ostend,
marched a few stages up the country, where it halted until the
beginning of the following year.

[Sidenote: 1743]

In February, 1743, the regiment commenced its march for Germany;
and after taking part in several manœuvres, it was encamped at
Aschaffenburg, where King George II. and the Duke of Cumberland
joined the army. On the 26th of June, as the troops were marching
along the bank of the river Maine, a French force was discovered
in position near _Dettingen_, a village in the Bavarian States,
in the circle of the Lower Rhine; and King George II. commanded
the British, Austrians, and Hanoverians to form line opposite the
enemy. After a severe cannonade of several hours' duration, the
French advanced from their formidable position, and a series of
charges of cavalry, with a heavy fire of musketry, commenced on
the left of the allied army, and extended along the front. During
the heat of the engagement, the regiment which forms the subject
of this memoir, had an opportunity of displaying its intrepidity
and prowess in close combat with the cavalry of the opposing army,
and obtained the approbation of its sovereign. The British dragoons
encountered the French _gens d'armes_ and household cavalry, and,
though without armour, they fought their steel-clad opponents with
signal gallantry. Twice the British horsemen were forced back;
but, rallying and returning to the charge, at the third onset
they overthrew the opposing squadrons, and chased them from the
field with great slaughter, and with the loss of several standards
and kettle drums. The infantry of the allied army evinced great
bravery, and a complete victory was gained over the enemy.

The QUEEN'S OWN regiment of dragoons had Lieutenant Falconer,
Cornet Hobey, one serjeant, ten rank and file, and twenty-two
horses killed; Lieutenant Frazer, Cornet St. Leger, one
quarter-master, two serjeants, thirteen rank and file, and thirteen
horses wounded: Cornet St. Leger afterwards died of his wounds.

After passing the night in the open grounds near the field of
battle, the regiment marched on the following day to Hanau, and
was subsequently encamped with the army on the banks of the
Kinzig. In the early part of August the king proceeded towards the
Rhine, passed that river beyond Mentz, and advanced to Worms. The
QUEEN'S OWN dragoons were employed in West Germany, but nothing of
importance occurred; and in the autumn they re-passed the Rhine,
and marched back to Brabant and Flanders, where they remained
during the winter.

[Sidenote: 1744]

The regiment served the campaign of 1744 under Field-Marshal Wade,
and was employed in several movements, but no general engagement
occurred, and in the autumn it marched into winter quarters at
Bruges.

[Sidenote: 1745]

The establishment having been augmented, the regiment was joined
in the spring of 1745, by a number of men and horses from England.
Soon afterwards it took the field, and advanced with the troops
commanded by His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, to the
relief of _Tournay_, which fortress was besieged by an immense
French army. On the 10th of May, two troops of the QUEEN'S OWN
dragoons were employed in driving back the enemy's out-guards and
piquets; and on the following day, they were engaged in supporting
the attack of the infantry on the formidable position, occupied
by the French, near the village of _Fontenoy_. The centre of the
position was twice forced by the British regiments; but the Dutch
having failed in their point of attack, a retreat was ordered.
Towards the close of the action, several squadrons of cavalry
charged with signal intrepidity, but were unable to retrieve the
fortune of the day, and the army withdrew to Aeth.

The regiment lost, on this occasion, ten men, and forty-six
horses killed; Lieut.-Colonel Erskine, Captain-Lieutenant
Ogilvy, Lieutenant Forbes, Cornet Maitland, Quartermaster Smith,
thirty-five men, and forty-seven horses wounded; one man and two
horses missing.

After the capture of Tournay, the French army advanced with such
overwhelming numbers, that the allies were unable to prevent the
loss of several important towns. The QUEEN'S OWN dragoons were
employed in defensive operations, and were encamped a short time
before Brussels.

[Sidenote: 1746]

Meanwhile, a rebellion had broken out in Scotland, and Charles
Edward, eldest son of the Pretender, was at the head of the
insurgent clans. Several corps were ordered to return to England;
and in February, 1746, the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons proceeded to
Williamstadt and embarked; but some delay was occasioned by severe
weather, and one transport was stranded. The regiment disembarked
to wait for more favourable weather; in the mean time, the prospect
of a speedy termination to the rebellion occasioned the order for
its return to be countermanded.

The war on the continent was continued; the regiment, having
received a remount of one hundred and two men, and one hundred
and fifty-six horses, took the field in the summer of 1746, and
served on the Dutch frontiers, under the command of General Sir
John Ligonier, and afterwards under Prince Charles of Lorraine.
On the 11th of October, the regiment was formed in line, with the
Greys and Inniskilling dragoons, with its right behind _Roucoux_,
a village near the city of Liege, while the infantry occupied the
houses and streets of several hamlets along the front. An immense
French force, commanded by Marshal Saxe, advanced and attacked the
left of the allied army; and by superior numbers, succeeded in
carrying the villages, and a retreat was ordered. As the enemy's
infantry emerged from among the houses, the Greys, Inniskilling,
and QUEEN'S OWN dragoons, dashed forward, broke their ranks, and
chased them back in gallant style. The army afterwards withdrew
to the vicinity of Maestricht; and the regiment passed the severe
winter months in cantonments in the country along the Lower Maese.

[Sidenote: 1747]

In the spring of 1747, the regiment encamped a short period
near the banks of the Scheldt, and was subsequently employed in
operations on the Great Nethe and the Demer, during which period a
remount of fifty men and one hundred and twenty horses, joined from
England. On the 1st of July, it confronted the French army in one
of the valleys in the province of Liege, and passed the night in a
state of constant readiness for action.

The French infantry descended from the hills on the following
morning, and made a furious attack on the troops stationed in the
village of _Val_. After much severe fighting, the enemy, by means
of a great superiority of numbers, forced the centre of the Allied
army. The cavalry of the left wing was ordered forward, and the
QUEEN'S OWN dragoons had another opportunity of distinguishing
themselves. Having broken the enemy's first line, the British
dragoons continued their victorious career, and overthrew a second
line with terrific violence; then, mixing with the French horsemen
and musketeers, used their broad swords with dreadful execution.
While pursuing their opponents, they received a volley from
some French infantry posted in a hollow, and behind hedges, and
several men and horses fell mortally wounded. The survivors rushed
furiously upon the infantry, drove them from behind the hedges, and
pursued them across the fields with great slaughter. This brilliant
success enabled the Duke of Cumberland to make arrangements for a
retreat; and the army withdrew to Maestricht, where it arrived on
the same evening.

The regiment lost several men and horses on this occasion; and had
Cornet Bulmere, five men, and ten horses captured by the enemy. It
was subsequently stationed a short time in the province of Limburg,
and was employed in various operations until the winter.

[Sidenote: 1748]

In the spring of 1748, the army again confronted the enemy in the
province of Limburg. Preliminary articles for a treaty of peace
were agreed upon; a suspension of hostilities took place, and the
British troops went into cantonments among the Dutch peasantry.

[Sidenote: 1749]

During the following winter, the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was
concluded. The British troops left Holland; and the QUEEN'S OWN
dragoons, after landing at Purfleet in January, 1749, were reduced
to a peace establishment, and quartered at Norwich and Yarmouth,
with detachments on coast duty.

[Sidenote: 1750]

The regiment was inspected by Lieutenant-General Campbell at Wells,
in April, 1750, and at Gloucester in October following; and by
Lieutenant-General Onslow at Gloucester in April, 1751.

[Sidenote: 1751]

On the 1st of July, 1751, King George II. issued a warrant relative
to the colours, standards, and clothing of the several regiments,
from which the following particulars have been extracted respecting
the SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF DRAGOONS.

COATS,--scarlet, double-breasted, without lapels, lined with white;
slit sleeves turned up with white; the button-holes ornamented with
narrow white lace; the buttons flat, of white metal, set on three
and three; a long slash pocket in each skirt; and a white worsted
aiguillette on the right shoulder.

WAISTCOATS AND BREECHES,--white.

HATS,--bound with silver lace, and ornamented with a white metal
loop and a black cockade.

BOOTS,--of jacked leather, reaching to the knee.

CLOAKS,--of scarlet cloth, with a white collar, and lined with
white shalloon; the buttons set on three and three upon yellow
frogs, or loops, with a blue stripe down the centre.

HORSE FURNITURE,--of white cloth; the holster-caps and housings
having a border of royal lace, with a blue stripe down the centre;
the Queen's cipher within the garter, embroidered on each corner of
the housing; and on the holster-caps, the King's cipher and crown,
with VII. D. underneath.

OFFICERS,--distinguished by silver lace; their coats and waistcoats
bound with silver embroidery; the button-holes worked with silver;
and a crimson silk sash worn across the left shoulder.

QUARTER-MASTERS,--to wear a crimson sash round their waists.

SERJEANTS,--to have narrow silver lace on the cuffs, pockets, and
shoulder-straps; silver shoulder-knots, or aiguillettes, and blue
and white worsted sashes tied round their waists.

DRUMMERS and HAUTBOYS,--clothed in scarlet coats lined with blue,
and ornamented with royal lace with a blue stripe down the centre;
their waistcoats and breeches of white cloth.

GUIDONS,--The first or King's guidon to be of crimson silk,
embroidered and fringed with gold and silver; in the centre the
rose and thistle conjoined and crown over them, with the motto
_Dieu et mon Droit_ underneath: the white horse in a compartment in
the first and fourth corners, and VII. D., in gold characters, on
a blue ground, in a compartment in the second and third corners.
The second and third guidons to be of white silk, in the centre the
Queen's cipher within the garter on a crimson ground: the white
horse on a scarlet ground in the first and fourth compartments, and
VII. D. within a wreath of roses and thistles upon a scarlet ground
in the second and third compartments.

[Sidenote: 1752]

[Sidenote: 1753]

[Sidenote: 1754]

The regiment was inspected at Birmingham, in October, 1751, by
Lieutenant-General Sir Philip Honeywood; at Lichfield, in April,
1752, by Lieutenant-General Campbell; and at Manchester in April,
1753, by Major-General Cholmondeley. In October following it
commenced its march to Scotland, and remained in that part of the
kingdom upwards of four years, during which period the undetermined
limits of the British territory in North America had given rise to
another war with France.

[Sidenote: 1755]

[Sidenote: 1756]

[Sidenote: 1757]

Hostilities commenced in 1755, and the establishment of the QUEEN'S
OWN dragoons was augmented to three hundred and forty-seven
officers and men. A seventh troop was also added, of which
Captain-Lieutenant William Erskine was appointed captain by
commission dated the 25th of December, 1755, and the officers and
men of this troop were mounted on small horses and equipped as
_light dragoons_. The establishment of the light troop was fixed,
by a royal warrant dated the 29th of January, 1756, at three
officers, one quarter-master, two serjeants, two drummers, and
sixty-three rank and file; but it was subsequently augmented to
upwards of one hundred officers and men.

[Sidenote: 1758]

In the spring of 1758 the SEVENTH dragoons quitted Scotland, and
were stationed in Yorkshire, the head-quarters being at York; from
whence the light troop was detached to Portsmouth to take part in
an expedition against the French coast, under the orders of Charles
Duke of Marlborough. A brigade was formed of the light troops of
nine regiments of dragoons, under the orders of Colonel Eliott, of
the horse grenadier guards; and when a landing had been effected
(6th June) on the coast of Brittany, the light horsemen gave signal
proof of their activity and usefulness on several occasions. They
took a distinguished part in the capture of the suburbs of _St.
Maloes_, and in the destruction, by fire, of the privateers and
other vessels, amounting to upwards of one hundred sail, in the
harbour; also in the destruction of extensive magazines of maritime
stores. The light cavalry subsequently advanced several miles up
the country, and evinced zeal and activity in skirmishing with the
French troops. The expedition not being of sufficient strength
to undertake the siege of St. Maloes, the troops re-embarked and
returned to England. The light cavalry subsequently took part in
a second enterprise against the French coast, under the orders
of Lieutenant-General Bligh, when CHERBOURG was captured, and the
works, with the shipping in the harbour and iron ordnance were
destroyed, and the brass ordnance sent as trophies to London. A
second landing was also effected near St. Maloes; but no advantage
resulted, and considerable loss was sustained on re-embarking.

[Sidenote: 1759]

After landing at Portsmouth in September, the light troop of the
QUEEN'S OWN proceeded to Hackney, and afterwards to Romford;
the remainder of the regiment occupying cantonments in Essex
and Middlesex, from whence it marched, in November, 1759, to
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, and Hertfordshire.

[Sidenote: 1760]

In the mean time Hanover and the adjoining states had become the
theatre of war, and a British force, commanded by the gallant
Marquis of Granby, was serving with the troops of Hanover,
Hesse, and Brunswick, the whole commanded by Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick; and in March, 1760, the six heavy troops of the SEVENTH
dragoons received orders to proceed to Germany.

The QUEEN'S OWN dragoons, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel George Lawson
Hall, embarked on the river Thames, and sailed for Germany in the
beginning of April: having a quick passage, they arrived in the
river Weser, landed above Bremen, the capital of a duchy of the
same name in Lower Saxony, and joined the allied army commanded
by Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, at the camp on the heights of
Fritzlar, in the principality of Lower Hesse, on the 21st of April.
They were formed in brigade with the dragoons of Price-schenik,
under the orders of Colonel Bremar.

Being opposed by a French army of very superior numbers, the
allies were restricted to defensive operations, and the SEVENTH
took part in several toilsome marches and skirmishes. At length
thirty thousand French troops crossed the river Dymel to cut off
the communication of the allies with Westphalia, and a favourable
opportunity occurring to attack this detached force, the QUEEN'S
OWN dragoons, with several other corps, under the Hereditary
Prince of Brunswick, advanced to Liebenau, where they passed the
Dymel, and making a detour of many miles, gained the left flank of
the enemy's position at _Warbourg_, on the 31st of July. Prince
Ferdinand was advancing with the main body against the enemy's
front; but before his arrival, the enemy had been attacked in flank
and rear, and were retiring. The cavalry under the Marquis of
Granby and Lieut.-General Mostyn arrived at a favourable moment; a
gallant charge of the British squadrons decided the fortune of the
day, and the French made a precipitate retreat across the Dymel.
The SEVENTH dragoons supported the infantry in the attack of the
enemy's flank, and by a spirited charge towards the close of the
action, contributed to the success of the day. The conduct of the
British cavalry was commended by the Marquis of Granby, in his
public despatch, and Prince Ferdinand declared in general orders,
that "_all the British cavalry performed prodigies of valour_."
The regiment being eager in the pursuit, had four men and horses
captured by the enemy; three of the men, however, escaped and
rejoined the regiment.

Lieut.-General Sir John Cope, K.B., died on the 28th of July, 1760;
and King George II. conferred the colonelcy on Lieut.-General
Mostyn, from the fifth, royal Irish, regiment of dragoons.

The SEVENTH dragoons were encamped near the banks of the Dymel,
until winter, when the soldiers were directed to build huts
to protect themselves and horses from severe weather. They
subsequently went into cantonments in the villages in that part of
the bishopric of Paderborn.

[Sidenote: 1761]

The army was suddenly called from its winter quarters in February,
1761, and penetrating, during a heavy snow, into the enemy's
cantonments, captured several towns and extensive magazines of
forage and provision; but afterwards returned to its former
quarters, and the SEVENTH were again quartered in villages in the
bishopric of Paderborn.

On taking the field in the beginning of May, 1761, the SEVENTH
were formed in brigade with the Scots greys and Ancram's (eleventh)
dragoons, commanded by Colonel Harvey. After much manœuvring, some
skirmishing, and many long and toilsome marches, they were encamped
on the heights of Denkernberg, between the rivers Asse and Lippe,
and formed part of the Marquis Granby's corps, which had its right
in front of the village of _Kirch-Denkern_. This post was attacked
on the 15th, and again on the 16th of July; the SEVENTH were formed
in column behind the centre of this part of the position, and
supported the infantry; the enemy was repulsed; the cavalry dashed
forward, but were prevented charging by the nature of the ground.

The regiment was subsequently employed in operations which brought
on slight skirmishes; but no general engagement occurred. In August
it was employed on the Dymel. In the early part of November it
was engaged in dislodging a French corps from a strong camp near
_Escherhausen_, in the duchy of Brunswick; and afterwards marched
to _Eimbeck_, where another skirmish occurred. These movements
were designed to surprise the French army in dispersed quarters;
but the enemy having gained time to assemble his forces, this
regiment, with several other corps, marched during the night of
the 7th of November, through a heavy snow to _Foorwohle_, where
another skirmish occurred, and the British dragoons evinced
signal gallantry. The SEVENTH were encamped in the snow until the
following morning, when the British had another skirmish with their
opponents; and they subsequently marched to the heights between
Mackensen and Lithorst. When the army went into winter quarters,
the regiment was cantoned in East Friesland.

[Sidenote: 1762]

The season for military operations having arrived, the QUEEN'S OWN
dragoons again took the field, and were encamped at Brackel, and
subsequently on the heights of Tissel: they were formed in brigade
with the Eleventh dragoons, under Lieut.-Colonel George Lawson
Hall, of the SEVENTH. They left their camp before day-break on the
morning of the 24th of June, 1762, and having crossed the Dymel,
advanced against the French camp at _Groebenstein_. The enemy was
surprised, and made a precipitate retreat upon Cassel, with the
loss of their tents and baggage; and one division being surrounded
in the woods of Wilhelmsthal, surrendered. The SEVENTH pursued the
French in the direction of Cassel, and took several prisoners; they
subsequently encamped near Holtzhausen.

During the remainder of the campaign, the regiment continued
actively employed, and was frequently engaged in detached services;
the enemy was forced to abandon several important positions,
and Cassel was captured by the allies. Preliminary articles
for a treaty of peace having been agreed upon, a suspension of
hostilities took place, and the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons, and other
British cavalry, went into quarters in the bishopric of Munster.

[Sidenote: 1763]

Peace having been concluded, the thanks of Parliament were
communicated to the army, and in February, 1763, the SEVENTH
commenced their march from Germany, through Holland, to
Williamstadt, where they embarked for England. After landing
at Harwich they were stationed at Chelmsford, Springfield, and
Colchester. The light troop, which had not been on foreign service
with the other troops of the regiment, was disbanded; and the
establishment was reduced to six troops of three officers, one
quarter-master, two serjeants, two corporals, one drummer, and
twenty-eight private men each; eight men per troop were equipped as
light dragoons, and the remainder as heavy dragoons.

In May, 1763, Lieut.-General Mostyn was removed to the First
dragoon guards; and Major-General Sir George Howard, K.B., was
appointed colonel of the SEVENTH dragoons, from the third foot, or
buffs.

[Sidenote: 1764]

In January, 1764, a squadron was employed on revenue duty on
the Suffolk coast. On the 9th of April following, King George
III. reviewed the regiment in Hyde Park, and expressed his high
approbation of its appearance and discipline. In the same year,
orders were received for the regiment to be mounted on long-tailed
horses;--for epaulettes to be worn on the left shoulder instead
of aiguillettes, and for the men's boots to be of a lighter
description than formerly.

[Sidenote: 1765]

[Sidenote: 1766]

The regiment occupied quarters in Sussex, in 1765, and was removed
to Northampton and Leicestershire in 1766; at the same time, the
DRUMMERS on the establishment were directed to be replaced by
TRUMPETERS.

[Sidenote: 1767]

[Sidenote: 1768]

[Sidenote: 1769]

From Leicestershire, &c., the regiment was removed to York in
May, 1767, and to Scotland in the spring of 1768, but returned
to England in the early part of 1769, and was quartered in
Warwickshire.

[Sidenote: 1770]

[Sidenote: 1771]

[Sidenote: 1772]

[Sidenote: 1773]

In April, 1770, the regiment marched into Dorsetshire and
Somersetshire; in June, 1771, it was removed to Canterbury, and
employed on coast duty until April, 1772, when it marched into
Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and Lincolnshire. In the spring
of 1773 it commenced its march for Scotland, where it was stationed
during the succeeding twelve months.

[Sidenote: 1774]

[Sidenote: 1775]

[Sidenote: 1776]

[Sidenote: 1777]

Returning to England in the summer of 1774, the regiment was
stationed in Lancashire; in 1775 it was removed into Worcestershire
and Staffordshire; in 1776 it was employed on revenue duty on the
Sussex coast; and in 1777 it was engaged in similar duties on the
coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk.

[Sidenote: 1778]

In the summer of 1778 the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons were encamped near
Bury St. Edmunds, together with three other regiments of dragoons
and two battalions of militia, under the command of Major-General
Warde.

[Sidenote: 1779]

Lieut.-General Sir George Howard, C.B., was removed in April, 1779,
to the first dragoon guards, and King George III. conferred the
command of the QUEEN'S OWN dragoons on Major-general Sir Henry
Clinton, K.B.

An augmentation had, in the mean time, been made to the strength
of the regiment, in consequence of the American war; and in April,
1779, the men, equipped as light dragoons, were incorporated, with
detachments from the second, third, fifteenth, and sixteenth, into
a regiment, which was numbered the twenty-first light dragoons.

[Sidenote: 1780]

[Sidenote: 1781]

[Sidenote: 1782]

[Sidenote: 1783]

Soon after this event the SEVENTH dragoons marched to Scotland,
where they remained two years, and on their arrival in England, in
May, 1781, they were quartered at Durham. In the summer of 1782
they were removed to Salisbury, and in 1783 to Newbury.

The great usefulness of light cavalry had been fully proved during
the reign of King George II., and also during the American war; and
after the conclusion of a treaty of peace in 1783, the QUEEN'S
OWN dragoons underwent a change of clothing and equipment;--the
cocked hats were replaced by helmets; boots, saddles, belts, and
other articles of equipment, of a light construction, were adopted;
carbines of a smaller size than those before used, were received;
the standard height for men and horses was reduced; and the
regiment was constituted a corps of LIGHT DRAGOONS.

[Sidenote: 1784]

The change of equipment having taken place, the regiment was
employed in the travelling escort duty for the royal family; it was
quartered at Hounslow, and other villages, on the road from London
to Windsor; and during the summer of 1784 it was reviewed, on
Hounslow heath, by His Majesty, when its appearance and discipline
procured the expression of his royal approbation.


REGULATIONS FOR THE CLOTHING OF THE LIGHT DRAGOONS.--_April, 1784._

The clothing of a private light dragoon to consist of a jacket and
shell, under-waistcoat, and leather breeches.

The jacket and shell to be of _blue_ cloth, the collars and cuffs
of the royal regiments to be red, and those of the other regiments
to be of the colour of the facing of the regiment, looped upon the
breast, and edged with white _thread_ cord, and to be lined with
white, the Eleventh and Thirteenth regiments excepted, which are to
be lined with buff.

The under-waistcoat to be of flannel, with sleeves, and made so as
to be buttoned within the waistband of the breeches.

The breeches to be of buckskin.

N.B.--The make of the dress, and method of placing the cord upon
the breast of the jacket, to be exactly conformable to the pattern
approved of by His Majesty.

OFFICERS AND QUARTER-MASTERS,--The dress uniform of the officers
and quarter-masters of the light dragoons to be made according to
the King's regulation of the 19th of December, 1768, excepting
that the coats are to be blue, and faced with the same colour as
the private men, and that the royal regiments are to be faced with
scarlet.

FIELD UNIFORM OF THE OFFICERS AND QUARTER-MASTERS,--The jacket
and shell to be made up in the same manner as those of the men,
excepting that the shell is to have sleeves, and that the looping
is to be of silver, the Thirteenth regiment excepted, which is to
be of gold.

SERJEANTS,--To be distinguished by gold or silver looping.

CORPORALS,--To be distinguished by a gold or silver cord round the
collar and cuff.

TRUMPETERS,--To have a jacket and shell the colour of the facing of
the regiment, with lace instead of looping in front and down the
seams.

N.B.--A pattern suit of clothing, made up according to these
regulations, will be deposited at the Army-Comptroller's Office,
Horse Guards.

[Sidenote: 1785]

The SEVENTH Light Dragoons marched, in the summer of 1785, into
quarters in Sussex, where the following order, dated Horse Guards,
February 6, 1786, was received:--

  SIR,--His Majesty has been pleased to order, that the colonels
  commanding regiments of Light Dragoons shall, for the future,
  supply them with _blue_ cloaks, instead of red, in proportion as
  the red ones, now in use, wear out, and that new cloaks shall
  become necessary.

  I have, &c.,
  (Signed)      WILLIAM FAWCETT,
  _Adjutant-General_.

[Sidenote: 1786]

[Sidenote: 1787]

[Sidenote: 1788]

[Sidenote: 1789]

In May, 1786, the SEVENTH dragoons were removed to Guildford,
and in July to Maidstone; in 1787 they marched to Canterbury;
and afterwards to Greenwich and adjacent villages, from whence
they proceeded to Norwich; they passed the summer of 1788 in
Nottinghamshire; in the following winter they proceeded to the
vicinity of London, and after occupying cantonments at Staines a
few months, resumed their former quarters at Hounslow, &c., in
April, 1789, and took part in the escort duty for the royal family.

[Sidenote: 1790]

[Sidenote: 1791]

[Sidenote: 1792]

Having been relieved from escort duty, the regiment marched, in
June, 1790, into cantonments in Sussex, the head-quarters being
established at Lewes, from whence they were removed, in April,
1791, to Brighton, and in June of the same year to Canterbury. In
the summer of 1792 the regiment marched to Nottingham.

[Sidenote: 1793]

A revolution had in the mean time taken place in France, and the
tyrannical and barbarous proceedings of the republicans, who had
seized on the powers of the government in that kingdom, filled
Europe with wonder and with abhorrence of the ruthless perpetrators
of the numerous tragedies which took place; their crimes were
increased by the execution of their sovereign Louis XVI.; the
British ambassador consequently received instructions to quit
Paris, and active preparations were made for war. Two troops were
added to the QUEEN'S OWN light dragoons, and in the spring of 1793
four troops, under the command of Major Osborne, embarked for the
Netherlands, to form part of the army under His Royal Highness the
duke of York, designed to co-operate with the allies in repelling
the aggressions of the French republic on Holland and the Austrian
Netherlands. The depôt troops were stationed at Manchester.

Having joined the forces commanded by the duke of York, the two
squadrons of the SEVENTH took part in the operations of the army.
After retiring from before Dunkirk, the troops re-assembled at
Furnes and Dixmude, and were stationed for some time on the
frontier of West Flanders. His royal highness having resolved to
make every possible effort for the protection of the Austrian
Netherlands, determined to re-capture Menin, and, as a diversion to
favour this design, Major-General Abercromby was directed to attack
_Lannoy_ with a body of troops, of which a squadron of the SEVENTH
formed a part. The attack was made on the 28th of October: the
French having been driven from the town by the artillery, the light
dragoons galloped forward in pursuit with distinguished gallantry,
overtook their opponents, cut down one hundred with their sabres,
took fifty-nine prisoners, and captured five pieces of artillery,
besides tumbrils and baggage waggons, for which they were honoured
with the approbation of Major-General Abercromby and of His Royal
Highness the duke of York. The only loss sustained by the SEVENTH,
on this occasion, was two men wounded.

The regiment performed much hard service on out-post duty during
the following winter.

[Sidenote: 1794]

On the 16th of April, 1794, the regiment advanced to the heights
above Cateau, where it was reviewed by the emperor of Germany, and
on the succeeding day, supported the attack of the infantry and
artillery on _Prémont_, _Vaux_, &c.

When the siege of _Landrécies_ was undertaken, the QUEEN'S
OWN formed part of the covering army encamped at _Cateau_. At
day-break, on the 26th of April, while a thick fog covered the
fields and villages near the British camp, a few pistol-shots in
front gave indication that the advance-posts were engaged, and soon
afterwards the piquets were seen retiring before crowds of French,
whose movements were partly concealed by the fog. The SEVENTH
were speedily mounted and formed in front of their camp-ground;
the cannonade became louder and louder, and the fog clearing, the
duke of York detached the cavalry of the right wing to turn the
enemy's left flank, while the SEVENTH and Eleventh light dragoons'
and two squadrons of Archduke Ferdinand's hussars, supported by
several other corps, moved forward to reconnoitre the French column
advancing from Prémont and Marets. Encountering their opponents in
the plain of St. Celian, the SEVENTH and Eleventh light dragoons
raised a loud shout and dashed furiously against the adverse ranks
of war, while the German hussars joined gallantly in the charge,
and the enemy was overthrown and pursued with dreadful carnage. The
SEVENTH were distinguished for their heroic ardour and contempt of
danger, and Lieutenant O'Laughlin eminently signalized himself.
Twelve hundred Frenchmen fell in the charge and pursuit, and ten
pieces of cannon, with eleven tumbrils filled with ammunition,
were captured, exclusive of those taken by the remainder of the
army. A writer who was present at this engagement (Robert Brown of
the Coldstream guards), states in his Journal, published in 1795,
"_the_ SEVENTH _and Eleventh light dragoons performed prodigies of
valour on our left_." The Duke of York observed in general orders,
after complimenting several other corps, "_Nor is the determined
gallantry with which the_ SEVENTH _and Eleventh light dragoons
attacked the enemy on the left (notwithstanding their numbers),
less worthy of every commendation_." The loss of the regiment on
this occasion was one man and seven horses killed, nineteen men and
six horses wounded.

After the fall of Landrécies, the regiment proceeded by forced
marches to the vicinity of _Tournay_; and on the 10th of May, when
the French attacked the British position with thirty thousand
men, it had another opportunity of signalizing itself. The enemy
having failed in his attempt to turn the British left, directed his
efforts against the centre. A favourable opportunity presenting
itself, sixteen British and two Austrian squadrons were detached,
under Lieut.-General Harcourt, against the enemy's right, and by a
determined charge broke the French columns. A second charge proved
decisive; the French were defeated, and the British troops were
thanked in general orders for their excellent conduct. The SEVENTH
had six horses killed; four men and four horses wounded; and two
horses missing.

A general attack having been resolved upon, with the view of
compelling the French to evacuate Flanders, the QUEEN'S OWN light
dragoons were selected to take part in this enterprise, and were
attached to one of the columns, under His Royal Highness the Duke
of York, which advanced at an early hour on the morning of the 17th
of May, to the vicinity of Lannoy, where the troops halted a short
period, until a thick fog cleared off, when they resumed their
march. Arriving at _Roubaix_, the place was gallantly captured,
and the troops reposed a few hours in the town. As the sun was
declining in the western horizon, and the shades of evening were
gathering over the provinces of Flanders, Lieut.-General Abercromby
received orders to attack a village two miles distant, called
_Mouvaux_, which was situated on a rising ground, surrounded by
palisades and entrenchments, protected by flanking redoubts, and
defended by a strong body of republican troops. This enterprise
was undertaken with cheerful alacrity; the flank battalion of the
foot guards stormed the works, and the SEVENTH light dragoons, led
by Lieut.-Colonel William Osborne, (a most gallant officer, who
had been twenty years in the regiment[6]), made a detour round
the village, followed by the Fifteenth light dragoons, under
Lieut.-Colonel Churchill. As the French soldiers began to give
way before the furious onset of the foot guards, and issuing from
among the houses, attempted to escape by the rear of the village,
they were charged by the two cavalry regiments with the most
distinguished bravery. The SEVENTH were in front on this occasion;
arriving at a _chevaux-de-frise_, a few men of the regiment
dismounted, and, though exposed to a sharp fire of musketry,
cleared a space for the troops to pass, when the two regiments
rushed with terrific violence upon the French infantry, broke their
ranks, and cut them down with a dreadful slaughter, capturing
three guns. When the two regiments returned from the pursuit, the
evening was far advanced, and they passed the night in the village.

The Austrians having failed in several of their points of attack,
the enemy was enabled to bring nearly his whole force against the
daring Britons who had thus attacked his position; and the morning
of the 18th of May was ushered in by a tremendous cannonade.
Multitudes of French cavalry, infantry, and artillery, appeared
advancing in every direction; and by nine o'clock, Lieut.-General
Abercromby found the few men he had with him nearly surrounded
by crowds of opponents; at the same time he received orders from
the Duke of York to retire to the heights behind Roubaix. He fell
back fighting; and as he passed through the town, his rear was
pressed by hosts of enemies, who followed, shouting and assailing
the British with grape and musketry. From Roubaix the division
proceeded towards Lannoy; being beset by superior numbers, the
soldiers had to dispute every foot of ground, and to keep up a
running fight. The SEVENTH and Fifteenth light dragoons were
constantly engaged on the flanks and in the rear. _Lannoy_ being
found occupied by the French, the British division took to the
fields, passing over hedges and ditches, constantly fighting crowds
of opponents, the light cavalry evincing the most noble ardour and
intrepidity; and the SEVENTH thus exhibiting, under accumulated
disasters and difficulties, the innate bravery of Britons, and
the great value of light cavalry. One of the foot guards who was
present (Browne), observes in his Journal, "Our British light
cavalry which were with us (the Seventh, Fifteenth, and Sixteenth)
performed wonders of valour, charging the enemy with unexampled
courage whenever they approached; it was no uncommon thing to
see _one_ of them attack _three_ of the French dragoons at once,
in order to rescue the prisoners they were carrying off. It was
owing to their bravery that so few prisoners were taken; they also
retook numbers from the enemy. As soon as we reached the village
of Templeuve, we halted and formed; and from thence marched to our
former position, behind the village of Blandin. Our loss proved to
be very inconsiderable to what might have been expected, for it was
rather to be wondered at that one of us escaped." The loss of the
SEVENTH was, four horses killed; six men and ten horses wounded;
and fifteen men and thirty-two horses prisoners of war and missing.
The conduct of the British on this trying occasion was highly
commended by the Emperor of Germany; and the Duke of York expressed
his approbation of the valour and firmness of the corps engaged.

The troops returned to their former position in front of
_Tournay_, where the British were attacked on the 22nd of May;
they repulsed their opponents, who were forced to retire with the
loss of seven pieces of artillery. The loss of the SEVENTH on this
occasion was limited to one troop horse.

The immense numbers which the enemy was enabled to bring forward,
at length forced the allies to retreat from the Austrian
Netherlands to the United Provinces; and during this retrograde
movement the SEVENTH were frequently engaged in out-post duty,
in covering the retiring army, and in numerous rencounters with
detachments of French cavalry.

Tn August the army was encamped near _Breda_, on a large plain
bestrewed with the vestiges of war, to give the Dutch an
opportunity of putting the fortress in a state of defence. While
at this camp, a piquet of the SEVENTH and Sixteenth light dragoons
surprised one of the enemy's out-guards. The French dragoons fled
at the first onset; and many of them forsook their horses to escape
across walls and other fences where mounted troopers could not
pursue them; seven men were, however, made prisoners, and forty
horses were captured.

One hundred thousand French advanced to attack thirty-five thousand
British, and the Duke of York made a further retrograde movement.
In October the army defended the passage of the Waal from the
island of Bommel until it communicated with the Austrians on the
left. The enemy constructed batteries before _Nimeguen_; a sortie
was made on the 4th of November, in order to destroy the French
works, and the QUEEN'S OWN light dragoons formed part of the force
employed on this service. The infantry led on by Major-General
De Burgh (afterwards Earl of Clanricarde), stormed the enemy's
entrenchments in gallant style, when a dreadful carnage ensued,
the French fighting with resolution, but the British proved
irresistible with the bayonet: as the enemy fled from their works,
the SEVENTH and other cavalry charged them in the rear and cut them
down with great slaughter. "Here" (Captain Jones states in the
Historical Journal) "the British performed prodigies of valour": a
thousand opponents lay weltering on the plain and among the works;
the troops were thanked in general orders for their services on
this occasion.

[Sidenote: 1795]

At length a severe frost enabled the enemy to advance in the
beginning of 1795, across the rivers on the ice, and the British,
being no longer capable of resisting the very superior numbers
of their opponents, retired through Holland to Germany. During
this retreat the troops endured very great hardship and privation
from severe weather, and from the hostile spirit manifested by
the Dutch, who had imbibed principles favourable to the French
interest. The SEVENTH light dragoons were employed in covering
the retrograde movements, and had occasional skirmishes with
the enemy's leading corps. After their arrival in Germany, they
occupied quarters of refreshment for several weeks; during the
summer they were encamped on one of the plains of Westphalia; and
in November returned to England.

On the decease of General Sir Henry Clinton, K.B., his Majesty
conferred the colonelcy of the regiment on Major-General David
Dundas, by commission dated the 26th of December, 1795.

[Sidenote: 1796]

[Sidenote: 1797]

[Sidenote: 1798]

[Sidenote: 1799]

The QUEEN'S OWN light dragoons occupied various quarters in England
until the summer of 1799, when they were encamped near Windsor,
and were reviewed by the King, who was pleased to express, in
very gracious terms, his royal approbation of their appearance
and field movements. In the mean time the British government had
resolved to make, in connection with the Russians, an attempt to
deliver Holland from the power of the French republic; and the
SEVENTH embarked for this service at Ramsgate, in the beginning of
September, under the command of Lieut.-Colonel HENRY LORD PAGET,
who was appointed to the command of the cavalry employed in this
expedition, consisting of the SEVENTH, Eleventh, Fifteenth, and
part of the Eighteenth light dragoons; the whole being under the
orders of His Royal Highness the Duke of York.

On the advance of the army on the 19th of September, the SEVENTH
were attached to the column under Lieut.-General de Hermann, which
attacked the enemy at half-past three in the morning, and by
eight gained possession of _Bergen_, a large village surrounded
by extensive woods; but the Russians, overlooking the formidable
resistance they were to meet with, had not preserved the necessary
order, and they were driven back with the loss of many men, and
Lieut.-Generals de Hermann and Tchertchekoff taken prisoners.

In the attack of the enemy's position on the 2nd of October, the
SEVENTH formed part of the cavalry attached to the column commanded
by Lieut.-General Sir Ralph Abercromby, which advanced along the
beach to within a mile of _Egmont-op-Zee_, where a corps of French
infantry was posted among the sand-hills, with a numerous body of
cavalry and artillery on the beach. A sanguinary contest ensued,
in which the heroic perseverance of the British was conspicuous.
Late in the evening the enemy's cavalry made an attempt on the
British horse artillery on the beach: but were charged with
signal intrepidity by the light dragoons under Colonel LORD
PAGET, and driven with considerable loss nearly to the town. The
British established themselves among the sand-hills, where they
passed the night, and on the following day gained possession of
Egmont-op-Zee[7]. The SEVENTH had two men and four horses killed on
this occasion, and eleven men and twenty-five horses wounded.

Part of the regiment was engaged on the 6th of October, in driving
the enemy from his position between _Beverwyck_ and _Wyck-op-Zee_,
which proved a sanguinary service; but the SEVENTH did not sustain
any loss.

These gallant efforts were not seconded by the Dutch, and severe
weather, with other causes, having rendered a retreat necessary,
the SEVENTH under LORD PAGET, covered the movement. Some
skirmishing took place, and several pieces of cannon fell into the
hands of the enemy, when his lordship led one squadron on to the
charge with signal gallantry, and breaking in upon and repulsing a
force six times more numerous than his own, retook the cannon and
with them several pieces belonging to the enemy.

Circumstances having occurred to induce the Duke of York to vacate
Holland, the regiment returned to England in December, and was
stationed at Canterbury.

[Sidenote: 1800]

[Sidenote: 1801]

In the year 1800 the QUEEN'S OWN light dragoons were stationed at
Windsor and Hounslow, to perform the escort duty for the royal
family; in 1801 they were quartered at Reading, with detached
troops in Sussex, from whence they were removed to Oxfordshire and
Wiltshire.

Lieut.-General Sir David Dundas was removed to the Scots Greys in
May, 1801, and the lieut.-colonel of the SEVENTH, Colonel HENRY
W. LORD PAGET (now MARQUIS OF ANGLESEY), was advanced by King
George III. to the colonelcy of the regiment, as a special mark
of royal favour and approbation for his personal merit, and for
the excellent state of discipline and efficiency manifested on all
occasions by the corps under his orders.

[Sidenote: 1802]

[Sidenote: 1803]

Peace having been concluded with the French republic, in 1802,
the establishment of the regiment was reduced; but in 1803, the
treacherous conduct of Napoleon Bonaparte gave rise to another war,
and the establishment was again augmented. When Bonaparte made his
ostentatious, but vain, preparations for the invasion of Great
Britain, the SEVENTH were stationed at Ipswich and Norwich, and
were held in readiness to repel the invaders, should they venture
to approach the shores of Britain.

[Sidenote: 1804]

In 1804 the establishment was augmented to ten troops.

[Sidenote: 1805]

[Sidenote: 1807]

In 1805 directions were received for the light dragoon appointments
and clothing to be changed for those of HUSSARS; the alteration
took place on the 25th of December, 1807; and the regiment
subsequently obtained the designation of "SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN,
REGIMENT OF HUSSARS."

[Sidenote: 1808]

After passing six years at Ipswich and Norwich, the SEVENTH HUSSARS
proceeded to Guildford in July, 1808; and when on their march
they were reviewed by His Royal Highness the Duke of York, on
Hounslow-heath. Important events had, in the mean time, transpired
on the continent and in the peninsula, and Portugal and Spain had
become subject to the tyrannical sway of Bonaparte, who had nearly
attained the zenith of his power. Portugal was delivered during the
summer of 1808, by British skill and valour; and a powerful effort
in aid of the Spaniards, who were endeavouring to free themselves
of the French yoke, having been resolved upon by the British
government, the SEVENTH HUSSARS were selected to take part in this
enterprise.

Eight troops, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Vivian, and
consisting of two lieut.-colonels (Vivian and Kerrison), two
majors (Hon. Berkeley Paget and Hon. G. H. C. Cavendish), eight
captains, six lieutenants, four cornets, four staff-officers,
six quarter-masters, 717 non-commissioned officers, trumpeters,
and privates, and 677 troop-horses, embarked at Portsmouth in
October; on arriving at Corunna, in November, the horses were slung
overboard, and they swam to the shore. The regiment marched by
squadrons to Astorga, from whence it proceeded, with the Tenth and
Fifteenth hussars, towards Salamanca, to join the troops advancing
from Portugal under Lieut.-General Sir John Moore, K.B. The British
commander had been promised that his advance should be covered
by a powerful and victorious Spanish army, and that numerous and
enthusiastic legions of patriots were ready to co-operate with
him; but not a Spanish soldier was in his front;--the enemy was at
hand;--those armies with which he had been ordered to co-operate
had been routed and dispersed, and Bonaparte was approaching the
capital of Spain in triumph. Twenty-three thousand Britons were
not able to cope with three hundred thousand French; but Sir John
Moore resolved to push boldly forward, and menace the French lines,
that he might thus draw Bonaparte with a powerful army from the
capital, which would give time for the southern provinces of Spain
to organize their means of resistance, and for the discomfited
Spanish armies to re-assemble. The boldness and ability with which
this resolution was executed, surprised Napoleon, and deserve the
commendation of posterity. The SEVENTH HUSSARS were employed in
this enterprise, and a piquet of the regiment was engaged on the
21st of December, with the Tenth and Fifteenth hussars, commanded
by Lieut.-General LORD PAGET, in driving a body of French dragoons
from _Sahagun_, when about twenty of the enemy were killed,
and thirteen officers and one hundred and fifty-four men taken
prisoners, in a sharp sword-fight which lasted about twenty minutes.

The approach of Bonaparte with an immense army rendered it
necessary for the British to withdraw, and the heavy baggage, with
several brigades of infantry, commenced retiring; at the same
time the cavalry patroles advanced up to the French lines and
skirmished, to conceal the retrograde movement. On the morning of
the 25th of December a squadron of the SEVENTH HUSSARS, commanded
by Lieut.-Colonel Kerrison, advanced towards _Carrion_, and
encountering a French detachment of about equal numbers, made
them all prisoners except the officer, who wounded Lieut.-Colonel
Kerrison in the arm, and escaped.

The regiment commenced its retreat a few hours after this affair;
and the army rested two days at _Benevente_, a rich open town
situate in a plain extending from the Gallician mountains to the
neighbourhood of Burgos. The infantry afterwards continued the
retreat, while the cavalry remained in the town, and had parties
watching the fords of the little river Esla. Soon after day-break
on the 29th of December, six hundred cavalry of the French imperial
guard crossed the stream and advanced into the plain; the British
detachments retired fighting, and a piquet of the SEVENTH HUSSARS,
under Lieutenant Lowther, was sharply engaged. Being joined by
part of the Third German hussars, the piquets charged the French
leading squadrons with signal gallantry, the ground was obstinately
disputed, and a particularly animating scene presented itself.
Baggage mules and followers of the army were scattered over the
plain, the town was filled with tumult, the distant piquets and
videts were galloping in from right and left; the French were
pressing forward, and every appearance indicated that the enemy's
whole army was come up and passing the river. Suddenly LORD PAGET
led the Tenth hussars at speed into the plain; the piquets that
were engaged united, and the whole charged. In an instant the scene
changed, the French were seen galloping back, with the British
at their heels; they plunged into the stream without breaking
their ranks, and having gained the opposite heights, they wheeled
round and appeared inclined to come forward a second time; but
the British horse artillery opening upon them, they retired.
Fifty-five killed and wounded Frenchmen lay on the plain, their
general, Lefebre Desnouettes, and several other officers, were
taken prisoners, and many of those who escaped across the river,
were wounded. The piquet of the SEVENTH HUSSARS suffered severely,
nearly every man being either killed or wounded.

[Sidenote: 1809]

[Sidenote: 1810]

The enemy planted heavy cannon on the bank of the river, and made a
show of re-crossing; but LORD PAGET guarded the fords all the day,
and at night withdrew with the cavalry. The SEVENTH were constantly
in the rear of the army, with the other hussar regiments, during
the remainder of the retreat; they, however, suffered little from
the swords of the enemy; but the effects of frost, snow, and of a
deficiency in the supplies of provision and forage, were severely
felt. The want of horse-shoes was a serious evil, which was owing
to the impracticability of the forge carts accompanying the
regiment. When the army withdrew from the position at Lugo, during
the night of the 8th of January, 1809, the SEVENTH HUSSARS were
left behind to keep up the bivouac fires, and to cover the retreat,
and they were in the rear of the army until it arrived within
three leagues of Corunna.

On arriving at Corunna, the regiment mounted two hundred and fifty
horses only, out of six hundred and eighty which had marched
from that port about two months before, and many of those which
remained, were destroyed for the want of transport, which could
be obtained only for the officers' horses and for about ninety
troop-horses.

The French were defeated in a general action fought on the 16th
of January, when SIR JOHN MOORE fell mortally wounded. The army
afterwards embarked and returned to England. Thus the British had
intercepted the blow which was descending to crush Spain; time had
been given to enable the patriots to re-organize their armies;
and Bonaparte being recalled to France, by the news that Austria
and Russia were arming to oppose him, the war was protracted in
Spain. On the passage to England the Despatch transport, having
on board Major the Hon. G. C. Cavendish, Captain G. Dukinfield,
and Lieutenant the Hon. Edward Waldegrave, with one hundred and
thirteen men, and forty-four horses, was wrecked near the Lizard,
on the coast of Cornwall, and only seven men escaped.

After its arrival from Spain, the regiment was quartered at
Guildford, from whence it proceeded to Weymouth; in May, 1810, it
embarked at Liverpool for Ireland, and was stationed at Dublin,
with detached troops at Athy and Carlow.

[Sidenote: 1811]

[Sidenote: 1812]

[Sidenote: 1813]

In 1811 the head-quarters were removed to Dundalk, where they
remained during the year 1812; and in 1813 the regiment embarked at
Dublin for England.

Having landed at Liverpool, the regiment proceeded to London; it
was stationed at Hyde Park barracks, Hampton Court, and Hounslow,
and performed the king's duty during the absence of the household
cavalry on foreign service.

The glorious victories gained by the allied army under Field
Marshal the Marquis of Wellington had, in the mean time,
accomplished the deliverance of Portugal, and of nearly all Spain,
from the despotic sway of Bonaparte, and the SEVENTH HUSSARS were
selected to take part in completing the overthrow of the tyrannical
power of Napoleon. Eight troops, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel R.
Hussey Vivian, embarked at Portsmouth on the 15th of August, and
landed at Bilboa, the capital of Biscay, in Spain, on the 1st
of September; and two additional troops joined from England in
October. The regiment was formed in brigade with the Tenth and
Fifteenth hussars, commanded by Major-General Lord Edward Somerset.

After the surrender of the castle of St. Sebastian the regiment
advanced, and having joined the army, supported the infantry at
the passage of the _Bidassoa_, and advanced as far as Vera on the
borders of France. The SEVENTH HUSSARS subsequently retired through
the Pyrenean mountains to the vicinity of Pampeluna, which fortress
surrendered on the 31st of October.

Colonel Richard Hussey Vivian having been appointed to the command
of a brigade of cavalry, the command of the regiment devolved on
Lieut.-Colonel Edward Kerrison.

[Sidenote: 1814]

After occupying village cantonments near Pampeluna for several
weeks, the SEVENTH HUSSARS marched through the Pyrenees and
joined the army in France. On the 18th of December they took the
out-post duty at Cambo, a town eight miles from Bayonne, where
the French army, under Marshal Soult, lay in a fortified camp. On
the 31st of December, the regiment took the out-post duty on the
road leading to St. Jean Pied de Port, where a French division
was stationed. The weather becoming very severe, the regiment
went into cantonments in the beginning of 1814, near Hasparan, in
Gascony, thirteen miles from Bayonne: in these quarters forage was
particularly scarce, and the horses suffered in condition from
being fed on chopped gorse and about three pounds of oats a day.
The foraging parties sent towards the French lines, had frequent
skirmishes, and on one of these occasions, Captain Peter Augustus
Heyliger was wounded.

The weather having become more clear, the army advanced in the
middle of February, and on the 24th the hussar brigade proceeded to
the bank of the Gave d'Oléron, in the expectation of being engaged.
Captain Fraser and twelve men of the SEVENTH passed the river under
a heavy fire, and were followed by Captain Verner's squadron, for
the purpose of supporting a body of infantry which had crossed the
stream and were seriously engaged; but the enemy being in force,
and the ground such that cavalry could not act, the squadron was
re-called. The enemy abandoning his position, the regiment crossed
the river in pursuit, and halted at the village of Boren.

Marshal Soult concentrated his forces behind the Pau at _Orthes_;
the allies advanced to attack him; and the SEVENTH HUSSARS, having
crossed the river, were engaged in driving the enemy from his
position on the 27th of February. About 10 o'clock the regiment
was ordered to cover the sixth division and the guns; and when
the French gave way, it dashed forward in pursuit, and by a
brilliant charge it overthrew a body of opponents, and took sixty
prisoners: this occurred about 3 o'clock. Shortly afterwards
the regiment was again ordered to charge, and being led forward
by Colonel Kerrison with signal gallantry, it was once more
successful, and sixteen officers, with about seven hundred men,
were made prisoners. The Marquis of Wellington observed in his
public despatch: "Lieutenant-General Sir Stapleton Cotton took
advantage of the only opportunity which occurred, to charge with
Major-General Lord Edward Somerset's brigade in the neighbourhood
of _Sault de Navailles_, where the enemy had been driven from the
high road by Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill. _The_ SEVENTH
HUSSARS _distinguished themselves upon this occasion, and made many
prisoners_."

The regiment had four men and five horses killed; Major William
Thornhill, Captain P. A. Heyliger, Lieutenant Robert Douglas, nine
men, and eleven horses wounded.

After the battle of Orthes the SEVENTH HUSSARS were employed a
short time at Villeneuve de Marsan, in the department of the
Landes; also at Roquefort and Captieux, in protecting the rear
of the army from the depredations of parties of brigands. From
these quarters the regiment advanced, and rejoining the army near
_Toulouse_, supported the infantry in the action at that place on
the 10th of April.

When the French withdrew from Toulouse, the regiment moved forward
and was employed in the out-post duty.

At length hostilities were terminated by the abdication of
Bonaparte and the restoration of the Bourbon dynasty. Thus a war
of unprincipled aggression, begun in acts of fraud and perfidy,
and carried on with treachery, cruelty, and rapine, ended with the
downfall of its author, and the humiliation and dispersion of his
boasted invincible legions.

After the termination of hostilities, the regiment reposed a month
in village cantonments; and on the 1st of June commenced its march
for Boulogne, where it embarked for England, and, after landing,
it marched to Romford, and in September to Brighton. Its services
were subsequently rewarded with the honour of bearing the word
"PENINSULA" upon its appointments.

[Sidenote: 1815]

Riots having occurred in London towards the end of February and in
the beginning of March, 1815, in consequence of the introduction
into Parliament of a bill to regulate the importation of grain,
the SEVENTH HUSSARS were suddenly ordered to proceed thither from
Brighton.

The return of Bonaparte to France, the sudden defection of the
forces of Louis XVIII., and the elevation of the usurper to the
throne, filled Europe with astonishment. War was resolved upon, and
on the 25th of March three squadrons of the QUEEN'S OWN HUSSARS,
commanded by Col. Sir Edward Kerrison, marched from London for
foreign service; they embarked at Dover, landed at Ostend, and,
after marching a few stages up the country, went into cantonments,
and were formed in brigade with the Fifteenth hussars, and
Second hussars of the King's German legion, under the orders of
Major-General Sir Colquhoun Grant, K.C.B. On the 29th of May they
were reviewed, with other brigades of the cavalry, by Field-Marshal
his Grace the Duke of Wellington, accompanied by Marshal Von
Blucher, the commander of the Prussian army.

Bonaparte, endeavouring, by one of those rapid movements for
which he had been so famous, to interpose between the British and
Prussian armies, and beat them in detail, suddenly attacked and
drove in the out-posts, and early on the morning of the 16th of
June the SEVENTH HUSSARS advanced to support the troops engaged
at _Quatre Bras_. After a march of many miles, they arrived at
the scene of conflict; the French were repulsed, and the troops
bivouacked in the fields.

The Prussians having been defeated and forced to retreat, the Duke
of Wellington made a corresponding movement on the 17th of June, to
preserve his communication with them, and the SEVENTH HUSSARS were
engaged, with other corps, in covering this retrograde movement.
On passing through the village of _Genappe_, the French lancers
began to press upon the rear of the retiring army, and the SEVENTH
were directed by their colonel, Lieutenant-General the Earl of
Uxbridge, to charge. This order was executed with signal bravery;
but the lancers, being sustained by a great mass of cavalry, and
having their flanks secure, presented an almost impenetrable row
of pikes, through which the hussars were unable to break. The
regiment rallied and charged a second time; but the lancers, being
well supported and advantageously posted, were enabled to maintain
their ground. Some impression had, however, been made, and two
squadrons of the first regiment of life guards coming up at speed,
the weight and power of their charge broke the lancers, who were
pursued through the village with great slaughter. The retreat
was afterwards continued with skirmishing and cannonading to the
position in front of the village of _Waterloo_, where the army
passed the night exposed to a heavy rain.

On the following day the hard contested and sanguinary battle
of _Waterloo_ was fought,--a battle memorable in the annals of
Europe,--where the fate of empires was decided by the sword, and
the British troops acquired immortal honour! During the early
part of the action the SEVENTH HUSSARS supported the infantry,
and towards the evening they were ordered forward. Moving from
Hugomont, they acted nearly on the reverse of the enemy, and by
a series of brilliant charges, most nobly executed, contributed
to the final overthrow of the French army. On this occasion
the officers and men proved their resolution to support the
high character which the regiment had so long borne; and their
conduct was publicly noticed and attested in the strongest
and most unequivocal terms by the commander of the cavalry,
Lieutenant-General the Earl of Uxbridge, who, after having gone
through this arduous day, received a wound at the close of the
action by which he lost his right leg.

The loss of the regiment on the 17th and 18th of June was, one
serjeant, fifty-five rank and file, and eighty-four horses killed;
Captains J. W. Robins, W. Vernor, and P. A. Heyliger; Lieutenants
R. Douglas, E. Peters, and R. Beattie; with nine serjeants, one
trumpeter, eighty-three rank and file, and one hundred and sixteen
horses wounded.

The gallant conduct of the regiment on this occasion, was
subsequently rewarded with the honour of bearing the word
"WATERLOO" on its appointments; the officers and men received each
a silver medal; and the privilege of reckoning two years' service
for that day, was conferred on the subaltern officers, and also on
the non-commissioned officers and private men.

On the 19th of June, the regiment advanced in pursuit of the
French, who fled in dismay towards Paris; on the evening of
the 24th, it was at the capture of _Cambray_ by escalade, by
Lieut.-General Sir Charles Colville's division. On arriving at the
vicinity of Paris, the war was terminated, by the surrender of the
capital, and the restoration of Louis XVIII. to the throne of his
ancestors.

After occupying village cantonments near Paris for several months,
and taking part in several grand reviews, at which the Emperors
of Russia and Austria, and the Kings of Prussia and France, were
present, the SEVENTH HUSSARS were selected to form part of the
army of occupation in France, and they proceeded to Estaples and
neighbouring villages.

[Sidenote: 1816]

In the summer of 1816, the SEVENTH marched to quarters between
St. Omer and Dunkirk, for the purpose of field exercise and
review, and were joined by a squadron from England. On the 22nd of
October, the Duke of Wellington reviewed the army on the plains of
St. Denain, and witnessed the troops go through the formula of a
mock engagement. The SEVENTH afterwards returned to their former
quarters.

[Sidenote: 1817]

In February, 1817, the regiment was again quartered near St.
Omer, for the convenience of field exercise; it was subsequently
stationed between Cambray and Valenciennes, and was again reviewed
in October, by the Duke of Wellington, together with the remainder
of British troops, and the Saxons, Danes, and Hanoverians. The
regiment was afterwards stationed at Cassel and adjacent villages.

[Sidenote: 1818]

Several changes of quarters took place in 1818; and the regiment
was at the grand military spectacles, when the army was seen by
their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of Kent and Cumberland, and
when the Russians, British, Saxons, Danes, and Hanoverians were
reviewed, by the Emperor of Russia, King of Prussia, Prince of
Orange, Grand Dukes Constantine and Michael, &c., &c. After these
reviews, the army of occupation quitted France: the SEVENTH HUSSARS
embarked at Calais, landed at Dover and Ramsgate, and marched to
Chertsey, &c.

On the night of the 1st of December the regiment attended the
funeral of Her Majesty Queen Charlotte.

[Sidenote: 1819]

[Sidenote: 1820]

In 1819, the regiment marched to Scotland; in August, 1820, it
embarked at Port Patrick for Ireland; and the head-quarters were
stationed twelve months at Dundalk.

[Sidenote: 1821]

In August, 1821, the regiment marched to Dublin, on the occasion of
the visit of His Majesty King George IV. to the capital of Ireland.
On the 18th of August, the king reviewed the SEVENTH HUSSARS, with
the other troops in garrison at Dublin, on which occasion the
regiment was commanded by its colonel, the Marquis of Anglesey. In
September the establishment was reduced from eight to six troops.

[Sidenote: 1822]

[Sidenote: 1823]

Leaving Dublin in December, 1822, the regiment proceeded to
Newbridge; in June, 1823, it embarked at Waterford, and landing
at Bristol, proceeded to Richmond and other villages in the
neighbourhood of Hounslow.

On the 15th of July the two regiments of life guards, Blues, Third
light dragoons, and SEVENTH and Fifteenth hussars, with a brigade
of horse artillery, were reviewed on Hounslow-heath by his Royal
Highness the Duke of York.

[Sidenote: 1824]

After the review the SEVENTH HUSSARS marched to Brighton,
Chichester, and Hastings, with detachments on revenue duty on the
coast; but returned to the vicinity of Hounslow in the spring
of 1824, the head-quarters being at Hampton Court; and on the
7th of July they were again reviewed, with the same corps as in
the preceding year, on Hounslow-heath, by the Duke of York. The
head-quarters were afterwards removed to Hounslow barracks, and the
regiment took the escort duty.

[Sidenote: 1825]

[Sidenote: 1826]

[Sidenote: 1827]

In July, 1825, the regiment proceeded to York, Beverley, and
Newcastle; in April, 1826, it marched to Scotland, and was
stationed at Edinburgh and Perth, with parties on revenue duty at
Cupar, Angus, and Forfar; and in March, 1827, it left Scotland for
the South of England.

On the 12th of April the SEVENTH HUSSARS were reviewed on
Hounslow-heath by his Grace the Duke of Wellington, who was pleased
to express his unqualified approbation of their appearance and
discipline. After the review they continued their march to Brighton
and Chichester.

[Sidenote: 1828]

[Sidenote: 1829]

[Sidenote: 1830]

Leaving these quarters, the regiment proceeded to Liverpool in
March, 1828, and embarking for Ireland, landed at Dublin, where it
was stationed until May, 1829, when it was removed to Newbridge,
and in May, 1830, to Dundalk, Monaghan, and Belturbet.

On the 2d of August, 1830, a general order was issued for the
whole of the cavalry, with the exception of the Royal Horse
Guards (Blues), to be dressed in _red_; the SEVENTH HUSSARS were
consequently furnished with red pelisses in the following year.

[Sidenote: 1831]

The regiment left Dundalk, &c., in April, 1831, for Newbridge, and
in June proceeded to Dublin and embarked for England. After landing
at Liverpool, it marched to Birmingham, with detached troops at
Coventry and Kidderminster.

[Sidenote: 1832]

[Sidenote: 1833]

[Sidenote: 1834]

In March, 1832, the regiment proceeded to Norwich, Ipswich, and one
troop to Boston. In the month of March of the following year it
proceeded to Scotland, and was stationed at Hamilton and Glasgow,
and in February, 1834, performed much extra duty in consequence
of riots among the cotton spinners and calico printers in the
neighbourhood of Glasgow.

[Sidenote: 1835]

On the 2d of May, 1834, the regiment left its quarters in Scotland,
and proceeding to England, was stationed at York and Newcastle; and
in April, 1835, it marched to Nottingham, Sheffield, Derby, and
Boston.

[Sidenote: 1836]

[Sidenote: 1837]

In April, 1836, the regiment proceeded to Hounslow, and took the
escort duty. In June, 1837, it embarked at Bristol for Ireland,
landed at Cork, and the head-quarters were established at
Ballincollig, from whence they were removed in August to Cork, and
in September to Dublin, where they passed the winter.

[Sidenote: 1838]

[Sidenote: 1839]

Orders having been received for the regiment to transfer its
services to Canada, it was divided into four service and two depôt
troops; the service troops embarked at Cork on the 1st of May,
1838; and arrived at Montreal in June. In November, 1838, they were
employed against the insurgents in Lower Canada, and one troop was
similarly employed in January, 1839.

[Sidenote: 1840]

[Sidenote: 1841]

[Sidenote: 1842]

During the years 1839, 1840, and 1841, the service troops were
stationed at Montreal and Laprairie. In the year 1841 orders were
received to resume blue pelisses. The Service Troops have continued
in Canada to the summer of 1842, the date of the conclusion of this
memoir.


The record of the services of the SEVENTH, or QUEEN'S OWN HUSSARS,
for a period of one hundred and fifty years, (as contained in the
preceding pages,) exhibits a proof, among the other portions of
the British army, of attachment to their officers, of loyalty and
fidelity to their sovereign, and of zeal and devotedness to their
country. On all occasions, when their services have been required
to meet a foreign enemy, they have entered upon the difficulties of
active warfare with readiness and a determination to perform the
duties allotted them; and their bravery and contempt of danger have
been strongly evinced. Their gallantry at the battle of Dettingen
in 1743; their conduct at _Warbourg_ in 1760, under the Marquis
of Granby, and on other occasions in Germany during the Seven
years' War;--their boldness and intrepid bearing in conflict with
the enemy at _Cateau_, _Roubaix_, _Tournay_, and _Mouvaux_, under
the Duke of York, in 1794, which received His Royal Highness's
strongest commendations, afford instances of the most determined
bravery.

The proofs of true courage were further adduced by the firm
conduct of the SEVENTH HUSSARS in the advance into Spain under
Lieut.-General Sir John Moore in 1808, and in the retreat to
Corunna in January, 1809, as detailed in the Regimental Record.
The gallantry of the regiment at the battle of Waterloo, in June,
1815, gained an imperishable addition to its fame; and the deeds
of the officers and men, who fought on that glorious occasion,
are sufficient to perpetuate an emulous desire in the present and
future members of the corps to rival the exertions of their brave
predecessors.

The smart, active, and soldier-like appearance of the regiment,
its correct and orderly conduct in quarters, and its gallantry in
the field, have acquired a high character in the estimation of the
country, and proved it to be a valuable acquisition to the crown
and to the government.

In thus recording the commendations due to so distinguished a
regiment as the SEVENTH Hussars, the compiler of this Record, with
true respect towards the gallant officer and nobleman at the head
of the corps, ventures to associate his fame and honour with those
of his regiment, with which, for more than forty years, they have
been identified: General the Marquis of Anglesey, K.G. and G.C.B.,
assumed the command of the SEVENTH Hussars as Lieutenant-Colonel on
the 6th of April, 1797; he shared with his regiment in the dangers
and honours of the conflicts in Holland in 1799; at Sahagun and
Benevente in 1808; in the retreat to Corunna in 1809; and at the
all-crowning victory of Waterloo in 1815, where he lost his leg by
a cannon shot. In future ages the gallant and heroic deeds of this
nobleman will be the admiration of every member and friend of the
British army.




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

OF

THE SEVENTH,

OR

QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT

OF

HUSSARS.


ROBERT CUNNINGHAM.

_Appointed 30th December, 1690._

ROBERT CUNNINGHAM was an officer of reputation in the Scots brigade
in the service of Holland, and was wounded at the battle of St.
Denis, in 1678. Proceeding to Scotland, he became a warm advocate
for the principles of the Revolution of 1688, and having performed
faithful services in that cause, he was rewarded with the colonelcy
of a regiment of foot formed during the winter of 1689-90. When
the clans tendered their submission to King William's government,
Colonel Cunningham's regiment was disbanded, and he obtained the
command of a corps of dragoons, now the SEVENTH HUSSARS. He served
with his regiment, under King William, in the Netherlands, during
the campaigns of 1694, 1695, and 1696, and in the summer of the
last-mentioned year he commanded a brigade of dragoons in Flanders.
At the close of the campaign he was succeeded in the colonelcy by
Lord Jedburgh.


WILLIAM, LORD JEDBURGH.

_Appointed 1st October, 1696._

The Honorable WILLIAM KERR, son of Robert, fourth Earl and first
Marquis of Lothian, steadily supported the principles of the
Revolution, and rose to the rank of colonel in the army on the
1st of March, 1692. He succeeded, in the same year, to the title
of LORD JEDBURGH; and on the 1st of October, 1696, King William
appointed him to the colonelcy of a regiment of dragoons, now the
SEVENTH HUSSARS. In 1702, Queen Anne promoted him to the rank
of brigadier-general. On the decease of his father, in 1703,
he succeeded to the title of MARQUIS OF LOTHIAN[8]. The rank
of major-general was conferred on his lordship in 1704; in the
succeeding year he was invested with the order of the Thistle; and
in January, 1707, he obtained the rank of lieut.-general. On the
25th of April following he obtained the colonelcy of the third foot
guards, from which he was removed in 1713, in consequence of his
political views not being in accordance with those of Queen Anne's
new ministry. After the accession of King George I., his lordship
was appointed to the staff of North Britain. He died in 1722.


PATRICK, LORD POLWARTH.

_Appointed 28th April, 1707._

This officer was the son of Sir Patrick Hume, of Polwarth, who was
one of the most conspicuous and vigorous characters of the age in
which he lived, was a strenuous opposer of the proceedings of King
Charles II. in Scotland, and was created, by King William, Lord
Polwarth, and Earl of Marchmont.

PATRICK HUME was educated in Holland, and the Prince of Orange gave
him a commission in the Dutch service. He accompanied His Highness
to England at the Revolution, and when his father was elevated to
the dignity of Earl of Marchmont, he was styled LORD POLWARTH. He
was appointed major of a regiment of dragoons, now SEVENTH HUSSARS,
in 1694; lieut.-colonel in 1697, and colonel in 1707. He died in
1709.


THE HONORABLE WILLIAM KERR.

_Appointed 10th October, 1709._

The Honorable WILLIAM KERR, third son of Robert, Earl of Roxburgh,
and brother of John, first Duke of Roxburgh, served with reputation
on the continent, under the celebrated John, Duke of Marlborough.
In 1709 he was rewarded with the command of a regiment of dragoons,
now SEVENTH HUSSARS, and on the accession of King George I. he
was appointed groom of the bedchamber to the Prince of Wales. He
highly distinguished himself at the battle of Dumblain, on the 13th
of November, 1715, where, according to the accounts published at
the time, he had three horses killed under him, was wounded in
the thigh, and had his coat torn by a pistol bullet. The care and
attention which he paid to the interests of his corps, procured
him the affection and esteem of the officers and soldiers. He was
promoted to the rank of brigadier-general in 1727, to that of
major-general in 1735, and to that of lieut.-general in 1739. He
died in 1741, after commanding the regiment nearly thirty-two years.


JOHN COPE.

_Appointed 12th August, 1741._

JOHN COPE entered the army in March, 1707, and speedily rose
to the lieut.-colonelcy in the second or Scots troop of horse
grenadier guards. He obtained the rank of colonel in the army in
1711. In 1730 he was promoted from the horse grenadier guards
to the colonelcy of the thirty-ninth foot, from which he was
removed to the fifth foot, in 1732. He was promoted to the rank
of brigadier-general in 1735; was removed to the ninth dragoons
in 1737; and advanced to the rank of major-general two years
afterwards. He served several years on the staff of Ireland,
obtained the colonelcy of the SEVENTH dragoons in 1741, and
proceeded, in the summer of 1742, to Flanders with the army
commanded by Field-Marshal the Earl of Stair. In the beginning of
the following year he was promoted to the rank of lieut.-general,
and having signalized himself, under the eye of his sovereign, at
the head of the second line of cavalry, at the battle of Dettingen,
he was constituted a knight of the Bath.

SIR JOHN COPE was commander-in-chief in Scotland when the rebellion
of 1745 broke out in the Highlands, and a small body of troops,
under his immediate command, was defeated by the clans under the
young Pretender, at Preston Pans, which unfortunate circumstance
enabled the rebels to penetrate into England. He died in 1760.


JOHN MOSTYN.

_Appointed 18th August, 1760._

JOHN MOSTYN served in the thirty-first foot, in which corps
he rose to the rank of captain, and in 1742 he was appointed
captain-lieutenant in the second foot guards. Having joined his
company on foreign service, he was engaged at the battle of
Fontenoy, where the foot guards highly distinguished themselves,
and he was wounded. In December, 1747, he was promoted to the
rank of colonel, and appointed aide-de-camp to King George II.;
and in 1751 he obtained the colonelcy of the seventh foot, from
which he was removed to the thirteenth dragoons in 1754. In 1757
he was promoted to the rank of major-general; he was removed to
the fifth dragoons in 1758, and to the SEVENTH dragoons in 1760.
He commanded a brigade of infantry under the Duke of Marlborough
in the expedition to the coast of France in 1758; in 1759 he was
promoted to the rank of lieut.-general, and serving in Germany
under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick, he distinguished himself on
several occasions. At the conclusion of the war he was removed to
the first dragoon guards, and was promoted in 1772, to the rank of
general. He died in March, 1779.


SIR GEORGE HOWARD, K.B.

_Appointed 13th May, 1763._

GEORGE HOWARD entered the army in the reign of King George I.,
and after serving the crown a period of nineteen years, he
obtained the lieut.-colonelcy of the third foot on the 2nd of
April, 1744. He commanded the regiment at the battles of Fontenoy,
Falkirk, Culloden, and Val; and in 1749 he succeeded his father
in the colonelcy of the corps. He served with distinction in
Germany during the seven years' war; was promoted to the rank of
major-general in 1758, and to that of lieut.-general in 1760: and
at the conclusion of the peace in 1763, he was removed to the
SEVENTH dragoons, and advanced to the dignity of a knight of the
Bath. In 1777 he was promoted to the rank of general; in April,
1779, he was removed to the first dragoon guards; and was promoted
to the rank of field-marshal in October 1793; he was also a member
of the privy council, and governor of Jersey. He died on the 16th
of July, 1796.


SIR HENRY CLINTON, K.B.

_Appointed 21st April, 1779._

HENRY CLINTON, grandson of Francis, sixth Earl of Lincoln, held
a commission in an independent company of foot at New York, from
which he was removed in 1751, to a lieutenancy in the second
foot guards, and in 1758 he was promoted to the rank of captain
and lieut.-colonel in the first foot guards. Having gained great
credit for his conduct during the seven years' war, in which the
foot guards had several opportunities of acquiring distinction,
he was promoted, in 1762, to the rank of colonel in the army;
and in November, 1766, King George III. rewarded him with the
colonelcy of the twelfth regiment of foot, then at Gibraltar; he
was promoted to the rank of major-general in 1772. On the breaking
out of hostilities in America, in 1775, this distinguished officer
was sent with reinforcements to General Gage, at Boston, with
the local rank of lieut.-general, and signalized himself at the
battle of Bunker's Hill. In January, 1776, he was promoted to the
local rank of general in America; he proceeded to North Carolina,
and commanded the troops which made an unsuccessful attempt on
Charlestown; and afterwards commanded a division of the army,
under General Sir William Howe, in the descent on Long Island.
In the action at Brooklyn he evinced ardour and ability; also in
the skirmish at White Plains, and in the capture of Rhode Island,
in December, the same year. In 1777, he commanded the troops at
New York, and captured forts Clinton and Montgomery, and was
rewarded with the order of the Bath. In 1778 he was appointed
commander-in-chief in North America; in May he joined the army at
Philadelphia from whence he withdrew to New York, and while on
the march he repulsed an attack of the Americans at Freehold. He
subsequently had success in several affairs of minor importance;
and while engaged in these services, he was appointed to the
colonelcy of the SEVENTH dragoons. In December, 1779, he embarked
with a large force for South Carolina, and, after overcoming
numerous difficulties, he captured Charlestown, for which he
received the thanks of parliament. He sustained the character
of a brave, zealous, and accomplished officer; but he was so
circumstanced in America, that he was unable to add much to his
reputation by the energetic and gallant efforts which he made in
that country; and after experiencing pain and mortification from
numerous causes, he returned to England in June, 1782, having been
succeeded by General Carleton, afterwards Lord Dorchester.

The rank of general in the army was conferred on SIR HENRY CLINTON
in 1793; he held the government of Limerick; and in 1795 he was
appointed governor of Gibraltar. He was many years a member of
parliament; and was also groom of the bedchamber to the Duke of
Gloucester. His decease occurred on the 23rd of December, 1795.


DAVID DUNDAS.

_Appointed 26th December, 1795._

DAVID DUNDAS was one of the most distinguished officers of the age
in which he lived, for his perfect knowledge of the principles of
military tactics. He commenced his military education at the age
of thirteen in the academy at Woolwich, and at fifteen he assisted
in a survey of Scotland; in 1756 obtained a commission in the
fifty-sixth regiment. In 1758 he proceeded with the expedition
to the coast of France as an assistant quarter-master-general;
and in the following year obtained the command of a troop in a
newly-raised regiment of light dragoons (Eliott's light horse), now
the fifteenth, or King's hussars. He served with his regiment in
Germany in 1760 and 1761; in the following summer he accompanied
an expedition to Cuba, as aide-de-camp to Major-General Eliott,
and was actively employed in the reduction of the Havannah. After
the peace he resumed his post in his regiment, in which he rose
to the rank of major; and, urged by an ardent desire to acquire a
perfect knowledge of every branch of his profession, he obtained
permission to proceed to the continent, to observe the practice
of the French and Austrian armies. In 1775 he procured the
lieut.-colonelcy of the twelfth light dragoons, joined the regiment
in Ireland shortly afterwards, and in 1778 obtained the appointment
of quarter-master-general in that country. In 1782 he was removed
to the lieut.-colonelcy of the second Irish horse, now the fifth
dragoon guards. In 1785 he again proceeded to the continent,
attended the exercises of the Prussian troops during three summers,
and after his return he presented His Majesty with a detailed
account of their evolutions.

Colonel Dundas, having become a proficient tactician, produced,
in 1788, a highly useful work on the principles of military
movements, which became the basis of our army regulations for
field exercises. His abilities obtained for him the favour and
attention of King George III., who appointed him adjutant-general
in Ireland, for the purpose of introducing his system of tactics
into the army of that country. In 1790 Colonel Dundas was promoted
to the rank of major-general. In 1791 he obtained the colonelcy
of the twenty-second foot, and in the same year was placed on the
Irish staff, but he resigned that appointment in 1793 to engage in
service of actual warfare. After the commencement of hostilities
with the French republic, Major-General Dundas was employed on a
military mission to the island of Jersey, and was subsequently
sent to the continent to confer with the Duke of York respecting
the siege of Dunkirk. From Flanders he proceeded to Toulon, which
had recently been taken possession of by a British armament; and
his services there, although he was ultimately obliged to evacuate
the place, called forth the approbation of his sovereign and of
the British nation. After abandoning Toulon, he made a descent
on Corsica, which island was reduced and annexed to the British
dominions; but shortly afterwards he received directions to proceed
to Flanders, where he arrived in the spring of 1794, and commanded
a brigade of cavalry at the battle of Tournay on the 22d of May,
1794. Major-General Dundas was actively employed in the retreat
through Holland, and the corps under his immediate command gained
considerable advantage over the enemy in two successive actions
near Gelder-Malsen; he highly distinguished himself also in an
attack upon the French post at Thuyl, in December of the same year.
He continued with the British troops in Germany during the summer
of 1795, and in December was appointed colonel of the SEVENTH
Light Dragoons. After his return to England he was appointed
quarter-master-general to the army; and he composed the celebrated
regulations for the field exercises and movements for the cavalry,
which were approved by his Royal Highness the Duke of York and by
King George III., and ordered to be exclusively adopted throughout
the cavalry.

In 1799 Lieut.-General Dundas commanded a division of the allied
army under the Duke of York, in the expedition to Holland; he
distinguished himself in several actions with the enemy, and was
highly commended by His Royal Highness in his public despatches.
In 1801 he was appointed colonel of the second, or Royal North
British dragoons, and was constituted governor of Fort George.
In 1802 he was promoted to the rank of general; and in the
following year, when the French were preparing to invade England,
he was placed in command of the troops in the southern district,
which comprised the counties of Kent and Sussex. In 1804 he was
appointed governor of the Royal Hospital at Chelsea, and created
a Knight of the Bath. On the 18th of March, 1809, His Majesty was
pleased to confer on this distinguished veteran the appointment of
commander-in-chief of the army, on the resignation of Field-Marshal
His Royal Highness the Duke of York, which appointment he
held until the 25th of May, 1811, when His Royal Highness was
re-appointed. He was also appointed colonel-in-chief of the rifle
brigade on the 31st of August, 1809. He was promoted to the
colonelcy of the King's dragoon guards on the 27th of January,
1813. He died in 1820, after a distinguished service of upwards of
sixty years.


HENRY W., LORD PAGET,

NOW

MARQUIS OF ANGLESEY, KG., GCB., K.ST.P., GCH.

_Appointed 16th May, 1801._




SUCCESSION OF LIEUTENANT-COLONELS

OF THE

SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN, REGIMENT OF HUSSARS.


  +----------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+
  |       Name.          |    Date of     |            Remarks.            |
  |                      |  Appointment.  |                                |
  +----------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+
  | William Forbes       | Dec.  30, 1690 | Removed in 1697.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Hon. Patrick Hume, } | March 30, 1697 | { Appointed colonel of the     |
  | afterwards Lord    } |                | { regiment, April 28, 1707.    |
  | Polwarth           } |                | {                              |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Sir John Johnston    | April 28, 1707 | Removed in 1711.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Archibald Lord     } | Oct.  30, 1711 | { Promoted to the colonelcy of |
  | Wandale,           } |                | { the third foot, April 4,     |
  | afterwards Earl    } |                | { 1713.--Died of wounds        |
  | of Forfar          } |                | { received at the battle of    |
  |                      |                | { Dumblain in 1715.            |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | James Lord Torphichen| April  4, 1713 | { Distinguished himself at the |
  |  Re-appointed        | Jan.  31, 1715 | { battle of Dumblain.--Retired |
  |                      |                | { in 1722.                     |
  |                      |                |                                |
  |                      |                | { Promoted to the colonelcy of |
  | Thomas Fowke         | June  25, 1722 | { the 54th foot (afterwards    |
  |                      |                | { disbanded) in 1741.          |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | William Erskine      | Jan.  21, 1741 | Retired in 1751.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | John Guerin          | March  3, 1751 | Removed in 1757.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | George Lawson Hall   | May   14, 1757 | Retired in 1761.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | John Litchfield      | Oct.  14, 1761 | Removed in 1765.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  |                      |                | { Retired from the regiment in |
  | Thomas Hay           | June  14, 1765 | { 1771, but retained his rank  |
  |                      |                | { in the army.                 |
  |                      |                |                                |
  |                      |                | { Promoted to the colonelcy of |
  | Thomas Bland         | Feb.  27, 1771 | { the fifth dragoon guards in  |
  |                      |                | { 1790.                        |
  |                      |                |                                |
  |                      |                | { Removed to the               |
  | John William Egerton | Nov.  18, 1790 | { lieut.-colonelcy dragoons    |
  |                      |                | { of the fourteenth light in   |
  |                      |                | { 1797.                        |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | William Osborne      | March  1, 1794 | { Exchanged to sixteenth light |
  |                      |                | { dragoons in 1797.            |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Henry W. Lord      } |                |                                |
  | Paget, now Marquis } | April  6, 1797 | { Promoted to the colonelcy of |
  | of Anglesey, K.G., } |                | { the regiment in 1801.        |
  | &c.                } |                |                                |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | John G. Le Marchant  | June   1, 1797 | { Removed to second dragoon    |
  |                      |                | { guards in 1801.              |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Michael Barne        | July  19, 1799 | Retired in 1805.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | John Walhause        | May   16, 1801 | { Exchanged to twenty-fifth    |
  |                      |                | { light dragoons in 1804.      |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Richard Hussey       | Dec.  28, 1804 | Promoted major-general in 1814.|
  | Vivian               |                |                                |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Edward Kerrison      | April  4, 1805 |   Ditto      ditto        1819.|
  |                      |                |                                |
  | William Thornhill    | Aug.  12, 1819 | Retired in 1826.               |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | James John Fraser    | Sept. 28, 1826 | Retired on half-pay in 1830.   |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Edward Keane         | June  15, 1830 | { Exchanged to half-pay        |
  |                      |                | { unattached in 1833.          |
  |                      |                |                                |
  | Charles John Hill    | April  5, 1833 | To half-pay unattached in 1837.|
  |                      |                |                                |
  | John James Whyte     | Oct.  21, 1837 |                                |
  +----------------------+----------------+--------------------------------+




SUCCESSION OF MAJORS

OF THE

SEVENTH, OR QUEEN'S OWN, REGIMENT OF HUSSARS.


  +----------------------------+----------------+
  |                            |    Date of     |
  |           Name.            |  Appointment.  |
  +----------------------------+----------------+
  | George Wishart.            | Dec.  30, 1690 |
  |                            |                |
  | Patrick Hume, afterwards } |           1694 |
  |   Lord Polwarth          } |                |
  |                            |                |
  | John Johnston              | March 30, 1697 |
  |                            |                |
  | George Douglas             | April 28, 1707 |
  |                            |                |
  | Archibald Lord Wandale     | Sept. 22, 1711 |
  |                            |                |
  | --------- Preston          | Oct.  30, 1711 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Lord Torphichen      | Feb.  15, 1712 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Nasmyth              | April 15, 1714 |
  |                            |                |
  | Matthew Stewart            | Jan.  31, 1715 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Agnew                | April  4, 1733 |
  |                            |                |
  | John Guerin                | July  23, 1748 |
  |                            |                |
  | Edward Harvey              | March  8, 1751 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Wharton              | Jan.   5, 1754 |
  |                            |                |
  | George Lawson Hall         | April  8, 1755 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Shipley              | May   14, 1757 |
  |                            |                |
  | John Litchfield            | Feb.  10, 1758 |
  |                            |                |
  | Thomas Hay                 | Oct.  14, 1761 |
  |                            |                |
  | Thomas Bland               | June  14, 1765 |
  |                            |                |
  | Robert Lawrie              | Feb.  27, 1771 |
  |                            |                |
  | Thomas Warburton           | April 26, 1779 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Osborne            | March  7, 1787 |
  |                            |                |
  | Richard Watson             | March  1, 1794 |
  |                            |                |
  | Michael Barne              | March  1, 1794 |
  |                            |                |
  | John Walhouse              | Oct.  18, 1798 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Calcraft           | July  19, 1799 |
  |                            |                |
  | Charles Taylor             | May   16, 1801 |
  |                            |                |
  | Richard Hussey Vivian      | March  9, 1803 |
  |                            |                |
  | Edward Kerrison            | May   12, 1803 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Stuart               | Sept. 28, 1804 |
  |                            |                |
  | Hon. Berkeley Paget        | April  4, 1805 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Tuyll              | Jan.   1, 1807 |
  |                            |                |
  | Hon. G. H. C. Cavendish    | June  23, 1808 |
  |                            |                |
  | Charles Denshire           | Feb.  23, 1809 |
  |                            |                |
  | George Cholmley            | April 27, 1809 |
  |                            |                |
  | Edward Hodge               | May    7, 1812 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Thornhill          | April  8, 1813 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Verner             | June  17, 1815 |
  |                            |                |
  | Thomas William Robins      | Dec.  24, 1818 |
  |                            |                |
  | Edward Keane               | Dec.  16, 1819 |
  |                            |                |
  | James Hamlyn Williams      | Oct.  24, 1821 |
  |                            |                |
  | James John Fraser          | Feb.  27, 1823 |
  |                            |                |
  | William Shirley            | June  17, 1824 |
  |                            |                |
  | Hon. George Berkeley     } | Sept. 28, 1826 |
  |   Molyneux               } |                |
  |                            |                |
  | Charles John Hill          | Dec.  31, 1827 |
  |                            |                |
  | Philip Dundas              | Dec.   3, 1830 |
  |                            |                |
  | John James Whyte           | April  5, 1833 |
  |                            |                |
  | Arthur William Biggs       | Oct.  21, 1837 |
  |                            |                |
  | Thos. Edmund Campbell      | Nov.   4, 1840 |
  +----------------------------+----------------+




FOOTNOTES:

[1] These two troops have, by several authors, been erroneously
styled "regiments."

[2] See the Historical Record of the Third Foot, or the Buffs, from
page 63 to 66.

[3] The following speculative account of the regiment is extracted
from Mc Pherson's Secret History of England; edition of 1775,
vol. 2, page 7; Mr. Scott's relation, "An Account of the State of
Scotland, in July, 1706."

"The Earl of Lothian's regiment of dragoons (as I remember)
consists of six companys, each company, including serjeants
corporals, and drummers, is thirty men. The colonel's character
is already given. The lieut.-colonel is son to Polwarth, now
called Earl of Marchmont. When the late Earl of Hume listed, this
lieut.-colonel was thought well-affected, and very much under the
influence of Hume; but what to say of him now I know not. The major
of the regiment, John Johnston of Westraw, is reported to have
loyal inclinations, being much managed that way by his very loyal
lady, whom few of any side must trust."

[4] See the Record of the First, or Royal Regiment of Dragoons,
pages 52 and 53.

[5]

  _Whitehall, 1st August, 1715._

"GENTLEMEN,

"His Majesty having been pleased to declare the regiment of
dragoons whereof the Honorable William Kerr is colonel, to be
'HER ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCESS OF WALES' OWN ROYAL REGIMENT OF
DRAGOONS,' I am desired you will acquaint the Right Honorable the
Lord Townshend therewith, that a commission may be accordingly
prepared, constituting the said William Kerr, Esq. colonel of the
said regiment.

  "I am, &c.,
  "WILLIAM PULTENEY,"
  (_Secretary at War_.)

  _The Secretaries to
  The Lord Townshend._


[6] An instance of ardent attachment and zeal was exemplified by a
detachment of the SEVENTH light dragoons, who, having been informed
that Lieut.-Colonel Osborne had been made prisoner, rushed forward
among the enemy and rescued him.

[7] An instance again occurred of gallantry in a detachment having
pressed forward in consequence of a report that Colonel Lord Paget
had been taken prisoner: the report proved incorrect, but the zeal
of the men of the SEVENTH and their attachment to their officers
was on this, as on other occasions, strongly manifested; and
although His Lordship felt it necessary to restrain this excess of
ardour, he could not withhold an expression of his feeling of the
good intentions of his brave corps.

[8] Macky, in his characters of the Scottish nobility, speaking
of the Marquis of Lothian, observes--"He hath abundance of fire,
and may prove a man of business when he applies himself that way;
laughs at all revealed religion, yet sets up for a pillar of
presbytery, being very zealous, though not devout. He is brave in
his person; loves his country and his bottle; a thorough libertine;
very handsome; hair black; with a fine eye; 45 years old."


  LONDON:
  HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS,
  ST. MARTIN'S LANE.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. For example,
  rencounters; devotedness; impracticability; Field-Marshal,
  Field Marshal; re-called, recalled; honorable, honourable.

  Pg 29, '1720, the the regiment' replaced by '1720, the regiment'.
  Pg 39, 'without lappels' replaced by 'without lapels'.
  Pg 44, 'dragoons of Price-schenik' retained, but perhaps meant to be
         'dragoons of Prince Friedrich'.
  Pg 44, 'was advanceing' replaced by 'was advancing'.
  Pg 101, 'Lord Torpichen' replaced by 'Lord Torphichen'.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE SEVENTH, OR THE QUEEN'S OWN REGIMENT OF HUSSARS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


