The Project Gutenberg eBook of Waterfowl Identification Guide
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Waterfowl Identification Guide

Author: Central Flyway Council

Release date: April 5, 2017 [eBook #54487]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, MFR and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WATERFOWL IDENTIFICATION GUIDE ***

                     WATERFOWL IDENTIFICATION GUIDE


                              Published by
                       The Central Flyway Council


                            COUNCIL MEMBERS

  Colorado
  Kansas
  Montana
  Nebraska
  New Mexico
  North Dakota
  Oklahoma
  South Dakota
  Texas
  Wyoming


                            Acknowledgments

The Central Flyway Council wishes to thank the Atlantic Flyway Council
for making available the illustrations and most of the text of this
booklet.

The Council also wishes to thank the many persons who assisted in
preparation of this publication, particularly the Vermont Fish and Game
Commission and Alan R. Munro, the artist.

                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.
             BY THE LANE PRESS. INC. · BURLINGTON, VERMONT




                                CONTENTS


  Council Members                                                       1
  Acknowledgements                                                      2
  Foreword                                                              5
  Identification                                                        6
  Individual Problems                                                   7
  Nonhunting Enjoyments                                                 8
  Research and Management                                               8
  Flyway Council Approach                                               9
  Your Responsibility                                                  10
  Parts of a Duck                                                      11
  Whistling Swan                                                       12
  Canada Goose                                                         13
  Snow Goose                                                           14
  Ross Goose                                                           15
  White-Fronted Goose                                                  16
  Blue Goose                                                           17
  Puddle or Dabbling Duck Characteristics                              18
  Mallard                                                              19
  Black Duck                                                           20
  Mottled Duck                                                         21
  New Mexico Duck                                                      22
  Gadwall                                                              23
  Pintail                                                              24
  Green-Winged Teal                                                    25
  Blue-Winged Teal                                                     26
  Cinnamon Teal                                                        27
  American Widgeon                                                     28
  Shoveler                                                             29
  Wood Duck                                                            30
  Harlequin Duck                                                       31
  Diving Duck Characteristics                                          32
  Redhead                                                              33
  Ring-Necked Duck                                                     34
  Canvasback                                                           35
  Greater Scaup                                                        36
  Lesser Scaup                                                         37
  Common Goldeneye                                                     38
  Barrow’s Goldeneye                                                   39
  Bufflehead                                                           40
  White-Winged Scoter                                                  41
  Fulvous Tree Duck                                                    42
  Black-Bellied Tree Duck                                              43
  Ruddy Duck                                                           44
  Hooded Merganser                                                     45
  Common Merganser                                                     46
  Double-Crested Cormorant                                             47
  Common Loon                                                          48
  Horned Grebe                                                         49
  Pied-Billed Grebe                                                    49
  Western Grebe                                                        50
  American Coot                                                        51
  King Rail                                                            52
  Clapper Rail                                                         52
  Virginia Rail                                                        53
  Sora                                                                 53
  Common Snipe (Jacksnipe)                                             54
  Waterfowler’s Code                                                   55




                                FOREWORD


The North American continent, at the time of its discovery and early
settlement, had a waterfowl population which was one of its many
wonders. So far as the evidence shows, no equal area of the earth’s
surface ever supported such vast numbers of so many different ducks and
geese, and this situation persisted to a time within the memory of
living men. Long after the end of early settlement on this continent,
hunting was free and harvest unlimited. But as the advancing tide of
settlement reached into the north-central prairie states and provinces
in the final years of the Nineteenth Century, radical changes began.
From that time on North American waterfowl habitat began to deteriorate.
Literally millions of acres of former nesting ground in the north have
now been drained and put to the plow. South of the breeding range, not
only agriculture, but industrialization and urbanization also have
steadily reduced available resting and wintering grounds.

The progressive decline in waterfowl numbers which followed these
changes in land use led eventually to the scientific management of
waterfowl. Spring shooting and market hunting were abolished in the
second decade of this century. Ten years later the federal government
undertook detailed regulation of migratory waterfowl so the annual
harvest could be made proportional to the annual production. This was
accomplished through collective effort by State, Provincial and Federal
agencies of Canada, Mexico and the United States to obtain scientific
information. In keeping with biological principles, most of the
restrictions on bag limit and means of taking have been used with some
flexibility.

Throughout the decline of all waterfowl populations some species have
been underharvested. These species have declined in about the same
proportion as those species on which the bulk of the harvest occurred.
The Central Flyway Council feels that a refinement in waterfowl
management is possible by directing hunting pressure on these previously
underharvested species. This goal can only be accomplished through a
knowledge of species identification by the waterfowl hunter. This
booklet is a start in that direction.

In recent years most waterfowl populations have made encouraging
recoveries from the low point of the early 1930’s, when disastrous
drouths, drainage and changing land use patterns took their toll. Still
drainage continues, and industrialization is further reducing the
habitat. Hunting continues as a major sport, however, maximum
utilization of all species must be accomplished if hunting is to be
fostered at a reasonable level of freedom and enjoyment.

The very future of duck hunting depends upon a more effective
partnership between regulatory agencies and the many thousands of
gunners whom they serve. The federal agency is charged by treaty and law
with husbandry of the waterfowl resource. The State agencies assist in
the responsibility. However, they need the help of all sportsmen, and
particularly they need the understanding help of waterfowlers who know
their birds and who keep abreast of current plans for management. To
foster this essential cooperation between agencies and gunners is a
primary purpose of this booklet.


                             Identification

Identification of birds in the field, and particularly on the wing, as
ducks and geese are usually seen over decoys, is easier than appears at
first try. The trick is to note, in addition to shape and approximate
size, the general arrangement of light and dark areas in the plumage,
for nearly every species has its own distinctive pattern. With practice,
the eye can be trained to pick out this pattern at a glance, and within
a short time recognition becomes automatic. The illustrations which
follow, one for each important species of Central Flyway waterfowl, make
use of this practice of “pattern recognition” in the two or more flying
birds at the top of the page. Actually in many cases recognition by
flight pattern and flight characteristics will soon become evident.

In each drawing of ducks the flying female leads, with the drake
following, for this is the usual order in a mated pair during winter,
and spring. On the lower part of each page are shown enlarged heads,
adult male on the left, female on the right, with an immature head added
when the difference is substantial, or with certain details which
further aid identification when the bird is in hand. All ducks, both
flying pairs and heads, are drawn in direct proportion to each other,
but geese, because of their larger size, are reduced one third from the
duck proportion.

Drawings of geese show only a single enlarged head on each plate because
male and female geese are alike in color pattern. Finally, some birds
which are not “waterfowl” in the strict sense of the word, but are
nevertheless often seen, are shown in the last few illustrations. Some
of them (loon, grebe, and cormorant), although protected at all times,
are included because they are often mistakenly shot for waterfowl.
Others (rails, coot, and snipes) are included because they occupy
wet-land habitat along with ducks.


                          Individual Problems

Although “pattern recognition” simplifies the problem of identification
for the waterfowler, there are still several complications to be
considered. Of these, the most troublesome by far is the matter of
moults. The adult drakes of most species of ducks, very soon after the
hens begin to incubate eggs, moult the bright body-feathers of their
breeding dress and assume an “eclipse” plumage which resembles the
year-round coloration of the female. This dull plumage, serving as a
protective factor during the wing-moult which follows, is retained until
the new flight feathers are fully developed. By September a second
body-moult is under way by which these old drakes assume the bright
courting plumage of late fall and winter. During the same period, the
young males of the year, whose juvenile plumage likewise resembles the
female dress, are also assuming the adult plumage. Following December 1
most difficulties of identification by reason of the moult are resolved,
but in early fall the hunter may be puzzled by some of the transition
plumages noted on birds in his bag. Identification during this period
may appear extremely difficult, but it is well to remember that wing
patterns remain virtually unchanged regardless of stage of the moult.

The remaining problems of identification require only brief mention for
they appear but rarely. In the first place, this booklet includes all
species of ducks and geese which occur in numbers in any part of the
Central Flyway, but omits others which may be occasional visitors.
Second, hybrids are rather frequent among waterfowl, and some are
extremely puzzling. In such special cases as these your local wildlife
manager or biologist may be able to help.

The following publications contain further information for the hunter
interested in additional facts of natural history, distribution and
description:

    Kortright, “Ducks, Geese and Swans of North America”
    Peterson, “A Field Guide to the Birds”
    Pough, “Audubon Water Bird Guide”


                         Nonhunting Enjoyments

For the nonhunter—and many avid outdoorsmen prefer to watch rather than
shoot—this guide to waterfowl can provide enjoyment beyond the simple
pleasure of seeing ducks and geese. Most of us remember seeing some
“oldtimer” identify flights or singles or rafts of birds at what seemed
impossible distances. The ability to do this does not really stem from
some mystic communion with the birds. Rather, through such a booklet as
this the waterfowling layman can develop the same powers in himself. For
the cost of a little concentrated effort he can gain great personal
satisfaction and the increased understanding that comes from resolving
“ducks” into the wide variety of individual species they really are.

Further, some knowledge of waterfowl distribution, annual abundance and
the approximate source and destination of the ducks and geese he hunts,
will often help the waterfowler understand the overall picture of
waterfowl management. For both administrative and biological purposes of
waterfowl management, the United States is divided into four flyways—the
Atlantic, the Mississippi, the Pacific, and the one for which this
booklet is written, the Central. Each flyway has its own segment of the
waterfowl population, subject to different conditions and pressures than
the populations of other flyways, and therefore is administered as a
separate unit. In general this is a sound premise, but it must not be
considered too rigid. Since the flyway principle is in part an
administrative device, it is important principally in fall and winter
when most North American waterfowl are within the United States. As the
wintering populations begin to move northward in the spring, many
species disperse throughout the nesting grounds of the northern states
and Canada. Much overlapping of the populations from various flyways in
which the birds wintered occurs.


                        Research and Management

Methods developed over the years and applied systematically supply
information which is necessary to intelligent management. Breeding pair
and brood surveys indicate the distribution of nesting populations, and
their success from year to year in hatching and raising their broods of
young. The banding of waterfowl, carefully aged, sexed, and released,
gives specific information on the travels of individual birds, on
mortality, and on some phases of hunting pressure. Periodic air-counts
in late summer and fall serve to measure, in a rough way, the
distribution of different species during southward migration, and the
rate of movement. Hunter-bag checks, carried out in the field during the
shooting season, complement fall counts with regard to distribution at
given points. A post-season sampling of hunter success, by mail,
supplies data on additional aspects of hunting pressure, and gives an
index of total kill. Finally, the annual winter count indicates the
distribution and relative size of populations remaining after the
shooting season ends. In combination, these methods are steadily
increasing our knowledge of North American waterfowl, and in particular
are providing the sort of “running inventory” which is the first
requirement for intelligent management of this resource.

The Central Flyway Council is the clearing house for coordinated
planning in this Flyway. It is a delegate organization, including in its
membership administrative and technical representatives from the fish
and game departments of all states and provinces in the flyway. A Flyway
Representative has been assigned from the Fish and Wildlife Service.
This group is concerned with all phases of waterfowl research and
management in the flyway. The Central Flyway Council provides for an
effective interchange of information between member agencies and assists
in the coordination and integration of flyway management programs. These
purposes have been furthered by regular meetings for the open discussion
of flyway problems.


                        Flyway Council Approach

In early 1953, the Council and the Fish and Wildlife Service, acting
jointly, adopted a flyway program which has been expanded and improved
as factual information and experience dictate. This program outlines
objectives and suggests methods and priorities for accomplishment. State
game departments now pattern their activities around the flyway program.

Extending the cooperative idea, the Council has joined with
corresponding organizations from the other flyways to form the National
Waterfowl Council, which annually participates in the official
discussion of continental and flyway management problems and
regulations. From their inception, the flyway councils have been
successful in promoting understanding and teamwork so necessary for the
perpetuation of the waterfowl resource.


                          Your Responsibility

As an individual reader of this booklet, you have a part to play in the
essential partnership between agencies and waterfowlers. Your part may
be small and may take various forms, depending on the circumstances, but
certainly it is there. Perhaps, having sent in one or two waterfowl
bands in the past and having experienced the initial novelty of hearing
where your birds came from, you now forget to report them. The next time
you have this choice between reporting or forgetting a band, remember
that its prompt recovery, with full data, might be the clue to some
missing fact to improve your future gunning.

Hunter bag checks indicate crippling losses in the Central Flyway run to
an average of about one quarter of the total kill. In certain marshes,
early in the season, crippling can greatly exceed the one quarter loss.
Shooting at birds on the fringe of effective killing range is a
crippling practice and, moreover, as you probably know from observation
is contagious. The usual effect of one “sky shooter” in a marsh is to
force other gunners nearby to attempt impossible shots which increase
crippling losses and soon ruin shooting for everybody. Controlling such
practices lies solely in the hands of individual gunners. With
large-gauge guns of modified bore, the shot-pattern that will produce
kills should be consistent up to forty yards, a distance well within
capabilities of the average gunner to hold and compute necessary lead.
Successful duck shooting is a matter of good judgment. To avoid errors
in judgment drive stakes in front of your blind at distances of thirty
and forty yards to indicate safe killing range. Hold your fire until the
feet of an incoming duck can be seen distinctly, for only then will the
bird be in range. Good sportsmanship in duck blinds and marshes is
equally as important as remaining friendly with your home neighbors.
Train a good retrieving dog, and add to your day’s pleasure by watching
him at work on downed birds.

Above all, remember that the future of waterfowling is partly in your
hands—that your good sportsmanship and cooperation are as necessary to
the work of the Central Flyway Council and its member agencies as their
activities are to you.


                            PARTS OF A DUCK

    [Illustration: PARTS OF A DUCK]

  CROWN
  FOREHEAD
  OCCIPUT
  CHEEK
  NAPE
  SIDE NECK
  BACK
  SCAPULARS
  RUMP
  CHIN
  THROAT
  FORENECK
  TERTIALS
  UPPER TAIL COVERTS
  BREAST
  TAIL
  UNDER TAIL COVERTS
  BELLY
  SIDE

  LESSER COVERTS
  SPURIOUS WING
  GREATER COVERTS
  PRIMARIES
  SECONDARIES
  TERTIALS

  TIBIA
  SCUTELLATE TARSUS
  HEEL
  HIND TOE
  TOE
  WEB

  NAIL
  LAMELLAE
  LOWER MANDIBLE
  UPPER MANDIBLE
  NOSTRIL
  NAIL
  MALE
  FEMALE


                             WHISTLING SWAN
                          (Cygnus columbianus)

    [Illustration: WHISTLING SWAN (Cygnus columbianus)]

  ENTIRE PLUMAGE WHITE
  IMMATURE BIRDS HAVE GRAY-WHITE PLUMAGE WITH DULL PINKISH BILL
  YELLOW SPOT
  BLACK BILL
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR
  CARRIES NECK HELD ERECT
  HEAD OF MUTE SWAN SHOWING BLACK KNOB AND ORANGE BILL


                              CANADA GOOSE
                          (Branta canadensis)

    [Illustration: CANADA GOOSE (Branta canadensis)]

  WHITE RUMP
  BROWNISH GRAY BODY AND WINGS
  BLACK BILL
  WHITE PATCH
  BLACK NECK
  ALL GEESE HAVE RETICULATE TARSUS
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                               SNOW GOOSE
                           (Chen hyperborea)

    [Illustration: SNOW GOOSE (Chen hyperborea)]

  WHITE BODY
  BLACK WING TIPS
  PINK FEET
  LIGHT PINK BILL
  BLACK “GRINNING” PATCH
  FEATHERS OF CHEEKS, BREAST AND BELLY OFTEN STAINED WITH RUSTY BROWN
  IMMATURE BIRDS TEND TOWARD A MORE GRAY PLUMAGE
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                               ROSS GOOSE
                              (Chen rossi)

    [Illustration: ROSS GOOSE (Chen rossi)]

  ABOUT SIZE OF MALLARD
  ADULT
    WARTY PROTUBERANCES ON BILL.
    NO BLACK “GRINNING” PATCH
    PINKISH BILL
  IMMATURE


                          WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE
                           (Anser albifrons)

    [Illustration: WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE (Anser albifrons)]

  ADULT
    BARRED BELLY
  IMMATURE
    YELLOWISH BILL
    PALE BREAST
  WHITE PATCH
  BROWNISH FOREPARTS
  YELLOWISH LEGS


                               BLUE GOOSE
                          (Chen caerulescens)

    [Illustration: BLUE GOOSE (Chen caerulescens)]

  ADULT
    PINK FEET, IMMATURE DUSKY FEET
  IMMATURE
  PINK BILL
  WHITE NAIL
  BLACK “GRINNING” PATCH
  WHITE HEAD AND NECK
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                PUDDLE OR DABBLING DUCK CHARACTERISTICS
                               (Anatinae)

    [Illustration: PUDDLE OR DABBLING DUCK CHARACTERISTICS (Anatinae)]

  TIP UP TO FEED, RARELY DIVE
  LEGS PLACED NEAR CENTER OF BODY
  GENERALLY HAVE METALLIC SPECULUM
  USUALLY SWIM WITH TAIL HELD CLEAR OF WATER
  FOOT SMALLER THAN IN DIVING DUCKS
    HIND TOE NOT LOBED
  SPRING INTO AIR ON TAKE OFF


                                MALLARD
                          (Anas platyrhynchos)

    [Illustration: MALLARD (Anas platyrhynchos)]

  WHITE TAIL
  WHITE BORDERS ON PURPLE SPECULUM
  WHITISH TAIL
  ♂
    GREEN HEAD
    YELLOW BILL
    WHITE COLLAR
    RUDDY BREAST
  ♀
    ORANGE BILL MOTTLED WITH BLACK
    MOTTLED BROWN


                               BLACK DUCK
                            (Anas rubripes)

    [Illustration: BLACK DUCK (Anas rubripes)]

  YELLOWISH-BROWN HEAD
  DUSKY-BROWN BODY
  WHITE WING-LININGS
  IMMATURE HAS STREAKED BREAST
  PURPLE SPECULUM
  IMMATURE SIDE BREAST FEATHER
  ADULT MALE SIDE BREAST FEATHER
  ADULT FEMALE SIDE BREAST FEATHER
  ♂
    BILL COLOR VARIES FROM SOLID GREENISH YELLOW TO HIGH CHROME YELLOW
          DEPENDING UPON AGE AND SEASON KILLED
  ♀
    FEMALE BILL SHOWS VARYING AMOUNT OF BLACK SPOTTING


                              MOTTLED DUCK
                            (Anas fulvigula)

    [Illustration: MOTTLED DUCK (Anas fulvigula)]

  TRAILING EDGE OFTEN WHITE
  LIGHT TAN HEAD
  PURPLE SPECULUM
  FEET ORANGE
  CHIN AND THROAT PALE BUFF (WITH OR) WITHOUT STREAKING
  ♂
    DARK BASE OF BILL
    BILL YELLOW, DARK NAIL
  ♀
    DARK SPOT (often absent)
    VARIABLE SPOTTING


                            NEW MEXICAN DUCK
                       (Anas diazi novimexicana)

    [Illustration: NEW MEXICAN DUCK (Anas diazi novimexicana)]

  TAIL DARK.
  SPECULUM BLUISH PURPLE TO GREEN. WHITE EDGE ABOVE SOMETIMES ABSENT.
  FEET ORANGE.
  ♂
    BILL YELLOW, DARK NAIL.
    CHIN PINKISH BUFF WITHOUT STREAKING.
  ♀
    BILL DARK OLIVE OR ORANGE, DARK ON RIDGE.
    SMALL SPOTS NEAR BASE LIMITED OR ABSENT.


                                GADWALL
                            (Anas strepera)

    [Illustration: GADWALL (Anas strepera)]

  BLACK RUMP
  WHITE BELLY
  WHITE SPECULUM
  WHITE BELLY
  BOTH SEXES HAVE YELLOW FEET
  ♂
    BILL BLUISH BLACK
  ♀
    BILL DULL ORANGE VARYING SPOTTING


                                PINTAIL
                              (Anas acuta)

    [Illustration: PINTAIL (Anas acuta)]

  WHITE STRIPE
  CINNAMON-BUFF BORDER
  POINTED TAIL
  WHITE STRIPE
  ♂
    BROWN HEAD
    GRAY BILL
  ♀
    GRAY BILL
    MOTTLED BROWN


                           GREEN-WINGED TEAL
                          (Anas carolinensis)

    [Illustration: GREEN-WINGED TEAL (Anas carolinensis)]

  GREEN SPECULUM
  WHITE BELLY
  ♂
    BROWN HEAD
    GREEN PATCH
    WHITE MARK
  ♀


                            BLUE-WINGED TEAL
                             (Anas discors)

    [Illustration: BLUE-WINGED TEAL (Anas discors)]

  CHALKY-BLUE PATCH
  GREEN SPECULUM
  ♂
    MALE HAS DARK BELLY
    WHITE CRESCENT
  ♀
    FEMALE HAS LIGHT BELLY


                             CINNAMON TEAL
                           (Anas cyanoptera)

    [Illustration: CINNAMON TEAL (Anas cyanoptera)]

  CHALKY-BLUE PATCH
  GREEN SPECULUM
  ♂
    UNIFORM CINNAMON BODY COLOR
  ♀
    FEMALE HAS LIGHT BELLY


                      AMERICAN WIDGEON (Baldpate)
                           (Mareca americana)

    [Illustration: AMERICAN WIDGEON (Baldpate) (Mareca americana)]

  WHITE PATCH
  WHITE BELLY
  GREEN SPECULUM
  WHITE BORDER
  ♂
    WHITE CROWN
    GREEN PATCH
    GRAY BILL, BLACK TIPPED
    WHITE PATCH
  ♀


                                SHOVELER
                           (Spatula clypeata)

    [Illustration: SHOVELER (Spatula clypeata)]

  CHALKY-BLUE PATCH
  GREEN SPECULUM BORDERED WITH WHITE
  ♂
    IRIDESCENT GREENISH BLACK
    LARGE SHOVEL BILL
    CONSPICUOUS BRISTLE-LIKE LAMELLAE
    WHITE BREAST
    CHESTNUT SIDES AND BELLY
  ♀


                               WOOD DUCK
                              (Aix sponsa)

    [Illustration: WOOD DUCK (Aix sponsa)]

  WHITE BORDER
  WHITE BELLY
  SILVERY BORDERED
  ♂
    RED IRIS
    RED AND WHITE BILL
    ADULT MALE HIGHLY COLORED
      ECLIPSE AND IMMATURE MALE
    WHITE PATCH
  ♀
    CONSPICUOUS WHITE EYE-RING
    CRESTED


                             HARLEQUIN DUCK
                      (Histrionicus histrionicus)

    [Illustration: HARLEQUIN DUCK (Histrionicus histrionicus)]

  WHITE MARKS
  ♂
    STOCKY, DARK, SMALL BILL
  ♀
    FEMALE HAS SMALLER BILL
    PLAIN DARK BODY


                      DIVING DUCK CHARACTERISTICS
                              (Aythyinae)

    [Illustration: DIVING DUCK CHARACTERISTICS (Aythyinae)]

  LEGS SET NEAR REAR OF BODY
  DIVE COMPLETELY UNDER WATER TO SECURE FEED
  SPECULUM GENERALLY DULL, LACKS IRIDESCENCE
  USUALLY SWIM WITH TAIL HELD CLOSE TO WATER
  HIND TOE LOBED, FOOT LARGE
  ON TAKE OFF PATTER ALONG SURFACE FOR SOME DISTANCE


                                REDHEAD
                           (Aythya americana)

    [Illustration: REDHEAD (Aythya americana)]

  GRAY BACK
  GRAY WING STRIPE
  ♂
    CHESTNUT HEAD
    HIGH ABRUPT FOREHEAD
    BLUE BILL, BLACK TIP
    BLACK BREAST
  ♀
    LIGHT PATCH


                            RING-NECKED DUCK
                           (Aythya collaris)

    [Illustration: RING-NECKED DUCK (Aythya collaris)]

  BLACK BACK
  GRAY WING STRIPE
  ♂
    DISTINCT CREST
    CONSPICUOUS BILL RING
    CHESTNUT COLLAR
    BLACK BREAST
    WHITE PATCH
  ♀
    WHITE EYE RING
    LIGHT PATCH


                               CANVASBACK
                          (Aythya valisineria)

    [Illustration: CANVASBACK (Aythya valisineria)]

  WHITE BACK
  GRAY WING STRIPE
  ♂
    CHESTNUT HEAD
    LONG SLOPING PROFILE, BLACK BILL
    BLACK BREAST
  ♀
    GRAY BACK
    BROWN BREAST


                             GREATER SCAUP
                            (Aythya marila)

    [Illustration: GREATER SCAUP (Aythya marila)]

  DARK RUMP
  WHITE WING STRIPE EXTENDING INTO PRIMARIES
  WHITE BELLY
  NAIL OF BILL 7.0-9.0 MILLIMETERS WIDE
  ♂
    GRAY BACK
    BLACK HEAD WITH GREENISH TINGE
    BROAD BLUE BILL
    BLACK BREAST
    WHITE FLANKS
  ♀
    BROWN BODY AND HEAD
    DISTINCT WHITE MASK


                              LESSER SCAUP
                            (Aythya affinis)

    [Illustration: LESSER SCAUP (Aythya affinis)]

  DARK RUMP
  WHITE WING STRIPE DOES NOT EXTEND INTO PRIMARIES
  WHITE BELLY
  NAIL OF BILL 5.0-6.5 MILLIMETERS WIDE
  ♂
    SLIGHT CREST
    GRAY BACK
    BLACK HEAD WITH PURPLISH TINGE
    BROAD BLUE BILL
    BLACK BREAST
    LIGHT FLANKS
  ♀
    BROWN BODY AND HEAD
    DISTINCT WHITE MASK


                            COMMON GOLDENEYE
                          (Bucephala clangula)

    [Illustration: COMMON GOLDENEYE (Bucephala clangula)]

  WHITE WING PATCHES
  ♂
    GREENISH BLACK HEAD
    LIGHT IRIS
    DISTINCT WHITE PATCH
    WHITE BREAST AND BELLY
  2ND SEASON MALE WITH BROWN HEAD AND FAINT WHITE PATCH
  ♀
    BROWN HEAD
    ORANGE TIP IN BREEDING PLUMAGE
    GRAY BACK AND FLANKS
    WHITE NECK
    GRAY BREAST
    WHITE BELLY
  1ST SEASON MALE IS SIMILAR IN COLORATION TO FEMALE BUT WITH HEAVIER
          BODY AND MORE RUGGED HEAD AND BILL


                           BARROW’S GOLDENEYE
                         (Bucephala islandica)

    [Illustration: BARROW’S GOLDENEYE (Bucephala islandica)]

  WHITE WING PATCHES
  ♂
    PURPLISH BLACK HEAD
    WHITE CRESCENT PATCH
    BLACK BACK
    BLACK BILL
    WHITE BREAST AND BELLY
  ♀
    LIGHT IRIS
    GRAY BACK AND FLANKS
    ORANGE TIP IN BREEDING PLUMAGE
    WHITE NECK
    GRAY BREAST
    WHITE BELLY


                               BUFFLEHEAD
                          (Bucephala albeola)

    [Illustration: BUFFLEHEAD (Bucephala albeola)]

  BLACK AND WHITE BACK
  DARK BACK
  WHITE WING PATCHES
  WHITE BELLY
  ♂
    BLACK WITH IRIDESCENT GREEN AND PURPLE
    DISTINCT WHITE PATCH
    BLUE-GRAY BILL
  ♀
    DARK GRAYISH BROWN
    DISTINCT WHITE PATCH


                          WHITE-WINGED SCOTER
                          (Melanitta deglandi)

    [Illustration: WHITE-WINGED SCOTER (Melanitta deglandi)]

  BLACK CHUNKY BODY
  WHITE PATCH
  ♂
    WHITE EYE PATCH
    PROMINENT BLACK KNOB
    REDDISH ORANGE
  IMMATURE HAS DISTINCT WHITE PATCHES
  ♀
    FEATHERING EXTENDS ALMOST TO NOSTRIL
    ADULT FEMALE CHEEK PATCHES RANGE FROM SLIGHTLY DARKER THAN IMMATURE
          TO NO WHITE AT ALL


                           FULVOUS TREE DUCK
                      (Dendrocygna bicolor helva)

    [Illustration: FULVOUS TREE DUCK (Dendrocygna bicolor helva)]

  LONG NECK
  ADULT
  WHITE LINE
  IMMATURE
  ADULT
    LONG LEGS


                        BLACK-BELLIED TREE DUCK
                  (Dendrocygna autumnalis autumnalis)

    [Illustration: BLACK-BELLIED TREE DUCK (Dendrocygna autumnalis
    autumnalis)]

  WHITE UPPER WING
  ADULT
    LONG NECK
  IMMATURE
    WHITE WING PATCH


                               RUDDY DUCK
                          (Oxyura jamaicensis)

    [Illustration: RUDDY DUCK (Oxyura jamaicensis)]

  DARK BROWN
  BELLY SILVERY WHITE
  ♂ SUMMER PLUMAGE
    WHITE CHEEK
    CROWN GLOSSY BLACK
    BILL BLUE
    RICH CHESTNUT
  ♂ WINTER PLUMAGE
    CROWN BROWNISH-BLACK
    BILL DUSKY
    ASHY WHITE
  ♀
    MOTTLED CHEEK WITH DARK STRIPE
    BILL NAIL DISTINCTLY SHARP-POINTED
    GRAYISH BROWN


                            HOODED MERGANSER
                        (Lophodytes cucullatus)

    [Illustration: HOODED MERGANSER (Lophodytes cucullatus)]

  WHITE WING PATCH
  ♂
    WHITE CREST OUTLINED WITH BLACK
    THIN, SPIKE-LIKE BLACK BILL
    TEETH NOT INCLINED BACKWARD AS IN OTHER MERGANSERS
    WHITE BREAST
    DOUBLE BLACK BANDS
  ♀
    CREST, LIGHT BROWN
    LIGHT THROAT
  IN FLIGHT ALL MERGANSERS CARRY BILL, NECK AND BODY IN HORIZONTAL
          PLANE, GIVING THEM A CHARACTERISTIC LONG-DRAWN APPEARANCE.


                            COMMON MERGANSER
                           (Mergus merganser)

    [Illustration: COMMON MERGANSER (Mergus merganser)]

  BLACK AND WHITE PATTERN
  WHITE WING PATCH
  ♂
    METALLIC GREENISH-BLACK
    NOT CRESTED
    RED BILL
    NOSTRIL POSITIONED NEAR CENTER OF BILL
  ♀
    DISTINCT CREST
    WHITE THROAT
    RED BILL
    TEETH INCLINED BACKWARDS
    GRAY BACK


                        DOUBLE-CRESTED CORMORANT
                        (Phalacrocorax auritus)

    [Illustration: DOUBLE-CRESTED CORMORANT (Phalacrocorax auritus)]

  ADULT
  IMMATURE
    PALE BREAST
  YELLOW-ORANGE THROAT POUCH
  BLACK BODY


                              COMMON LOON
                             (Gavia immer)

    [Illustration: COMMON LOON (Gavia immer)]

  SUMMER ADULT
    CHECKERED BACK
    IN FLIGHT HAS DOWNWARD CURVE TO NECK
  WINTER ADULT
    FEET EXTEND BEYOND TAIL
    GRAY
  SUMMER ADULT
    BLACK HEAD, PURPLISH IRIDESCENCE
    BLACK BILL
    WHITE RIBBED
    WHITE BREAST AND BELLY
  WINTER ADULT
    GRAY
    WHITE
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                              HORNED GREBE
                           (Colymbus auritus)

    [Illustration: HORNED GREBE (Colymbus auritus)]

  WINTER PLUMAGE
    DARK BACK
    THIN BILL
    RED EYE
    WHITE CHEEKS, THROAT AND BELLY
  HEAD, SUMMER PLUMAGE
  LOBED TOES


                           PIED-BILLED GREBE
                         (Podilymbus podiceps)

    [Illustration: PIED-BILLED GREBE (Podilymbus podiceps)]

  TARSUS FLATTENED LATERALLY
  ADULT HEAD
    BLACK
  IMMATURE
    CHICKEN-LIKE BILL
    WHITE
    STRIPED FACIAL PATTERN
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                             WESTERN GREBE
                      (Aechmophorus occidentalis)

    [Illustration: WESTERN GREBE (Aechmophorus occidentalis)]

  WHITE UNDERPARTS
  LONG SLENDER NECK


                             AMERICAN COOT
                           (Fulica americana)

    [Illustration: AMERICAN COOT (Fulica americana)]

  WHITE
  SCALLOPED FLAPS
  WHITE PATCH
  SLATE GRAY BODY
  WHITE BILL


                               KING RAIL
                            (Rallus elegans)

    [Illustration: KING RAIL (Rallus elegans)]

  COMMONLY INHABITS FRESH WATER MARSHES
  GENERALLY HAS A RUSTY COLORATION
  DARK BARRING
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                              CLAPPER RAIL
                         (Rallus longirostris)

    [Illustration: CLAPPER RAIL (Rallus longirostris)]

  GENERALLY HAS A GRAYER COLORATION
  COMMONLY INHABITS TIDAL MARSHES
  LIGHT BARRING
  IMMATURE BIRDS SIMILAR TO ADULTS: SPECIES DIFFERENTIATION OFTEN
          DIFFICULT


                             VIRGINIA RAIL
                           (Rallus limicola)

    [Illustration: VIRGINIA RAIL (Rallus limicola)]

  IMMATURE
    BLACKISH BODY
  ADULT
    REDDISH BODY
    GRAY CHEEKS
    LONG BILL
    WHITE
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                                  SORA
                           (Porzana Carolina)

    [Illustration: SORA (Porzana Carolina)]

  IMMATURE
    BUFFY BROWN BODY
  ADULT
    WHITE PATCH
    GRAY-BROWN BODY
    SHORT YELLOW BILL
    BLACK FACIAL AND THROAT PATCH


                        COMMON SNIPE (JACKSNIPE)
                          (Capella gallinago)

    [Illustration: COMMON SNIPE (JACKSNIPE) (Capella gallinago)]

  LONG BILL
  STRIPED BACK AND HEAD
  ORANGE TAIL
  HAS A CHARACTERISTIC ZIG-ZAG FLIGHT
  POINTED WING
  SEXES ARE SIMILAR


                           AMERICAN WOODCOCK
                           (Philohela minor)

    [Illustration: AMERICAN WOODCOCK (Philohela minor)]

  BARRED HEAD
  LONG BILL
  SHORT TAIL
  CHUNKY BODY
  LARGE EYE
  APPEARS NECKLESS
  BLUNT WING




                           WATERFOWLER’S CODE


Buy a State License, and if You Are 16 Years of Age or Older Obtain
Federal Duck Stamp. It is illegal to hunt waterfowl without these
licenses, and the dollars you spend for them help to maintain your
sport.

Know Your State, Provincial and Federal Migratory Bird Laws. When in
doubt consult your local game protector or U.S. Game Management Agent.

Treat the Landowner with Respect and Courtesy. Ownership of game is
vested in the State and Province, but landowners have the right to
prevent trespass on their land.

Learn to Identify Before You Shoot. A mistake may prove both
embarrassing and costly, a correct identification adds to your day’s
enjoyment.

Cooperate with Your Federal, State and Provincial Agencies. Solving the
many problems of waterfowl production, harvest and research is possible
only through continued cooperation of the duck hunter and
conservationist.

Use a Retriever if Possible, or at Least Pick Up Every Bird You Shoot. A
good dog will pick up cripples you would otherwise have to leave. A good
sportsman will never kill game needlessly. The use of retrieving dogs is
a sound conservation practice in reducing crippling losses in addition
to providing the pleasure of watching a good dog in action.

Good Sportsmanship in the Duck Blind and on the Marshes Is Equally
Important as Remaining Friendly with Your Neighbors.


                            DISTRIBUTED BY:
                     TEXAS GAME and FISH COMMISSION




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—Added several birds to the Table of Contents to match the text.

—Silently corrected a few typos.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WATERFOWL IDENTIFICATION GUIDE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


