The Project Gutenberg eBook of Stoles and shawls: hairpin lace, knitted, crocheted
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Stoles and shawls: hairpin lace, knitted, crocheted

Creator: American Thread Company

Release date: September 11, 2022 [eBook #68967]
                Most recently updated: October 19, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United States: American Thread Company, 1951

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STOLES AND SHAWLS: HAIRPIN LACE, KNITTED, CROCHETED ***

  STAR STOLES AND SHAWLS BOOK No. 86      10¢

  Stoles
  AND SHAWLS

  Hairpin Lace
  Knitted
  Crocheted

[Illustration: INSTRUCTIONS ON PG. 14]

[Illustration]




_STOLES and SHAWLS_....

_SHAWLS and STOLES_....

_such comfortable wool fashion accessories to wear to the movies,
church suppers, Grange meetings, the theater and the senior prom. Here
is a collection for daytime and evening wear in easy, knit, crochet
and hairpin lace stitches. Mix your colors or match them. Stoles are
the fashion and, of course, they look so much prettier if you can say
“I made it myself”. Remember ... the softest stoles are made with DAWN
Brand Wools and Nylon._

_The American Thread Company_

[Illustration]

_260 W. Broadway, New York 13, N. Y._

  _Copyright 1951_      _Printed in U. S. A._

[Illustration: INSTRUCTIONS ON PAGE 12]




KNITTING ABBREVIATIONS

  K           Knit
  P           Purl
  St          Stitch
  Sts         Stitches
  Sl st       Slip Stitch
  Tog         Together
  Y.O.        Yarn Over
  P.S.S.O.    Pass slip stitch over K st

 *(Asterisk)--This sign indicates that the instructions immediately
 following are to be repeated the given number of times plus the
 original.

 **Are used in the same way.


CROCHET ABBREVIATIONS

  ch         Chain
  st         Stitch
  sts        Stitches
  sl st      Slip Stitch
  s c        Single Crochet
  s d c      Short Double Crochet
  d c        Double Crochet
  tr c       Treble Crochet
  d tr c     Double Treble Crochet
  tr tr c    Triple Treble Crochet

 *(Asterisk)--This sign indicates that the instructions immediately
 following are to be repeated the given number of times plus the
 original.

 **Are used in the same way.




_Park Avenue_


=KNITTED=

=Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DAWN” PERMANENT “CRIMP
SET” NYLON=

  =_or_
  “DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT YARN
  _or_
  “DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  4 ozs. Canary or Buttercup.
  2 ozs. Beige or Sand.
  2 ozs. Wood Brown or Dk. Brown.
  1 pr. knitting needles No. 5.
  Plastic crochet hook No. 4.

=GAUGE=: 13 sts = 2 inches.

With Canary or Buttercup cast on 432 sts and work in pattern as
follows: P 1 row, K 1 row, P 1 row.

=4th Row.= K 2 tog, 3 times, * Y O, K 1, 6 times. K 2 tog, 6 times,
repeat from * across row, ending with Y O, K 1, 6 times, K 2 tog, 3
times.

Repeat last 4 rows twice.

=13th Row.= P across row.

=14th Row.= K across row.

=15th Row.= P across row, cut yarn.

=16th Row.= Attach Beige or Sand and K across row. Repeat from 1st to
15th rows, cut yarn.

=32nd Row.= Attach Wood Brown or Dk. Brown and K across row. Repeat
from 1st to 15th rows, cut yarn.

Continue in the above manner alternating colors, until there are 3
strips of Canary or Buttercup, 2 strips of Beige or Sand and 2 strips
of Wood Brown or Dk. Brown. Crochet a row of s c all around, working 3
s c in each corner and 2 s c in center st of each scallop across each
long edge, matching colors at each short end.

=FRINGE=: Wind yarn over a 3 inch cardboard, cut one end. Using one
strand, double in half and loop through each s c, across each short end
matching the colors.




_Nob Hill_


=KNITTED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT YARN=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  6 ozs. Jockey Green
  3 ozs. National Blue
  1 oz. Scarlet
  3 ozs. White
  1 oz. Maize
  1 pr. plastic knitting needles No. 6.
  Bone crochet hook No. 3 or 4

=GAUGE=: 6 sts = 1 inch

The entire stole is worked in garter st. K each row.

With Green, cast on 116 sts and work in pattern as follows: * Work
6 rows in Green, 6 rows White, 2 rows Green, 2 rows Maize, 4 rows
National Blue, 8 rows Green, 6 rows White, 2 rows Green, 2 rows Maize,
4 rows National Blue, 2 rows Scarlet, repeat from * 14 times, then work
8 rows Green, 4 rows National Blue, 2 rows Maize, 2 rows Green, 6 rows
White and 6 rows Green, bind off.

With Green work a row of s c all around working 3 s c in each corner.

[Illustration]




_Peachtree Street_


=CROCHETED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“GEM” CROCHET COTTON, Article 35, size 20=
  =_or_=
  =“STAR” CROCHET COTTON, Article 20, size 20=

  6 balls White or color desired.
  Steel crochet hook No. 5.

=GAUGE=: 3 knot sts = 2 inches.

Draw up a ¹⁄₂ inch loop on hook, thread over and pull through loop, s c
over single loop of st, repeat from beginning 63 times (63 single knot
sts), turn.

=2nd Row.= Skip 3 single knot sts, s c in s c between knot sts, ** work
a double knot st (double knot st: * draw up a ¹⁄₂ inch loop on hook,
thread over and pull through loop, s c over single loop of st, repeat
from * once), skip 1 s c between knot sts, s c in next s c between
single knot sts, repeat from ** across row, work 3 single knot sts to
turn each row.

=3rd Row.= S c in loop to right of s c of next double knot st, s c in
loop to left of s c of same double knot st, * double knot st, s c in
loop to right of s c of next double knot st, s c in loop to left of s
c of same double knot st. Repeat from * across row, work 3 single knot
sts, turn and repeat last row until work measures 68 inches or length
desired.

=EDGE=: Work a row of double knot sts all around stole but drawing the
loops up 1 inch instead of ¹⁄₂ inch.

Dip in thin starch and block.




_Beacon Hill_


=KNITTED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” PERMANENT “CRIMP SET” NYLON=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT YARN=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  10 ozs. Pink or color desired.
  1 oz. Black.
  1 pr. each knitting needles No. 2 and No. 5
  Steel crochet hook No. 3.

On No. 2 needles cast on 69 sts and work in ribbing of K 1, P 1 for
4¹⁄₂ inches, increasing 68 sts evenly spaced on last row of ribbing
(137 sts). Change to No. 5 needles and work in pattern as follows:

=1st Row.= K 8, * P 2, K 2 tog, YO, K 1, YO, sl 1, K 1, p.s.s.o.,
repeat from * across row, ending row with P 2, K 8.

=2nd Row.= K 10, * P 5, K 2, repeat from * across row, ending row with
P 5, K 10.

=3rd Row.= K 8, * P 2, K 5, repeat from * across row, ending row with P
2, K 8.

=4th Row.= Same as 2nd row.

Repeat last 4 rows until work measures 50¹⁄₂ inches from the beginning.
Change to No. 2 needles, work in ribbing decreasing 68 sts evenly
spaced (69 sts). Work even in ribbing for 4¹⁄₂ inches, bind off. Block
shoulderette. Sew ribbing and 6 inches above ribbing together.

=EDGE=: With wrong side of work toward you attach Black at end of seam,
1 s c in same space, * ch 3, 1 s c in 2nd st from hook, 1 s c in next
st of ch, skip ¹⁄₈ inch space, s c in next space, repeat from * all
around shoulderette, cut yarn. Work same edge around each cuff. Tack
collar back as illustrated.

[Illustration]




_Country Club_


=KNITTED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” PERMANENT “CRIMP SET” NYLON=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” POMPADOUR=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” INFANTS WOOL=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” BABY YARN=

  9 ozs. Buttercup or color desired.
  1 pr. plastic knitting needles No. 10.

Cast on 114 sts and K 1 row.

=1st Row.= K 1, * P 3 tog, K 1, P 1, K 1 into next st, repeat from *
across row, ending row with K 1.

=2nd and 4th Rows.= P across each row.

=3rd Row.= K 1, * K 1, P 1, K 1 into next st, P 3 tog, repeat from *
across row, ending row with K 1.

Repeat these 4 rows for pattern. Work even in pattern until work
measures 64 inches from the beginning ending with 4th row of pattern.
Bind off. Work a row of s c across each short end.

=FRINGE=: Cut strands 6 inches long. Using 2 strands, double in half
and loop through each st across each short end.




_Plaza_


=KNITTED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” KNITTING WORSTED=

  10 ozs. Scarlet and

  =“STAR” RAYON CROCHET, Article 700=

  2 balls Buttercup.
  1 pr. plastic knitting needles No. 8.

=GAUGE=: 7 sts = 2 inches.

With Scarlet cast on 70 sts, K 1 row, drop Scarlet.

=2nd and 3rd Rows.= Working with a double strand, attach Buttercup and
K each row, cut Buttercup.

=4th and 5th Rows.= Pick up Scarlet and K across each row.

=6th Row.= K 1, * Y O needle twice, K 1, repeat from * across row.

=7th Row.= K 1, * drop the 2 yarn overs from needle without knitting
them, K 1, repeat from * across row, drop Scarlet.

=8th and 9th Rows.= Same as 2nd and 3rd rows.

=10th and 11th Rows.= Same as 4th and 5th rows.

=12th, 13th, 14th and 15th Rows.= Same as 6th and 7th rows.

=16th and 17th Rows.= Same as 2nd and 3rd rows.

=18th and 19th Rows.= Same as 4th and 5th rows.

=20th to 25th Rows.= Same as 6th and 7th rows.

=26th and 27th Rows.= Same as 2nd and 3rd rows.

=28th and 29th Rows.= Same as 4th and 5th rows.

Repeat from 20th to 29th rows 17 times more.

=Next 4 Rows.= Same as 6th and 7th rows.

=Next 2 Rows.= Same as 2nd and 3rd rows.

=Next 2 Rows.= Same as 4th and 5th rows.

=Next 2 Rows.= Same as 6th and 7th rows.

=Next 2 Rows.= Same as 2nd and 3rd rows.

=Next 2 Rows.= Same as 4th and 5th rows, bind off.

=FRINGE=: Wind Scarlet over a 5 inch cardboard, cut one end. Using 1
strand, double in half and loop through each st across each short end.

[Illustration]




_La Louisian_


=CROCHETED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” PERMANENT “CRIMP SET” NYLON=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT YARN=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  12 ozs. National Blue or Med. Blue.
  2 ozs. Sand.

  =_and_=
  =“STAR” RAYON CROCHET, Article 700=

  5 balls Buttercup.
  2 balls each Red and Black.
  Plastic crochet hook No. 4 or =F=.

With Blue, ch 4, join to form a ring, ch 3 (counts as 1 d c in each
row) and work 11 d c in ring, join in 3rd st of ch.

=2nd Row.= Ch 3, 1 d c in next d c, * 2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c in next d c
(corner), 1 d c in each of the next 2 d c, repeat from * twice, 2 d c,
ch 2, 2 d c in next d c, join in 3rd st of ch.

=3rd Row.= Ch 3, 1 d c in each d c, 2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c in the ch 2 loop
at each corner, join in 3rd st of ch.

Repeat last row 3 times, cut yarn (22 d c on each side).

=7th Row.= Attach Buttercup, ch 1 and work 1 s c in each d c, 1 s c, ch
3, 1 s c in the ch 2 loop at each corner, join in ch 1.

=8th Row.= Ch 1, work 1 s c in each s c, 1 s c, ch 3, 1 s c in the ch 3
loop at each corner, cut yarn.

=9th Row.= Attach Blue, work same as 3rd row, cut yarn.

=10th and 11th Rows.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 7th and 8th rows,
cut yarn.

=12th Row.= Attach Blue, work 1 d c in each s c, 2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c in
the ch 3 loop at each corner.

=13th to 16th Rows.= Work same as 3rd row, cut yarn (54 d c on each
side).

=17th Row.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 7th row, cut yarn.

=18th Row.= Attach Black, work same as 8th row, cut yarn.

=19th to 23rd Rows.= Attach Blue, work same as 12th to 16th rows, cut
yarn.

=24th and 25th Rows.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 7th and 8th rows,
cut yarn.

=26th Row.= Attach Sand, ch 3 (counts as part of 1st cluster st), d c
in same space, * ch 1, skip 1 st, 2 d c cluster st in next st (2 d c
cluster st: 2 d c in same space keeping last loop of each d c on hook,
yarn over and pull through all loops at one time), repeat from * all
around working 2 cluster sts with ch 2 between in the ch 3 loop at each
corner, join in 3rd st of ch, cut yarn (43 cluster sts on each side).

=27th Row.= Attach Red Rayon, work same as 7th row, working 1 s c in
each cluster st and 1 s c in each ch 1.

=28th Row.= Ch 3, 1 d c in each s c, working 2 d c, ch 2, 2 d c in the
ch 3 loop at each corner, join.

=29th Row.= Work same as 7th row, cut yarn.

=30th Row.= Attach Sand, work same as 26th row, cut yarn.

=31st Row.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 27th row.

=32nd Row.= Work same as 8th row, cut yarn.

=33rd to 37th Rows.= Attach Blue, work same as 12th to 16th rows, cut
yarn.

=38th Row.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 7th row, cut yarn.

=39th Row.= Attach Black, work same as 8th row, cut yarn.

=40th Row.= Attach Blue, work same as 26th row, cut yarn.

=41st, 42nd & 43rd Rows.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 27th, 28th and
29th rows, cut yarn.

=44th Row.= Attach Blue, work same as 26th row, cut yarn.

=45th Row.= Attach Black, work same as 27th row, cut yarn.

=46th Row.= Attach Buttercup, work same as 8th row, cut yarn.

Repeat the 19th to 46th rows once, cut yarn.

=75th Row.= Attach Blue and work 1 s c in each s c, working 3 s c in
the ch 3 loop at each corner, join, cut yarn.

=FRINGE=: Wind Blue over a 10 inch cardboard, cut loops at one end.
Using 2 strands, double in half and knot fringe in every other st
across each side and one in each of the 3 sts at each corner around
entire shawl. * Take half of one group of fringe and half of next group
of fringe, knot together ³⁄₄ inch from 1st row of knots, repeat all
around, then repeat from * for another row of knots. Trim fringe evenly.

[Illustration]




_Esplanade_

  _Illustrated on page 3_


=HAIRPIN LACE=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DAWN” PERMANENT “CRIMP
  SET” NYLON=

  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT YARN=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  6 ozs. Scarlet.
  6 ozs. National Blue or Med. Blue.
  2 inch hairpin staple.
  Steel crochet hook No. 4.

Wind Scarlet around 2 prongs of staple and tie tightly in center over
the 2 strands thus forming a loop on each prong. With yarn in back,
insert hook in left hand loop close to center knot, yarn over hook and
pull through loop, * push the hook upwards so that it parallels the
prongs and pass between the prongs to the back of staple, turn the
staple ¹⁄₂ turn to right and place yarn in front of staple, wind yarn
around left prong to the back of staple and bring to center, insert
hook up through the front yarn of previous loop on left side close to
the center, yarn over hook and pull up a chain through previous loop on
staple (2 loops on hook), yarn over and pull through 2 loops, repeat
from * until there are 352 loops on each side, cut yarn, leaving a 6
inch length of yarn.

Work 8 more strips in Scarlet and 8 strips in Blue in same manner.

=JOINING=: Working across the long side of a strip of Blue and a strip
of Scarlet, insert hook in first 2 loops of Scarlet strip and keep on
hook, insert hook in first 2 loops of Blue strip and pull the 2 Blue
loops through the 2 Scarlet loops, there are 2 Blue loops on hook, *
pull the next 2 Scarlet loops through the 2 Blue loops on hook, then
pull the next 2 Blue loops through the 2 Scarlet loops on hook, repeat
from * until the 2 strips are joined, fasten last 2 loops securely with
the 6 inch length of yarn. Join remaining strips in same manner having
2 Scarlet strips on each outside edge and alternating colors when
joining.

=EDGE=: Working on long side, attach Blue in first 2 loops, s c in same
space, * ch 1, s c through next 2 loops, repeat from * across side, 3 s
c in corner, work in s c across short end working 4 s c over each loop,
work other 2 sides to correspond, join.

=Next Row.= 1 s c in each s c and 1 s c in each ch 1 loop on long
sides, 1 s c in each s c across short sides and 3 s c in center st at
each corner.

=Next Row.= 1 s c in each s c, cut yarn.

=FRINGE=: Wind Blue over a 6¹⁄₂ inch cardboard, cut one end. Using 4
strands, double in half and loop through every other s c across each
short end, trim evenly.




_Wilshire_

  _Illustrated on page 3_


=CROCHETED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DAWN” KNITTING WORSTED=

  20 ozs. White or color desired.
  Plastic crochet hook No. 8.

=GAUGE=: 1 shell = ³⁄₄ inch.

Ch 74, s c in 2nd st from hook, * skip 2 sts of ch, 4 d c with ch 1
between each d c in next st, skip 2 sts of ch, s c in next st, repeat
from * 11 times (12 shells), ch 4, turn.

=2nd Row.= D c in next s c, ch 1, s c in center loop of next shell,
* ch 1, 1 d c, ch 2, 1 d c in next s c between 2 shells of previous
row, ch 1, s c in center loop of next shell, repeat from * across row,
ending with 2 d c with ch 1 between in last s c, ch 1, turn.

=3rd Row.= S c in next ch 1 loop, * 4 d c with ch 1 between each d c in
next s c, s c in next ch 1 loop, repeat from * across row, ch 4, turn.
Repeat last 2 rows until stole measures 70 inches from the beginning
ending with 2nd row of pattern, cut yarn.

=FRINGE=: Wind yarn over a 7″ cardboard, cut one end. Using 2 strands,
double in half and loop through each st across each short end.




_Campus Queen_

  _Illustrated on next page_


=CROCHETED=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT=
  =YARN=

  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” SOCK & SWEATER YARN=

  5 ozs. Scarlet.
  9 ozs. Jockey Green.
  1 oz. Canary.
  Steel crochet hook No. 1.
  Tapestry needle for weaving.

With Scarlet ch 243, d c in 5th st from hook, * ch 1, skip 1 st of ch,
d c in next st, repeat from * across row (120 meshes), ch 4, turn.

=2nd Row.= D c in next d c, * ch 1, d c in next d c, repeat from *
across row, ch 1, d c in 3rd st of ch 4, ch 4, turn. Repeat 2nd row for
entire square in the following color scheme, * 5 rows Scarlet, 1 row
Canary, 5 rows Scarlet, 5 rows Jockey Green, repeat from * until shawl
is square.

=WEAVING=: Thread Scarlet in tapestry needle and working lengthwise,
weave over one mesh and under next mesh, weave same color in same mesh
reversing the over and under, weave 4 more rows of meshes in Scarlet,
* 1 row of Canary, 5 rows Scarlet, 5 rows of Jockey Green, 5 rows
Scarlet, repeat from * across shawl. Weave all ends in securely. With
Jockey Green crochet 11 rows of d c all around, working 3 d c in center
st at each corner of each row.

=Next Row.= Ch 5, skip 2 d c, d c in next d c, * ch 2, skip 2 d c, d
c in next d c, repeat from * all around working 1 d c, ch 3, 1 d c in
each corner.

=FRINGE=: Wind Jockey Green over a 7 inch cardboard, cut one end. Using
3 strands, double in half and loop through each ch 2 loop all around.

[Illustration]




_Gold Coast_

  _Illustrated on Cover_


=HAIRPIN LACE=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY=
  =“DAWN” POMPADOUR=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” BABY YARN=
  =_or_=
  =“DAWN” INFANTS WOOL=

  5 ozs. Pink or color desired.
  1--4 inch Hairpin Staple.
  Plastic crochet hook No. 2.

=HAIRPIN LACE=: Make a loop at end of yarn and place 1 prong of staple
in loop just made, insert hook in loop, wind yarn around right prong
of hairpin staple, yarn over hook and draw through loop keeping work
at center, * drop loop from hook, turn staple ½ turn to the left, pick
up the dropped loop at center, yarn over hook and pull through loop,
insert hook through top part of loop on left hand prong, yarn over and
pull through (2 loops on hook), yarn over and pull through both loops
completing the single crochet, repeat from * for length desired.

Work a length of hairpin lace having 352 loops on each side of staple,
cut yarn.

Work 4 more strips in same manner. Join yarn in 2 loops of first length
and work 1 s c in same space, * ch 1, 1 s c over 2 corresponding loops
of second length, ch 1, 1 s c over next 2 loops of first length, repeat
from * across length, cut yarn. Join 3rd strip to 2nd strip and 4th
strip to 3rd strip and 5th strip to 4th strip in same manner.

=EDGE=: Working across side edge of stole, join yarn in 2 end loops of
stole, 1 s c in same space, * ch 4, slip st in 3rd st from hook for
picot, ch 1, 1 s c over next 2 loops, repeat from * across side, cut
yarn. Work opposite side in same manner.

=TASSELS=: Wind yarn 20 times over a 3 inch cardboard, cut one end, tie
in center, then tie about ¹⁄₂ inch down from top. Work 17 more tassels
in same manner and attach to short ends of scarf as illustrated.




_Metropolitan_

  _Illustrated on Cover_


=HAIRPIN LACE=

  =Materials Required: AMERICAN THREAD COMPANY “DAWN” BRAEBURN SPORT
  YARN=

  6 ozs. White or color desired.

  =_and_=
  =“DAWN” POMPADOUR=

  2 ozs. White.
  3 inch hairpin staple.
  Plastic crochet hook No. 6 or H.

With Sport Yarn using No. 6 crochet hook hold the fork in left hand,
loop yarn around fork and securely tie knot in center. (Keep working
end of yarn always at rear of work.) Insert hook through loop on left
prong, draw rear yarn through loop, making a single crochet stitch at
the knot in the center, * withdraw hook, turn fork one-half turn to the
left, replace hook, then insert through loop at the left side of the
fork, pick up rear yarn and pull through loop completing an s c, repeat
from * until there are 595 loops on each side, cut yarn. Work 2nd
section having 513 loops, cut yarn. Work 3rd section having 349 loops,
cut yarn. Work 4th section having 389 loops, cut yarn. Work 5th section
having 1269 loops, cut yarn.

With Pompadour, join in 1st s c of 1st section, ch 12, s c in 1st 3
loops working through all 3 loops at one time (cluster), * ch 5, s c
through next 3 loops, repeat from * 5 times (7 clusters), ** ch 5, s c
through next 20 loops, * ch 5, s c through next 3 loops, repeat from *
6 times, repeat from ** 12 times, ch 5, s c through next 20 loops, *
ch 5, s c through next 3 loops, repeat from * 6 times, ch 12, s c in
center s c at end of section, ch 12, s c through next 20 loops and work
other side to correspond, cut yarn.

=2nd Section.= Join in 1st s c of 2nd section, ch 10, skip last 20 loop
cluster and 3--3 loop clusters of 1st section, s c in 3rd st of next ch
of 1st section, ** ch 2, s c through 3 loops of 2nd section, * ch 2, s
c in 3rd st of next ch of 1st section, ch 2, s c through next 3 loops
of 2nd section, repeat from * 5 times, ch 2, s c in 3rd st of next ch
of 1st section, ch 2, s c through 20 loops of 2nd section, ch 2, s c in
3rd st of next ch of 1st section, repeat from ** 11 times, * ch 2, s c
through next 3 loops of 2nd section, ch 2, s c in 3rd st of next ch of
1st section, repeat from * 6 times, ch 10, s c in center s c at end of
2nd section, ch 12, s c through next 20 loops and work other side in
same manner as 1st section, cut yarn.

=3rd Section.= Join in 1st s c of 3rd section, ch 10, skip 2--20 loop
clusters and 11--3 loop clusters of 2nd section, s c in 3rd st of next
ch of 2nd section, and work in same manner as 2nd section, working to
within last 11--3 loops and 2--20 loop clusters of 2nd section at end
of row, work other side in same manner as 2nd section, cut yarn.

=4th Section.= Join in 1st s c of 4th section, ch 12, ** s c through
next 20 loops, * ch 5, s c through next 3 loops, repeat from * 6 times,
ch 5, repeat from ** 8 times, s c through next 20 loops, ch 12, s c in
center s c at end of section, ch 10, skip 18--3 loop clusters and 2--20
loop clusters, s c in 3rd st of next ch of 1st section and work in same
manner as other section, skipping 11--3 loop and 2--20 loop clusters at
end of row, cut yarn.

=5th Section.= Join in s c of last 20 loop cluster of 3rd section, ch
2, s c through 9 loops of 5th section, ch 2, s c in 4th st of ch 12
of 3rd section, ch 2, s c through next 3 loops of 5th section, ch 2,
s c in 8th st of ch 12 of 3rd section, ch 2, s c through next 3 loops
of 5th section, ch 2, s c in next s c of 3rd section, work 24 more 3
loop clusters in same manner (26--3 loop clusters), s c in last 20 loop
cluster of 2nd section, ch 2, s c through 9 loops of 5th section, ch 2,
s c in 4th st of ch 12 and work 10--3 loop clusters, s c in 3rd st of
last ch 5 of 1st section, ch 2, s c through 9 loops, ch 2, s c in top
of 20 loop cluster of 1st section (always ch 2 between clusters), work
2--3 loop clusters and 1--9 loop cluster in 1st ch 12 of 1st section,
work 1--3 loop cluster and 2--9 loop clusters in next ch 12 of 1st
section, s c in s c at top of 3 loop cluster of 1st section, ch 2, s
c through 9 loops of 5th section, ch 2, s c in 3rd st of ch of 1st
section, then work 36--3 loop clusters up to the 8th st of 2nd ch 12 of
4th section, work 1--9 loop cluster and 120--3 loop clusters up to the
s c of last 20 loop cluster of 4th section, work 1--9 loop and 37--3
loop clusters, s c in 3rd st of last ch 5 of 1st section, ch 2, work
3--9 loop clusters, 1--3 loop cluster, 1--9 loop cluster and 2--3 loop
clusters, s c in top of next 20 loop cluster, work 1--9 loop cluster,
10--3 loop clusters, 1--9 loop cluster, s c in s c of 1st 20 loop
cluster of 2nd section, work 26--3 loop clusters, 1--9 loop cluster,
s c in s c of 1st 20 loop cluster of 3rd section, work 107--3 loop
clusters, join, cut yarn.

=EDGE=: With Pompadour, join in any 3 loops, s c in same space, ch 3, s
c in s c for picot, * ch 3, s c through next 3 loops, ch 3, s c in s c
for picot, repeat from * all around, ch 3, join, cut yarn.




_Have you seen the other Star instruction books?_


  Available at your nearest
  Art Needlework Counter--10¢ each


Book #75 Nylon Book

[Illustration]

Many basic styles in sweaters, mittens, socks for the whole family to
be knitted and crocheted in this fabulous new fiber.


Book #76 Beginner’s Manual of Crochet

[Illustration]

Crochet stitches from beginner’s class to the professional. Contains
instructions for tatting and hairpin lace.


Book #78 Television and Radio Scarfs

[Illustration]

Directions for many motifs to be made into doilies, scarfs,
tablecloths, bedspreads--also handkerchief insertions.


Book #79 Hats and Bags

[Illustration]

Hats, bags, beanies, slippers and gloves--directions for all these
fashion accessories in this new STAR Book.


Book #81 Edgings

[Illustration]

Crocheted, tatted, hairpin lace edgings for your finest handkerchiefs.
All easy to make and wonderful to give.


Book #82 Beautiful, Beautiful Afghans

[Illustration]

Motif designs as well as all-over designs in this full color booklet.
Some can be crocheted while watching television.


Book #84 Dolls and Dolls

[Illustration]

Characters of story book fame to be crocheted with STAR Brand Cottons.
Bride and Groom included.


Book #85 A.B.C. of Embroidery Stitches

[Illustration]

Over forty embroidery stitches as well as instructions for Swedish
Embroidery for Huck Toweling.




Transcriber’s Notes

The explanation of the abbreviations and the note explaining the
meaning of * and ** throughout have been relocated to the start for
convenience.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STOLES AND SHAWLS: HAIRPIN LACE, KNITTED, CROCHETED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


