The Project Gutenberg eBook of The journal of George Fox, vol. 1 of 2
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The journal of George Fox, vol. 1 of 2
        Being an historical account of his life, travels, sufferings, and Christian experiences.

Author: George Fox

Author of introduction, etc.: Daniel Pickard

Contributor: Margaret Fell
        William Penn

Editor: Norman Penney

Release date: March 8, 2025 [eBook #75559]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Friends' Tract Association, 1901

Credits: Emmanuel Ackerman, KD Weeks, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF GEORGE FOX, VOL. 1 OF 2 ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes have been moved to follow the paragraphs in which they are
referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                       THE JOURNAL OF GEORGE FOX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             EIGHTH EDITION

                                 OF THE

                         JOURNAL OF GEORGE FOX.

                         TWO VOLUMES, 5/- NET.

        With Map, recently prepared to accompany same, 6/6 net.
                 The Map separately, in case, 2/6 net.

                                -------

“His life well repays study. It is a rich mine, and every page of it
seems to be solid gold. Books now-a-days are spun out, and you get
little after reading much; but _The Journal of George Fox_ contains
ingots of gold—things to be thought on and that will have to be thought
on month by month before you get at the bottom of them.”—CHARLES HADDON
SPURGEON.

                                -------

                  LONDON: FRIENDS’ TRACT ASSOCIATION.

        Sold by HEADLEY BROTHERS, 14, Bishopsgate Without, E.C.


                              THE JOURNAL

                                   OF

                              GEORGE FOX;

                                BEING AN

                           HISTORICAL ACCOUNT

                                   OF

                   HIS LIFE, TRAVELS, SUFFERINGS, AND
                         CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES.


                            IN TWO VOLUMES.
                                VOL. I.


                                -------


 _THE EIGHTH (Bi-Centenary) EDITION, reprinted from stereotype plates,
                  with revised and enlarged indexes._


                                -------


                                LONDON:
                  =Friends’ Tract Association;=
                                SOLD BY
                           HEADLEY BROTHERS,
                  14, BISHOPSGATE STREET WITHOUT, E.C.
                                 1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           HEADLEY BROTHERS,

                               PRINTERS,

                     LONDON; AND AT ASHFORD, KENT.




                         NOTICE TO THE READER.

                                -------

The present issue of _The Journal of George Fox_ has been printed from
the stereotype plates of the Eighth (Bi-Centenary) Edition, slightly
corrected, and has been furnished with additional particulars of
previous editions of _The Journal_ (see pp. 541-544) and with greatly
enlarged Indexes.

To accompany this issue, a map has been prepared to show the places
mentioned in _The Journal_, the spelling of the names being mostly taken
from the First Edition. This work has necessitated a considerable amount
of research and enquiry in order to identify some of the more obscure
localities referred to by George Fox. It is hardly to be expected that
the positions of all these, after this lapse of time, will accord with
the judgment of all readers, but it is hoped that the map may promote
the intelligent perusal of these volumes.

_The Journal_ may be obtained with or without the map (see advertisement
on page ii.).

                                          NORMAN PENNEY,
                                 _Hon. Sec. Friends’ Tract Association_.

LONDON, 1901.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              INTRODUCTION

                         TO THE EIGHTH EDITION.


The following Eighth Edition of _The Journal of George Fox_, taken from
the Seventh Edition, as prepared by the late Wilson Armistead, of Leeds,
has been carefully read and collated with the original or First Edition
of that Work. And the reader can be confidently assured, making due
allowance for the translation or omission of a few obsolete expressions,
that the Work is now, in truth and substance, _the same_ as when it was
first printed. A large number of corrections in the spelling of names,
and of other chiefly clerical errors, have also been made, bringing all
down, so far as practicable, into harmony with the usage of the present
date in these respects.

                                                     DANIEL PICKARD.

LEEDS, 1891.




                              INTRODUCTION

                        TO THE SEVENTH EDITION.


                                -------


The present re-issue of the _Journal of George Fox_ has, in a great
measure, resulted from the concern of a Friend lately deceased, who was
actively engaged in the last edition, and who provided a handsome sum
towards the further republication of this valuable Testimony to the
Truth.

Assisted by the above bequest, and prompted by the encouragement of many
Friends, the Editor of this Seventh Edition of the Journal has
endeavoured to increase the usefulness by issuing it in a manner
considerably more adapted, than heretofore, for general usefulness, and
calculated, he hopes, to insure a still more extended circulation.

In printing from the last edition (which was collated with the first and
third) some further slight improvements in the style have been made, and
redundancies omitted, with an occasional transposition in the
construction of a sentence, or the omission or insertion of a word to
impart clearness to the sense of the author, care being taken in every
instance not in the least to misrepresent his meaning. In addition to
this, the work has now, for the first time, been divided into chapters;
a general table of contents has been supplied; and a considerable number
of Notes, chiefly biographical and historical, have been added, which
must materially increase its interest.

Though highly approved as a standard work, there is reason to believe
that the _Journal of George Fox_ has not obtained that attention which
its real worth justly demands, even from the members of the Society
which the author was so eminently instrumental in forming. Let those who
have not perused it be induced to make themselves acquainted with its
contents; and may those who are of ability, be stimulated to expend a
portion of their means in promoting the circulation of a work recording
the labours of so eminent a servant of the Lord, concerning whom the
following character was given by one of his contemporaries—not the less
truthful and applicable from having been often quoted—that “He was
indeed a heavenly-minded man, zealous for the name of the Lord, and
preferred the honour of God before all things. He was valiant for the
Truth, bold in asserting it, patient in suffering for it, unwearied in
labouring in it, steady in his testimony to it, immovable as a rock.”

The many and important truths unfolded in this work, though conveyed in
a style not always suited to the taste of the present day, will, if
patiently and seriously perused, amply compensate the reader, of
whatever denomination, for the time and attention he may bestow upon it.
Sir JAMES MACKINTOSH says, it “Is one of the most extraordinary and
instructive narratives in the world, which no reader of competent
judgment can peruse without revering the virtue of the writer;” and
COLERIDGE in his _Biographia Literaria_ observes: “There exist folios on
the human understanding, and the nature of man, which would have a far
juster claim to their high rank and celebrity, if, in the whole huge
volume, there could be found as much fulness of heart and intellect, as
bursts forth in many a simple page of George Fox.”

In every point of view, George Fox was a character of no ordinary rank.
Though a stranger to the polish of human learning, he possessed a truly
enlightened mind, connected with sound practical knowledge; and
fearlessly inculcated, amongst persons of all ranks, sentiments and
views on various points, equally conducive to the immediate comfort, and
to the amelioration and advancement of the various classes of civil
society. These views, though then rejected by many as visionary, have
since met with very general acceptance, and in some cases have even
obtained the favourable attention of government.

But what is of still more importance, he was well taught in the school
of Christ. He was thoroughly versed in the Holy Scriptures, which, to
use his own expression, were “very precious” to him, and he always held
them in high estimation. He firmly believed in the Son of God—in the
atoning efficacy of his sacrifice upon the cross, and in all his offices
and works both _for_ us, and _in_ us; and by obedience to the Light of
Life, the illuminating, renovating power of the Holy Spirit—to Christ in
his spiritual appearance, he realized in himself the benefits conferred
upon mankind by the sufferings and death of the Saviour. By a variety of
preparatory baptisms, he was, on the one hand, given to see the depths
of Satan, and on the other, richly instructed in the mysteries of the
everlasting kingdom of God. Thus trained and exercised he became
abundantly furnished, and qualified to enter upon the arduous service,
to which he believed himself Divinely called; and proved himself to be,
as his _Journal_ largely testifies, “a workman that needed not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.”

Contemplating the character of George Fox in this twofold light, the
Editor may, in conclusion, say with his predecessors, that he “indulges
a hope that the history of the author’s life, written by his own hand,
unfolding the energy and operation of that grace by which he was what he
was, will be found interesting to persons of every class, especially to
the really religious of whatever denomination, and still more peculiarly
so to those who profess to believe in the same doctrines he was engaged
so strenuously in preaching. To the promulgation of these doctrines he
steadily devoted upwards of forty years of his life—a life which
exhibited throughout ‘an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience;’ evincing him to be, both in principle and in practice, a
genuine disciple of his crucified LORD—a real CHRISTIAN.”

                                                                W.A.

P.S.—The Editor is also desirous of directing the special attention of
the reader to the admirable Preface to this work, by William Penn.

LEEDS, 1852.

                          CONTENTS OF VOL. I.

                                                                   PAGE.

 THE PREFACE; Being a summary account of the divers dispensations
   of God to men, from the beginning of the world to that of our
   present age, by the ministry and testimony of his faithful
   servant, George Fox, as an introduction to the ensuing Journal.  xix.


 CHAPTER I.—1624-1647.—George Fox’s birth and parentage—his
   gravity and piety in youth—apprenticed to a shoemaker, who is
   also a grazier, &c.—his integrity in dealing—refuses to drink
   healths—his exercises of mind commence—he lives retired—is
   tempted to despair—his sorrows continue for some years—has a
   sense of Christ’s sufferings—confutes a people who held women
   to be devoid of souls—begins to travel on Truth’s account—meets
   with Elizabeth Hooton—fasts often, and retires to solitary
   places with his Bible—his exercises intermit—sees why none but
   Christ could speak to his condition—visits a woman who had
   fasted twenty-two days—first declares the Truth at Dukinfield
   and Manchester—preaches at a great meeting at Broughton—his
   troubles wear off, and he weeps for joy—sees things which
   cannot be uttered—is reported to have a discerning
   spirit—overcomes his temptations through the power of Christ.       1


 CHAPTER II.—1648-1649.—Begins to have great meetings—at Mansfield
   he is moved to pray—the Lord’s power so great the house is
   shaken—cannot pray in his own will—a temptation besets him that
   there is no God, which is dissipated by an inward voice—he
   afterwards disputes with and confounds some Atheists—goes to
   courts and steeple-houses, &c., to warn against oppression and
   oaths—reproves a notorious drunkard, who is reformed—sees who
   are the greatest deceivers—shows how people read and understand
   the Scriptures—various mysteries are revealed to him—he is sent
   to turn people to the Inward Light, Spirit, and Grace, the
   Divine Spirit which he infallibly knew would not
   deceive—priests and professors rage at these innovations—he
   cries for justice in courts and against various wrong
   things—denounces the trade of preaching—is sent to preach
   freely.                                                            23


 CHAPTER III.—1649-1650.—George Fox is first imprisoned at
   Nottingham, where the sheriff is convinced—he is liberated and
   quiets a distracted woman—he is cruelly treated at
   Mansfield-Woodhouse—is taken before the magistrates at
   Derby—acknowledges that he is sanctified—is temptingly asked if
   he were Christ, which he denies, yet is committed for
   blasphemy—his mittimus to Derby prison—writes to the priests of
   Derby against preaching for hire, &c.—also against
   persecution—to Barton and Bennet, justices, on the same
   subject—to Justice Bennet against covetousness—to Justice
   Barton, a preacher and a persecutor—to the Mayor of Derby
   against persecution and oppression—to the court of Derby
   against oaths and oppression—to the bell-ringers of Derby
   against vanities and worldly pleasures—his jailer is
   convinced—Justice Bennet first gives Friends the name of
   Quakers in derision—writes to Friends and others, to open their
   understandings, and to direct them to their true Teacher within
   themselves—to the convinced people, directing them to internal
   silence and to true obedience—an encouragement to the
   faithful—to the justices of Derby against persecution, thrice
   repeated—to the priests of Derby, on the same subject—to the
   justices of Derby, to prize their time, and to depart from
   evil—the like to Colonel Barton, justice, and warning of the
   plagues and vengeance hanging over the oppressor.                  42


 CHAPTER IV.—1650-1651.—A trooper visits George Fox from an inward
   intimation—declines a commission in the army, and is put in the
   dungeon—confutes one who denied Christ’s outward appearance,
   from whence a slander is raised against Friends—testifies
   against capital punishments for small matters—writes for more
   speedy justice to prisoners—intercedes for the life of a young
   woman, imprisoned for stealing, who is brought to the gallows,
   but reprieved, and afterwards convinced—again refuses to bear
   arms, and is committed close prisoner—writes to Barton and
   Bennet, justices, against persecution—addresses the convinced
   and tender people against hirelings—to the magistrates of Derby
   against persecution, and foretelling his own enlargement and
   their recompense—is greatly exercised for the wickedness of
   Derby—sees the visitation of God’s love pass away from the
   town, and writes a lamentation over it—a great judgment fell
   upon the town—he is liberated after a year’s
   imprisonment—visits Lichfield—preaches repentance through
   Doncaster—many dread “the man with leather breeches”—goes to
   steeple-houses, as the apostles did to the temples, to bring
   people off from them—is denied entertainment, and ill-treated
   at some places—refuses to inform against his persecutors—many
   are convinced in Yorkshire, amongst others, Richard Farnsworth,
   James Naylor, William Dewsbury, Justice Hotham, and Captain
   Pursloe.                                                           67


 CHAPTER V.—1652.—George Fox visits great men’s houses, warning
   them to repent—is accused of calling himself Christ—refutes the
   charge, and tells the accuser that Judas’s end would be his,
   which shortly came to pass, hence a slander is raised against
   Friends—is stoned at Doncaster—a scoffing priest made to
   tremble at the Lord’s power—a slandering priest cut off in his
   wickedness—a murderous man seeks George Fox, but misses him—he
   lays in a wood all night—the influence of one man or woman, who
   lives in the same spirit that the prophets and apostles were
   in, is to be felt within a circuit of ten miles—George Fox
   ascends Pendle Hill, whence he sees the place of a great
   gathering of people—on descending, refreshes himself at a
   spring of water, having taken little sustenance for several
   days—foresees a great people in white raiment about Wensleydale
   and Sedbergh—a wicked man designs to injure him, but is
   prevented—many are convinced in Dent, and a meeting is settled
   at Sedbergh, where he had seen a people in white
   raiment—preaches for several hours in the steeple-house yard
   there—preaches on a rock, near Firbank chapel, to 1,000 people
   for three hours—the family of Judge Fell convinced, and a
   meeting settled at his house, and continued for forty
   years—preaches through Lancaster streets—at a meeting of
   priests at Ulverstone he speaks in great power, so that one of
   them said, “the church shook”—disputes with priest
   Lampitt—Justice Sawrey is the first persecutor in the
   north—forty priests appear against George Fox at Lancaster
   Sessions for speaking blasphemy; they are confounded, and he is
   cleared of the charge—James Naylor’s account of George Fox’s
   trial at Lancaster Sessions—priest Jackus is reproved from the
   bench for his blasphemy—these priests are reproved by the
   populace—Colonel West defends and protects George Fox against
   the machinations of the priests, and the design of Judge
   Windham, at the risk of losing his place.                         100


 CHAPTER VI.—1652-1653.—George Fox is branded by the priests as a
   witch—writes to Justice Sawrey, prophesying of the judgments
   impending over him—warning to priest Lampitt—exhortation to the
   people of Ulverstone—to the followers of Lampitt, against a
   hireling ministry, &c.—a rebuke to Adam Sands for his
   wickedness—to priest Tatham, against his hireling ministry and
   his suing for tithes—foretells the dissolution of the Long
   Parliament—fasts ten days—James Milner and Richard Myer create
   a schism, which is soon healed—the latter is miraculously
   healed of his lameness, but afterwards disobeys the Lord, and
   dies not long after—Anthony Pearson, an opposer, is
   convinced—the priests are shown to be Antichrist—George Fox
   preaches at John Wilkinson’s steeple-house three
   hours—admonishes a professor _for praising him_—reproves
   Wilkinson for speaking against his conscience—many hundreds are
   convinced—discerns an unclean spirit in a woman, and speaks
   sharply to her—the like of some other women—speaks sharply to
   an envious Baptist—preaches in the steeple house at Carlisle,
   where the Lord’s power was such that the people
   trembled—committed to Carlisle prison as a blasphemer, heretic,
   and seducer—the priests who come to see him are exceedingly
   rude—Anthony Pearson’s remonstrance to the Judges of assize
   against the unjust imprisonment and detention of George Fox—he
   is put in the dungeon, a filthy place, where a woman is found
   eaten to death with vermin—here James Parnell visits him—a
   challenge to professors to declare their objections to George
   Fox’s ministry—it being reported that George Fox was to die for
   religion, the Little Parliament write to the sheriff respecting
   him—he himself expostulates with Justices Craston and Studholm
   on their imprisoning him—A. Pearson and the governor visit the
   prison, blame the magistrates, require sureties of the jailer,
   and put the under-jailer in the dungeon for his cruelty to
   George Fox, who is soon after liberated—George Fox has great
   meetings, and _thousands_ are convinced—visits Gilsland, a
   noted country for thieving—has a glorious meeting of many
   thousands, near Langlands, on the top of a hill—great
   convincement in the six northern counties.                        145


 CHAPTER VII.—1653-1654.—George Fox disputes most of the day with
   priest Wilkinson—Many Friends lose their business for declining
   the world’s salutations, but afterwards their tried
   faithfulness and integrity procure them more than their
   neighbours—George Fox issues an address to Friends
   everywhere—two persecuting justices at Carlisle are cut off and
   a third disgraced—George Fox passes through Halifax, a rude
   town of professors—at Synderhill-Green, he has a mighty meeting
   of some thousands, and there was a general convincement—about
   sixty ministers are now raised up in the north, to travel
   towards the south, the east, and the west, in Truth’s
   service—George Fox’s address to Friends in the ministry—Rice
   Jones and many other false prophets rise up against friends and
   are blasted—a wicked man binds himself with an oath to kill
   George Fox, but is prevented—great convincement in
   Lincolnshire—at Swannington, George Fox has much controversy
   with professors—has a great dispute with priest Stevens and
   seven other priests at Drayton—his father being present was
   convinced, and said, “Truly I see he that will but stand to the
   truth it will carry him out”—priest Stevens propagates lies
   respecting George Fox, which the Lord swept away—is taken
   before Colonel Hacker, who sends him before the
   Protector—speaks prophetically to the Colonel—has a friendly
   conference with the Protector—is dismissed by him very
   friendly—refuses his entertainment—Captain Drury scoffs at
   trembling, but is made to tremble in a remarkable manner—George
   Fox prays with some officers, who are greatly shaken by the
   Lord’s power—priests and professors greatly disturbed because
   many of the people are convinced, and moved to declare against
   the rest.                                                         184


 CHAPTER VIII.—1654-1655.—Address to professors of Christianity
   against persecution—to such as follow the world’s fashions—to
   the Pope, and all kings, and rulers in Europe, against
   persecution—to the justices appointed for trying ministers of
   religion, being a testimony against hireling ministers—Samuel
   Fisher and others are convinced at a meeting at Romney, where
   the Lord’s power is marvellously displayed—a large meeting at
   Coggeshall of about two thousand people, which lasted several
   hours—many reproaches are cast upon the truth, and lying,
   slanderous books published, which are answered, and the truth
   set over the gainsayers—to those who scorn trembling and
   quaking—great rage is manifested against the truth and Friends,
   and their plainness is contemned—to the churches gathered into
   outward forms, opening their state and warning of the woes
   coming upon them—to the Protector, respecting the imprisonment
   of Friends for refusing to take oaths and pay tithes, &c.—to
   Friends to offer themselves to lie in prison for a brother or
   sister—an encouragement to Friends in their several exercises.    216


 CHAPTER IX.—1655-1656.—Friends slandered by Presbyterians and
   Independents, suffer much from them and the Baptists for
   refusing to pay tithes—the priests hunt after a fallen benefice
   like crows after carrion—great miracles wrought through
   several—an Independent preacher convinced, but relapses—address
   to the convinced in Ireland—a sick woman at Baldock
   restored—George Fox parts and reconciles two furious
   combatants—to the seven parishes at the Land’s End,
   recommending attention to the Inward Light—George Fox parts
   with James Naylor, and has a presentiment of his fall—Major
   Ceely places George Fox and Edward Pyot under arrest—they are
   sent to Launceston jail—put into Doomsdale, and suffer a long
   and cruel imprisonment—a paper against swearing—Peter Ceely’s
   mittimus—George Fox has great service in jail—many are
   convinced and opposers are confounded—experiences some
   remarkable preservations—Edward Pyot writes an excellent letter
   to Judge Glynne on the liberty of the subject, and on the
   injustice and illegality of their imprisonment—Truth spreads in
   the west by the very means taken to prevent it—exhortation and
   warning to magistrates—answer to the Exeter general warrant for
   taking up and imprisoning Friends—exhortation to Friends in the
   ministry—warning to priests and professors—cruel jailer
   imprisoned in Doomsdale, and further judgments upon him
   follow—a Friend offers to lie in prison instead of George
   Fox—Edward Pyot to Major General Desborough, in answer to his
   conditional offer of liberty—George Fox to the same—he and his
   Friends are soon after liberated.                                 250


 CHAPTER X.—1656-1657.—Address to those who are given to pleasures
   and wantonness—to the bowlers in Castle-Green at
   Launceston—George Fox visits Friends imprisoned at Exeter,
   amongst whom is James Naylor, who has apostatized, but
   afterwards returned into the Truth—at a meeting in the orchard
   at Bristol about ten thousand persons are present—Paul Gwin, a
   rude Baptist, creates a disturbance, but is reproved and
   silenced—meeting of two or three thousand persons at N.
   Crisp’s—Justice Stooks prevents the magistrates from
   apprehending George Fox—speaks to the Protector at Hyde Park,
   who invites him to his house—accordingly goes to Whitehall, and
   speaks to the Protector about Friends’ sufferings—travels
   through most parts of the nation after his liberation from
   Launceston jail—this year, 1656, there were seldom fewer than
   one thousand Friends in prison—to Friends on the schism of J.
   Naylor—to Friends to keep up their meetings—on judging the
   ministry, &c.—an answer to a high-flown professor—to
   professors, priests, and teachers on immediate revelation and
   universal grace, &c. &c.—at Cardiff, George Fox sends word to
   some who had run out that “the day of their visitation was
   over”—at Brecknock, his companion, John-ap-John, preaches in
   the streets—at night, there is a great uproar, like that of
   Diana’s craftsmen—at William Gandy’s has a large meeting of two
   or three thousand persons—Cromwell proclaims a fast for rain,
   and is told by George Fox that the drought was a sign of their
   barrenness—concerning the true fast and the false—preaches
   three hours at a great meeting in Radnorshire, and many are
   convinced—their horses are twice robbed of their oats—from a
   high hill sounds the day of the Lord, and foretells where God
   would raise up a people to himself, which came to pass—travels
   through every county in Wales, where there is a brave people,
   who sit under Christ’s teaching—has a large meeting on the top
   of a hill near Liverpool—at Manchester is taken into custody,
   but soon released.                                                323

 CHAPTER XI.—1657.—Exhortation to Friends to take heed to the
   Light of Christ—an expostulation with persecutors—to Friends to
   be valiant for the truth—in parts of Cumberland the priests are
   so forsaken that some steeple-houses stand empty—John
   Wilkinson, the priest, is so deserted, that he sets up a
   meeting in his own house—then a silent meeting, and at last
   joins Friends, and becomes an able minister—George Fox travels
   into Scotland with Colonel Osburn and Robert Widders—the latter
   was a thundering man against the rottenness of the priests’
   hypocrisy and deceit—Lady Hamilton is convinced—the Scotch
   priests raise the war-cry, and draw up their curses, which
   George Fox answers—they are in a rage and panic when he comes
   there, thinking “that all was gone”—some Baptists, with their
   logic and syllogisms, are confuted by George Fox’s logic—he is
   banished from Scotland by the council, but disregards their
   order—George Fox and William Osburn are waylaid by thieves, who
   are admonished by the former, and overawed by the Lord’s
   power—the Highlanders run at them with pitchforks—at Johnstons
   they are banished the town—on hearing that the council of
   Edinburgh had issued warrants against him, George Fox goes
   thither, and is not molested.                                     384


 CHAPTER XII.—1657-1659.—George Fox journeys from Scotland to
   England—dissuades a person from setting up a college at Durham
   to make ministers—has a meeting with Rice Jones and his
   people—attends a general Yearly Meeting for the whole nation,
   held at John Crook’s, which continued three days—address to
   Friends in the ministry—disputes with a Jesuit—writes to Lady
   Claypole—writes to Cromwell respecting the fast on account of
   persecution abroad, whilst there was much of it at home—writes
   a reproof to Parliament for their hypocrisy—speaks to the
   Protector in Hampton-Court Park about Friends’ sufferings—the
   Protector invites Fox to his house—he goes next day, but the
   Protector being sick he does not see him—the Protector died
   soon after—writes to encourage Friends to faithfulness—has a
   foresight of the King’s restoration long before the event
   occurred, as well as several others—Friends are disseized of
   their copyhold lands for refusing to swear—cautions Friends to
   avoid plots, &c.—against bearing arms—great places in the army
   are offered to Friends, but invariably refused—priest Townsend
   fails to substantiate his charge of error and blasphemy against
   George Fox, and is signally defeated—George Fox’s vision of the
   city of London is realized—he gives a final warning to those in
   authority, before their overthrow.                                413


 CHAPTER XIII.—1659-1660.—Address to the Cornish people,
   respecting shipwrecks—the soldiers at Bristol are punished for
   disturbing Friends’ meetings—several thousands attend a general
   meeting at Edward Pyot’s—General Monk also restrains his
   soldiers—great drunkenness at elections for Parliament-men—the
   Yearly Meeting is held at Balby—and a general meeting of
   discipline for several counties held at Skipton—a Friend goes
   naked (divested of the upper garments) through the town,
   declaring truth, and is much abused—general meeting at Arnside
   for three counties—George Fox is committed to Lancaster Castle
   by Major Porter—writes an answer to his mittimus—Margaret Fell
   writes to the magistrates thereon—address on true
   religion—against persecution—to Friends, on the change of
   government—to Charles II., exhorting him to exercise mercy and
   forgiveness towards his enemies, and to restrain
   profaneness—the sheriff of Lancashire’s return to George Fox’s
   writ of _Habeas Corpus_—M. Fell and Ann Curtis speak to the
   King on the subject—the King orders his removal to London by
   _Habeas Corpus_, and there sets him at liberty.                   456


 CHAPTER XIV.—1660-1662.—George Fox writes an epistle of
   consolation to Friends unjustly imprisoned in consequence of
   the insurrection of the Fifth-Monarchy Men—Friends’ declaration
   against war and plots—John Perrot and Charles Bailie create a
   schism—some Friends in New England are put to death, a sense
   whereof is given to George Fox at the time—the King’s mandamus
   to the Governor of New England and others, to restrain them
   from executing Friends—the _Battledore_ is published, showing
   by examples from thirty languages, that “Thou” and “Thee” are
   proper to one person—on true worship—George Fox disputes with
   some Jesuits, and with _all_ other sects—John Perrot’s heresy
   condemned—on judicial swearing—George Fox and Richard
   Hubberthorn write to the King, showing the number of Friends
   imprisoned prior to, and during the first year of the
   Restoration, and the number who died in prison during the
   Commonwealth—Thomas Sharman, jailer at Derby, convinced, and
   writes to George Fox—George Fox applies to Lord D’Aubigny on
   behalf of two Friends imprisoned in the Inquisition at Malta,
   who procures their liberation—the ground and rise of
   persecution set forth—great service at _Bristol_, where also he
   has a vision—visits Capt. Brown and his wife; the former had
   fled from persecution, and was judged in himself, but
   afterwards convinced—George Fox and several others are arrested
   by Lord Beaumont, and sent to Leicester jail—they are suddenly
   liberated—to Friends on the death of Edward Burrough—escapes
   from persecutors—Friends established on Christ, the Rock of
   Ages.                                                             489




                              THE PREFACE;

                                 BEING

            A SUMMARY ACCOUNT OF THE DIVERS DISPENSATIONS OF
                              GOD TO MEN,

FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD TO THAT OF OUR PRESENT AGE, BY THE
    MINISTRY AND TESTIMONY OF HIS FAITHFUL SERVANT, GEORGE FOX, AS AN
    INTRODUCTION TO THE ENSUING JOURNAL.

                                   BY

                             WILLIAM PENN.


         ------------------------------------------------------


Divers have been the dispensations of God since the creation of the
world unto the sons of men; but the great end of all of them has been
the renown of his own excellent name in the creation and restoration of
man: man, the emblem of himself, as a god on earth, and the glory of all
his works. The world began with innocency: all was then good that the
good God had made: and as he blessed the works of his hands, so their
natures and harmony magnified Him their Creator. Then the morning stars
sang together for joy, and all parts of his works said Amen to his law;
not a jar in the whole frame, but man in paradise, the beasts in the
field, the fowl in the air, the fish in the sea, the lights in the
heavens, the fruits of the earth; yea the air, the earth, the water, and
fire worshipped, praised, and exalted his power, wisdom, and goodness! O
holy sabbath! O holy day to the Lord.

But this happy state lasted not long: for man, the crown and glory of
the whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded
against command and duty, as well as interest and felicity; and so fell
below it, lost the divine image, the wisdom, power, and purity he was
made in. By which, being no longer fit for paradise, he was expelled
that garden of God, his proper dwelling and residence, and was driven
out, as a poor vagabond, from the presence of the Lord, to wander in the
earth, the habitation of beasts.

Yet God that made him, had pity on him; for He seeing he was deceived,
and that it was not of malice, or an original presumption in him, but
through the subtilty of the serpent (that had first fallen from his own
state), and by the mediation of the woman, man’s own nature and
companion (whom the serpent had first deluded), in his infinite goodness
and wisdom found out a way to repair the breach, recover the loss, and
restore fallen man again by a nobler and more excellent Adam, promised
to be born of a woman; that as by means of a woman the evil one had
prevailed upon man, by a woman also he should come into the world, who
would prevail against him and bruise his head, and deliver man from his
power; and which, in a signal manner, by the dispensation of the Son of
God in the flesh, in the fulness of time, was personally and fully
accomplished by him, and in him, as man’s Saviour and Redeemer.

But his power was not limited, in the manifestation of it, to that time;
for both before and since his blessed manifestation in the flesh he has
been the light and life, the rock and strength of all that ever feared
God: present with them in their temptations, he followed them in their
travels and afflictions, and supported and carried them through and over
the difficulties that have attended them in their earthly pilgrimage. By
this, Abel’s heart excelled Cain’s, Seth obtained the pre-eminence, and
Enoch walked with God. It was this that strove with the old world, and
which they rebelled against, and which sanctified and instructed Noah to
salvation.

But the outward dispensation that followed the benighted state of man,
after his fall, especially among the patriarchs, was generally that of
angels; as the Scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places
express, as to Abraham, Jacob, &c. The next was that of the law by
Moses, which was also delivered by angels, as the apostle tells us. This
dispensation was much outward, and suited to a low and servile state;
called therefore that of a schoolmaster, to point out and prepare that
people to look and long for the Messiah, who would deliver them from the
servitude of a ceremonious and imperfect dispensation, by knowing the
realities of those mysterious representations in themselves. In this
time the law was written on stone, the temple built with hands, attended
with an outward priesthood, and external rites and ceremonies, that were
shadows of the good things that were to come, and were only to serve
till the Seed came, or the more excellent and general manifestation of
Christ, to whom was the promise, and to all men only in him, in whom it
was Yea and Amen; even life from death, immortality and eternal life.

This the prophets foresaw, and comforted the believing Jews in the
certainty of it; which was the height of the Mosaical dispensation, and
which ended in John’s ministry, the forerunner of the Messiah, as John’s
was finished in him, the fulness of all. And God, that at sundry times
and in divers manners, had spoken to the fathers by his servants the
prophets, spoke then by his Son Christ Jesus, “who is heir of all
things”; being the gospel day, which is the dispensation of sonship;
bringing in thereby a nearer testament and a better hope; even the
beginning of the glory of the latter days, and of the restitution of all
things; yea, the restoration of the kingdom unto Israel.

Now, the Spirit, that was more sparingly communicated in former
dispensations, began to be “poured forth upon all flesh,” according to
the prophet Joel; and the light that shined in darkness, or but dimly
before, the most gracious God caused to shine out of darkness: and the
day-star began to arise in the hearts of believers, giving unto them the
knowledge of God in the face (or appearance) of his Son Christ Jesus.

Now, the poor in spirit, the meek, the true mourners, the hungry and
thirsty after righteousness, the peace-makers, the pure in heart, the
merciful, and the persecuted, came more especially in remembrance before
the Lord, and were sought out and blessed by Israel’s true Shepherd. Old
Jerusalem with her children grew out of date, and the New Jerusalem into
request, the mother of the sons of the gospel day. Wherefore no more at
Old Jerusalem, nor at the mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped,
above other places; for, behold, he is declared and preached a Spirit,
and he will be known as such, and worshipped in the Spirit and in the
Truth. He will come nearer than of old time, and he will write his law
in the heart, and put his fear and Spirit in the inward parts, according
to his promise. Then signs, types, and shadows flew away, the day having
discovered their insufficiency in not reaching to the inside of the cup,
to the cleansing of the conscience; and all elementary services were
expired in and by Him that is the substance of all.

And to this great and blessed end of the dispensation of the Son of God,
did the apostles testify, whom he had chosen and anointed by his Spirit,
to turn the Jews from their prejudice and superstition, and the Gentiles
from their vanity and idolatry, to Christ’s Light and Spirit that shined
in them; that they might be quickened from the sins and trespasses in
which they were dead, to serve the living God in the newness of the
Spirit of life, and walk as children of the light, and of the day, even
the day of holiness: for such “put on Christ,” the light of the world,
“and make no more provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.”
So that the Light, Spirit, and Grace that comes by Christ, and appears
in man, was what the apostles ministered from, and turned people’s minds
unto, and in which they gathered and built up the churches of Christ in
their day. For which cause they advised them not to quench the Spirit,
but wait for the Spirit, and speak by the Spirit, and pray by the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit too, as that which approved them the
truly begotten children of God; “born, not of flesh and blood, or of the
will of man, but of the will of God;” by doing his will, and denying
their own; by drinking of Christ’s cup, and being baptised with his
baptism of self-denial: the way and path that all the heirs of life have
trod to blessedness. But, alas! even in the apostles’ days, those bright
stars of the first magnitude of the Gospel light, some clouds,
foretelling an eclipse of this primitive glory, began to appear, and
several of them gave early caution of it to the Christians of their
time; that even then there was, and yet would be more and more, a
falling away from the power of godliness, and the purity of that
spiritual dispensation, by such as sought to make a fair show in the
flesh, but with whom the offence of the cross ceased; yet with this
comfortable conclusion, that they saw beyond it a more glorious time
than ever, to the true church. Their sight was true, and what they
foretold to the churches, gathered by them in the name and power of
Jesus, came so to pass: for Christians degenerated apace into outsides,
as days, and meats, and divers other ceremonies. And which was worse,
they fell into strife and contention about them, separating one from
another, then envying, and as they had power, persecuting one another,
to the shame and scandal of their common Christianity, and grievous
stumbling and offence to the heathen, among whom the Lord had so long
and so marvellously preserved them. And having got at last the worldly
power into their hands, by kings and emperors embracing the Christian
profession, they changed what they could, the kingdom of Christ, which
is not of this world, into a worldly kingdom; or at least styled the
worldly kingdom that was in their hands the kingdom of Christ, and so
they became worldly, and not true Christians. Then human inventions and
novelties, both in doctrine and worship, crowded fast into the church; a
door being opened thereunto by the grossness and carnality that appeared
then among the generality of Christians; who had long since left the
guidance of God’s meek and heavenly Spirit, and given themselves up to
superstition, will-worship, and voluntary humility. And as superstition
is blind, so it is heady and furious; for all must stoop to its blind
and boundless zeal, or perish by it: in the name of the Spirit,
persecuting the very appearance of the Spirit of God in others, and
opposing that in them which they resisted in themselves, viz., the
Light, Grace, and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; but always under the
notion of innovation, heresy, schism, or some such plausible name.
Though Christianity allows of no name or pretence whatever for
persecuting any man for matters of mere religion; religion being in its
very nature, meek, gentle, and forbearing; and consists of faith, hope,
and charity, which no persecutor can have, whilst he remains a
persecutor; in that a man cannot believe well, or hope well, or have a
charitable or tender regard to another, whilst he would violate his mind
or persecute his body for matters of faith or worship towards his God.

Thus the false church sprang up, and mounted the chair. But though she
lost her nature, she would keep her good name of the Lamb’s bride, the
true church and mother of the faithful; constraining all to receive her
mark, either in the forehead, or right hand, publicly or privately: but
in deed and in truth she was Mystery, Babylon, the mother of harlots;
mother of those that, with all their show and outside of religion, were
adulterated and gone from the Spirit, nature, and life of Christ, and
grown vain, worldly, ambitious, covetous, cruel, &c., which are the
fruits of the flesh, and not of the Spirit.

Now it was that the true church fled into the wilderness, that is, from
superstition and violence, to a retired, solitary, and lonely state;
hidden, and as it were out of sight of men, though not out of the world:
which shows that her wonted visibility was not essential to the being of
a true church in the judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as true a
church in the wilderness, though not as visible and lustrous, as when
she was in her former splendour of profession. In this state many
attempts she made to return, but the waters were yet too high, and her
way blocked up, and many of her excellent children, in several nations
and centuries, fell by the cruelty of superstition, because they would
not fall from their faithfulness to the truth.

The last age did set some steps towards it, both as to doctrine,
worship, and practice. But practice quickly failed, for wickedness
flowed in a little time, as well among the professors of the
Reformation, as those they reformed from; so that by the fruits of
conversation they were not to be distinguished. And the children of the
reformers, if not the reformers themselves, betook themselves very early
to earthly policy and power to uphold and carry on their reformation,
that had been begun with spiritual weapons; which I have often thought
has been one of the greatest reasons the Reformation made no better
progress, as to the life and soul of religion; for whilst the reformers
were lowly and spiritually minded, and trusted in God, and looked to
him, and lived in his fear, and consulted not with flesh and blood, nor
sought deliverance in their own way, there were daily added to the
church such as, one might reasonably say, should be saved. For they were
not so careful to be safe from persecution, as to be faithful under it,
being more concerned to spread the truth by their faith and patience in
tribulation, than to get the worldly power out of their hands, that
inflicted their sufferings upon them; and it will be well if the Lord
suffer them not to fall by the very same way they took to stand. In
doctrine, they were in some things short; in other things, to avoid one
extreme they ran into another; and for worship, there was, for the
generality, more of man than of God. They owned the Spirit, Inspiration,
and Revelation indeed, and grounded their separation and reformation
upon the sense and understanding they received from it, in the reading
of the Scriptures of Truth; and this was their plea, the Scripture was
the text, the Spirit the interpreter, and that to every one for himself.
But yet there was too much of human invention, tradition, and art, that
remained both in praying and preaching, and of worldly authority and
worldly greatness in their ministers, especially in this kingdom,
Sweden, Denmark, and some parts of Germany. God was therefore pleased
among us, to shift from vessel to vessel: and the next remove humbled
the ministry, so that they were more strict in preaching, devout in
praying, and zealous for keeping the Lord’s day, and catechising
children and servants, and repeating at home in their families what they
had heard in public.

But even as these grew into power, they were not only for whipping some
out, but others into the temple; and they appeared rigid in their
spirits, rather than severe in their lives, and more for a party than
for piety; which brought forth another people, that were yet more
retired and select. They would not communicate at large, or in common
with others; but formed churches among themselves of such as could give
some account of their conversion, at least of very promising experiences
of the work of God’s grace upon their hearts, and under mutual
agreements and covenants of fellowship they kept together. These people
were somewhat of a softer temper, and seemed to recommend religion by
the charms of its love, mercy, and goodness, rather than by the terrors
of its judgments and punishments; by which the former party would have
terrified people into religion.

They also allowed greater liberty to prophesy than those before them;
for they admitted any member to speak or pray, as well as their pastor
(whom they always chose, and not the civil magistrate), if such found
anything pressing upon them to either duty, even without the distinction
of clergy or laity; persons of any trade, be it never so low and
mechanical. But alas! even these people suffered great loss: for tasting
of worldly empire, and the favour of princes, and the gain that ensued,
they degenerated but too much. For though they had cried down national
churches, and ministry, and maintenance too, some of them, when it was
their own turn to be tried, fell under the weight of worldly honour and
advantage, got into profitable parsonages too much, and outlived and
contradicted their own principles: and which was yet worse, turned some
of them absolute persecutors of other men for God’s sake, that but so
lately came themselves out of the furnace; which drove many a step
farther, and that was into the water—another baptism, as believing they
were not scripturally baptized; and hoping to find that presence and
power of God in submitting to that ordinance, which they desired and
wanted.

These people made also profession of neglecting, if not renouncing, and
censuring, not only the necessity but use of all human learning as to
the ministry; and all other qualifications to it, besides the helps and
gifts of the Spirit of God, and those natural and common to men; and for
a time they seemed like John of old, a burning and a shining light to
other societies.

They were very diligent, plain, and serious, strong in Scripture, and
bold in profession, bearing much reproach, and contradiction: but that
which others fell by, proved their hurt. For worldly power spoiled them
too; who had enough of it to try them, what they would do if they had
more; and they rested also too much upon their watery dispensation,
instead of passing on more fully to the fire and Holy Ghost, which was
his baptism, who came with a “fan in his hand that he might thoroughly
(and not in part only) purge his floor,” and take away the dross and the
tin of his people, and make a man finer than gold. Withal, they grew
high, rough, and self-righteous, opposing further attainment; too much
forgetting the day of their infancy and littleness, which gave them
something of a real beauty; insomuch that many left them, and all
visible churches and societies, and wandered up and down, as sheep
without a shepherd, and as doves without their mates; seeking their
beloved, but could not find Him (as their souls desired to know him)
whom their souls loved above their chiefest joy.

These people were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by
others; because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they
sometimes met together, not formally to pray or preach, at appointed
times or places, in their own wills, as in times past they were
accustomed to do; but waited together in silence, and as anything rose
in any one of their minds that they thought savoured of a divine spring,
so they sometimes spoke. But so it was, that some of them not keeping in
humility, and in the fear of God, after the abundance of revelation,
were exalted above measure; and for want of staying their minds in an
humble dependence upon Him that opened their understandings to see great
things in his law, they ran out in their own imaginations, and mixing
them with those divine openings, brought forth a monstrous birth, to the
scandal of those that feared God, and waited daily in the temple not
made with hands, for the consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and
circumcision in spirit.

This people obtained the name of Ranters, from their extravagant
discourses and practices. For they interpreted Christ’s fulfilling of
the law for us, to be a discharging of us from any obligation and duty
the law required, instead of the condemnation of the law for sins past,
upon faith and repentance; and that now it was no sin to do that which
before it was a sin to commit, the slavish fear of the law being taken
off by Christ, and all things good that man did, if he did but do them
with the mind and persuasion that it was so. Insomuch that divers fell
into gross and enormous practices; pretending in excuse thereof that
they could, without evil, commit the same act which was sin in another
to do; thereby distinguishing between the action and the evil of it, by
the direction of the mind, and intention in the doing of it. Which was
to make sin superabound by the aboundings of grace, and to turn from the
grace of God into wantonness, a securer way of sinning than before; as
if Christ came not to take away sin, but that we might sin more freely
at his cost, and with less danger to ourselves. I say, this ensnared
divers, and brought them to an utter and lamentable loss, as to their
eternal state; and they grew very troublesome to the better sort of
people, and furnished the looser with an occasion to profane.

It was about that very same time, as you may see in the ensuing annals,
that the eternal, wise, and good God was pleased, in his infinite love,
to honour and visit this benighted and bewildered nation with his
glorious dayspring from on high; yea, with a most sure and certain sound
of the Word of Light and Life, through the testimony of a chosen vessel,
to an effectual and blessed purpose, can many thousands say, Glory be to
the name of the Lord for ever!

For as it reached the conscience and broke the heart, and brought many
to a sense and search, so what people had been vainly seeking _without_,
with much pains and cost, they by this ministry found _within_; where it
was they wanted what they sought for, viz., the right way to peace with
God. For they were directed to the Light of Jesus Christ within them, as
the seed and leaven of the kingdom of God; near all, because _in_ all,
and God’s talent to all; a faithful and true witness and just monitor
_in_ every bosom; the gift and grace of God to life and salvation, that
appears to all, though few regard it. This, the traditional Christian,
conceited of himself, and strong in his own will and righteousness, and
overcome with blind zeal and passion, either despised as a low and
common thing, or opposed as a novelty, under many hard names or
opprobrious terms; denying, in his ignorant and angry mind, any fresh
manifestation of God’s power and Spirit in man in these days, though
never more needed to make true Christians: not unlike those Jews of old,
that rejected the Son of God at the very same time that they blindly
professed to wait for the Messiah to come; because, alas, he appeared
not among them according to their carnal mind and expectation.

This brought forth many abusive books, which filled the greater sort
with envy, and lesser with rage, and made the way and progress of this
blessed testimony strait and narrow indeed to those that received it.
However, God owned his own work, and this testimony did effectually
reach, gather, comfort, and establish, the weary and heavy laden, the
hungry and thirsty, the poor and needy, the mournful and sick of many
maladies, that had spent all upon physicians of no value, and waited for
relief from heaven; help only from above: seeing, upon a serious trial
of all things, nothing else would do but Christ himself, the light of
his countenance, a touch of his garment, and help from his hand, who
cured the poor woman’s issue, raised the centurion’s servant, the
widow’s son, the ruler’s daughter, and Peter’s mother; and like her,
they no sooner felt his power and efficacy upon their souls, than they
gave up to obey him in a testimony to his power, and with resigned wills
and faithful hearts, through all mockings, contradictions, beatings,
prisons, and many other jeopardies that attended them for his blessed
name’s sake.

And truly, they were very many and very great; so that in all human
probability they must have been swallowed up quick of the proud and
boisterous waves that swelled and beat against them; but that the God of
all their tender mercies was with them in his glorious authority, so
that the hills often fled and the mountains melted before the power that
filled them; working mightily for them, as well as in them, one ever
following the other. By which they saw plainly, to their exceeding great
confirmation and comfort, “that all things were possible with him with
whom they had to do.” And that the more that which God required seemed
to cross man’s wisdom, and expose them to man’s wrath, the more God
appeared to help and carry them through all to his glory; insomuch that
if ever any people could say in truth, “Thou art our sun and our shield,
our rock and sanctuary, and by thee we have leaped over a wall, and by
thee we have run through a troop, and by thee we have put the armies of
the aliens to flight,” these people had right to say it. And as God had
delivered their souls of the wearisome burdens of sin and vanity, and
enriched their poverty of spirit, and satisfied their great hunger and
thirst after eternal righteousness, and filled them with the good things
of his own house, and made them stewards of his manifold gifts; so they
went forth to all quarters of these nations, to declare to the
inhabitants thereof, what God had done for them; what they had found,
and where and how they had found it; viz., the way to peace with God;
inviting them to come and see and taste for themselves, the truth of
what they declared unto them.

And as their testimony was to the principle of God in man, the precious
pearl and leaven of the kingdom, as the only blessed means appointed of
God to quicken, convince, and sanctify man; so they opened to them what
it was in itself, and what it was given to them for; how they might know
it from their own spirit, and that of the subtle appearance of the evil
one; and what it would do for all those, whose minds are turned off from
the vanity of the world and its lifeless ways and teachers, and adhere
to this blessed light in themselves, which discovers and condemns sin in
all its appearances, and shows how to overcome it, if minded and obeyed
in its holy manifestations and convictions; giving power to such to
avoid and resist those things that do not please God, and to grow strong
in love, faith, and good works; that so man, whom sin hath made as a
wilderness, overrun with briars and thorns, might become as the garden
of God, cultivated by his Divine power, and replenished with the most
virtuous and beautiful plants of God’s own right hand planting, to his
eternal praise.

But these experimental preachers of glad tidings of God’s truth and
kingdom, could not run when they list, or pray or preach when they
pleased, but as Christ their Redeemer prepared and moved them by his own
blessed Spirit, for which they waited in their services and meetings,
and spoke as that gave them utterance, and which was as those having
authority, and not like the dreaming, dry, and formal Pharisees. And so
it plainly appeared to the serious-minded, whose spiritual eye the Lord
Jesus had in any measure opened; so that to one was given the word of
exhortation, to another the word of reproof, to another the word of
consolation, and all by the same Spirit and in the good order thereof,
to the convincing and edifying of many.

And truly they waxed strong and bold through faithfulness; and by the
power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very fruitful; thousands, in a
short time, being turned to the Truth through their testimony in
ministry and sufferings, insomuch as in most counties, and many of the
considerable towns of England, meetings were settled, and daily there
were added such as should be saved. For they were diligent to plant and
to water, and the Lord blessed their labours with an exceeding great
increase; notwithstanding all the opposition made to their blessed
progress, by false rumours, calumnies, and bitter persecutions; not only
from the powers of the earth, but from every one that listed to injure
and abuse them; so that they seemed indeed to be as poor sheep appointed
to the slaughter, and as a people killed all the day long.

It were fitter for a volume than a preface, but so much as to repeat the
contents of their cruel sufferings from professors as well as from
profane, and from magistrates as well as from the rabble, that it may
well be said of this abused and despised people, they went forth weeping
and sowed in tears, bearing testimony to the precious seed, the seed of
the kingdom, which stands not in words, the finest, the highest that
man’s wit can use, but in power; the power of Christ Jesus, to whom God
the Father hath given all power in heaven and in earth, that he might
rule angels above, and men below; who empowered them, as their work
witnesseth, by the many that were turned through their ministry from
darkness to the light, and out of the broad into the narrow way,
bringing people to a weighty, serious, and godly conversation; the
practice of that doctrine which they taught.

And as without this secret Divine power there is no quickening and
regenerating of dead souls, so the want of this generating and begetting
power and life, is the cause of the little fruit that the many
ministries that have been, and are in the world, bring forth. O that
both ministers and people were sensible of this! My soul is often
troubled for them, and sorrow and mourning compass me about for their
sakes. O that they were wise! O that they would consider, and lay to
heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting
peace!

Two things are to be briefly touched upon; the doctrine they taught, and
the example they led among the people. I have already touched upon their
fundamental principle, which is as the corner-stone of their fabric; and
to speak eminently and properly, their characteristic, or main
distinguishing point or principle, viz., the Light of Christ within, as
God’s gift for man’s salvation. This, I say, is as the root of the
goodly tree of doctrines that grew and branched out from it, which I
shall now mention in their natural and experimental order.

First, Repentance from dead works to serve the living God; which
comprehends three operations, first, a sight of sin; secondly, a sense
and godly sorrow for it; thirdly, an amendment for the time to come.
This was the repentance they preached and pressed, and a natural result
from the principle they turned all people unto. For of light came sight;
and of sight came sense and sorrow; and of sense and sorrow came
amendment of life; which doctrine of repentance leads to justification;
that is, forgiveness of the sins that are past, through Christ, the
alone propitiation; and to the sanctification or purgation of the soul
from the defiling habits of sin present; which is justification in the
complete sense of that word; comprehending both justification from the
guilt of the sins that are past, as if they had never been committed,
through the love and mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the creature’s
being made inwardly just through the cleansing and sanctifying power and
Spirit of Christ revealed in the soul which is commonly called
sanctification.

From hence sprang a second doctrine they were led to declare, as the
mark of the prize of the high calling of all true Christians, viz.,
perfection from sin, according to the Scriptures of Truth, which testify
it to be the end of Christ’s coming, the nature of his kingdom, and for
which his Spirit was given. But they never held a perfection in wisdom
and glory in this life, or from natural infirmities or death, as some
have with a weak or ill mind, imagined and insinuated against them.

This they called a redeemed state, regeneration, or the new birth;
teaching everywhere, according to their foundation, that unless this
work were known, there was no inheriting of the kingdom of God.

Third, to an acknowledgment of eternal rewards and punishments, as they
have good reason; for else of all people, certainly they must be the
most miserable; who for about forty years have been exceedingly great
sufferers for their profession, and in some cases, treated worse than
the worst of men, yea, as the refuse and offscouring of all things.

This was the purport of their doctrine and ministry; which, for the most
part, is what other professors of Christianity pretend to hold in words
and forms, but not in the _power_ of godliness; that has been long lost
by men’s departing from that principle and Seed of Life that is in man,
and which man has not regarded, but lost the sense of; and in and by
which only he can be quickened in his mind to serve the living God in
newness of life. For as the life of religion was lost, and the
generality lived and worshipped God after their own wills, and not after
the will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in the works and
fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which they pressed, was not notion,
but experience, not formality, but godliness; as being sensible in
themselves, through the work of God’s righteous judgments, that without
holiness no man should ever see the Lord with comfort.

Besides these doctrines, and out of them, as the larger branches, there
sprang forth several particular doctrines, that did exemplify and
further explain the truth and efficacy of the general doctrine before
observed, in their lives and examples. As,

I. Communion and loving one another. This is a noted mark in the mouth
of all sorts of people concerning them. “They will meet, they will help
and stick one to another.” Whence it is common to hear some say, “Look
how the Quakers love and take care of one another.” Others less moderate
will say, “The Quakers love none but themselves”; and if loving one
another, and having an intimate communion in religion, and constant care
to meet to worship God and help one another, be any mark of primitive
Christianity, they had it, blessed be the Lord, in an ample manner.

II. To love enemies. This they both taught and practised; for they did
not only refuse to be revenged for injuries done them, and condemned it
as of an unchristian spirit, but they did freely forgive, yea, help and
relieve those that had been cruel to them, when it was in their power to
have been even with them; of which many and singular instances might be
given; endeavouring, through patience, to overcome all injustice and
oppression, and preaching this doctrine as Christian for others to
follow.

III. The sufficiency of truth speaking, according to Christ’s own form
of words, of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, among Christians without swearing,
both from Christ’s express prohibition, “Swear not at all,” Matt. v.;
and for that they being under the tie and bond of truth in themselves
there was both no necessity for an oath, and it would be a reproach to
their Christian veracity to assure their truth by such an extraordinary
way of speaking; but offering at the same time, to be punished to the
full, for false speaking, as others for perjury, if ever guilty of it;
and hereby they exclude with all true, all false and profane swearing;
for which the land did and doth mourn, and the great God was and is not
a little offended with it.

IV. Not fighting but suffering, is another testimony peculiar to this
people; they affirm that Christianity teacheth people “to beat their
swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks, and to
learn war no more,” so that the wolf may lie down with the lamb, and the
lion with the calf, and nothing that destroys be entertained in the
hearts of people; exhorting them to employ their zeal against sin, and
turn their anger against Satan, and no longer war one against another;
because all wars and fightings come of men’s own hearts’ lusts,
according to the apostle James, and not of the meek spirit of Christ
Jesus, who is captain of another warfare, and which is carried on with
other weapons. Thus, as truth-speaking succeeded swearing, so faith and
truth succeeded fighting, in the doctrine and practice of this people.
Nor ought they for this to be obnoxious to civil government, since if
they cannot fight for it, neither can they fight against it; which is no
mean security to the state; nor is it reasonable that people should be
blamed for not doing more for others than they can do for themselves.
And Christianity set aside, if the costs and fruits of war were well
considered, peace, with its inconveniences, is generally preferable. But
though they were not for fighting, they were for submitting to
government; and that, not only for fear, but for conscience’ sake, where
government doth not interfere with conscience; believing it to be an
ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great benefit
to mankind; though it has been their lot, through blind zeal in some,
and interest in others, to have felt the strokes of it with greater
weight and rigour than any other persuasion in this age; whilst they, of
all others (religion set aside) have given the civil magistrate the
least occasion of trouble in the discharge of his office.

V. Another part of the character of this people is, they refuse to pay
tithes, or maintenance to a national ministry, and that for two reasons;
the one is, that they believe all compelled maintenance, even to gospel
ministers, to be unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ’s
command, who said, “Freely you have received, freely give;” at least
that the maintenance of gospel ministers should be free, and not forced.
The other reason of their refusal is, because those ministers are not
gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their foundation, but human
arts and parts; so that it is not matter of humour or sullenness, but
pure conscience towards God, that they cannot help to support national
ministries where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly
become ways of worldly advantage and preferment.

VI. Not to respect persons, was another of their doctrines and
practices, for which they were often buffeted and abused. They affirmed
it to be sinful to give flattering titles, or to use vain gestures and
compliments of respect; though to virtue and authority they ever made a
difference, but after their plain and homely manner, yet sincere and
substantial way; well remembering the example of Mordecai and Elihu, but
more especially the command of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ who
forbade his followers to call men Rabbi, which implies lord and master,
also the fashionable greetings and salutations of those times; that so
self-love and honour, to which the proud mind of man is incident, in his
fallen estate, might not be indulged but rebuked.

VII. They also used the plain language of Thou and Thee, to a single
person, whatever was his degree among men. And indeed the wisdom of God
was much seen, in bringing forth this people in so plain an appearance;
for it was a close and distinguishing test upon the spirit of those they
came among; showing their insides and what predominated, notwithstanding
their high and great profession of religion. This, among the rest,
sounded so harsh to many of them, and they took it so ill, that they
would say, “Thou me, thou my dog; if thou thouest me, I’ll thou thy
teeth down thy throat,” forgetting the language they use to God in their
own prayers, and the common style of the Scriptures, and that it is an
absolute and essential propriety of speech; and what good had their
religion done them, who were so sensibly touched with indignation for
the use of this plain, honest, and true speech?

VIII. They recommended silence by their example, having very few words
upon all occasions; they were at a word in dealing; nor could their
customers with many words tempt them from it; having more regard to
truth than custom, to example than gain. They sought solitude; but when
in company, they would neither use, nor willingly hear, unnecessary as
well as unlawful discourses; whereby they preserved their minds pure and
undisturbed from unprofitable thoughts and diversions; nor could they
humour the custom of “Good night, Good morrow, God speed;” for they knew
the night was good, and the day was good, without wishing of either; and
that in the other expression, the holy name of God was too lightly and
unthinkingly used, and therefore taken in vain. Besides, they were words
and wishes of course, and are usually as little meant, as are love and
service in the custom of cap and knee; and superfluity in those, as well
as in other things, was burdensome to them; and therefore they did not
only decline to use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove
the practice.

IX. For the same reason they forbore drinking to people, or pledging of
them, as the manner of the world is; a practice that is not only
unnecessary, but they thought evil in the tendencies of it; being a
provocation to drinking more than did people good, as well as that it
was in itself vain and heathenish.

X. Their way of marriage is peculiar to them; and is a distinguishing
practice from all other societies professing Christianity. They say that
marriage is an ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join man
and woman in marriage. Therefore they use neither priest nor magistrate,
but the man and woman concerned, take each other as husband and wife, in
the presence of divers credible witnesses, “promising unto each other,
with God’s assistance, to be loving and faithful in that relation, till
death shall separate them.” But, antecedent to all this, they first
present themselves to the Monthly Meeting for the affairs of the church,
where they reside, there declaring their intentions to take one another
as man and wife, if the said meeting have nothing material to object
against it. They are constantly asked the necessary questions,[A] as in
case of parents, or guardians, if they have acquainted them with their
intention, and have their consent, &c. In case it appears they proceeded
orderly, the meeting passes their proposal, and so records it in their
meeting book; and in case the woman is a widow and hath children, due
care is there taken, that provision also be made by her for the orphans
before the said marriage; advising the parties concerned to appoint a
convenient time and place, and to give fitting notice to their
relations, and such friends and neighbours, as they desire should be the
witnesses of their marriage: where they take one another by the hand,
and by name promising reciprocally after the manner before expressed. Of
all which proceedings, a narrative, in the way of certificate, is made,
to which the said parties first set their hands, thereby making it their
act and deed; and then divers of the relations, spectators, and auditors
set their names as witnesses of what they said and signed; which
certificate is afterward registered in the record belonging to the
meeting where the marriage is solemnized. Which regular method has been,
as it deserves, adjudged in courts of law a good marriage where it has
been disputed and contested, for want of the accustomed formality of
priest and ring, &c., which ceremonies they have refused, not out of
humour, but conscience reasonably grounded, inasmuch as no Scripture
example tells us, that the priest had any other part of old time, than
that of a witness among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one
another: and therefore this people look upon it as an imposition, to
advance the power and profits of the clergy. And for the use of the
ring, it is enough to say, that it was a heathenish and vain custom, and
never in practice among the people of God, Jews, or primitive
Christians. The words of the usual form, as “With my body I thee
worship,” &c., are hardly defensible: in short, they are more careful,
exact, and regular than any form now used, and it is free from the
inconveniences other methods are attended with; their care and checks
being so many, and such, that no clandestine marriages can be performed
among them.

XI. It may not be unfit to say something here of their births and
burials, which make up so much of the pomp and solemnity of too many
called Christians. For births, the parents name their own children,
which is usually some days after they are born, and afterward sign a
certificate, for that purpose prepared, of the birth and name of the
child, or children, which is recorded in a proper book, in the Monthly
Meeting, to which the parents belong; avoiding the accustomed ceremonies
and festivals.

XII. Their burials are performed with the same simplicity. If the corpse
of the deceased be near any public meeting place, it is usually carried
thither, for the more convenient reception of those that accompany it to
the ground they bury in, and it so falls out sometimes, that while the
meeting is gathering for the burial, some or other have a word of
exhortation, for the sake of the people there met together: after which,
the body is borne away by the young men, or those that are of their
neighbourhood, or that were most intimate with the deceased party: the
corpse being in a plain coffin, without any covering or furniture upon
it. At the ground, they pause some time before they put the body into
its grave, that if any there should have anything upon them to exhort
the people, they may not be disappointed, and that the relations may the
more retiredly and solemnly take their last leave of the corpse of their
departed kindred, and the spectators have a sense of mortality, by the
occasion then given them to reflect upon their own latter end. Otherwise
they have no set rites or ceremonies on those occasions; neither do the
kindred of the deceased wear mourning, they looking upon it as a worldly
ceremony and piece of pomp; and that what mourning is fit for a
Christian to have, at the departure of a beloved relation or friend,
should be worn in the mind, which is only sensible of the loss; and the
love they had to them, and remembrance of them, to be outwardly
expressed by a respect to their advice, and care of those they have left
behind them, and their love of that they loved. Which conduct of theirs,
though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves nothing of the substance of
things neglected or undone; and as they aim at no more, so that
simplicity of life is what they observe with great satisfaction, though
it sometimes happens not to be without the mockeries of the vain world
they live in.

These things gave them a rough and disagreeable appearance with the
generality; who thought them turners of the world upside down, as indeed
in some sense they were: but in no other than that wherein Paul was so
charged, viz., to bring things back into their primitive and right order
again. For these, and such like practices of theirs, were not the result
of humour, as some have fancied, but a fruit of inward sense, which God,
through his fear, had begotten in them. They did not consider how to
contradict the world, or distinguish themselves; being none of their
business, as it was not their interest; no, it was not the result of
consultation, or a framed design to declare or recommend schism or
novelty. But God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw the
whole world in the same glass of truth; and sensibly discerned the
affections and passions of men, and the rise and tendency of things;
what gratified “the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life, which are not of the Father, but of the world.” And from
thence sprang, in that night of darkness and apostacy, which hath been
over people, through their degeneration from the Light and Spirit of
God, these and many other vain customs; which are seen, by the heavenly
day of Christ which dawns in the soul, to be, either wrong in their
original, or, by time and abuse, hurtful in their practice. And though
these things seemed trivial to some, and rendered this people stingy and
conceited in such persons’ opinions; there was and is more in them than
they were aware of. It was not very easy to our primitive Friends to
make themselves sights and spectacles, and the scorn and derision of the
world; which they easily foresaw must be the consequence of so
unfashionable a conversation in it. But herein was the wisdom of God
seen in the foolishness of these things; first, that they discovered the
satisfaction and concern that people had in and for the fashions of this
world, notwithstanding their pretences to another; in that any
disappointment about them came so very near them, that the greatest
honesty, virtue, wisdom, and ability were unwelcome without them.
Secondly, it seasonably and profitably divided conversation; for making
their society uneasy to their relations and acquaintance, it gave them
the opportunity of more retirement and solitude, wherein they met with
better company, even the Lord God, their Redeemer, and grew strong in
his love, power, and wisdom, and were thereby better qualified for his
service; and the success abundantly showed it: blessed be the name of
the Lord.

And though they were not great and learned in the esteem of this world
(for then they had not wanted followers upon their own credit and
authority), yet they were generally of the most sober of the several
persuasions they were in, and of the most repute for religion; and many
of them of good capacity, substance, and account among men.

And also some among them neither wanted for parts, learning, nor estate;
though then, as of old, not many wise, nor noble, &c., were called, or
at least received the heavenly call; because of the cross that attended
the profession of it in sincerity; but neither do parts or learning make
men the better Christians, though the better orators and disputants; and
it is the ignorance of people about the divine gift that causes that
vulgar and mischievous mistake. Theory and practice, expression and
enjoyment; words and life; are two things. O! it is the penitent, the
reformed, the lowly, the watchful, the self-denying and holy soul that
is the Christian; and that frame is the fruit and work of the Spirit,
which is the life of Jesus; whose life, though hid in God the Father, is
shed abroad in the hearts of them that truly believe. O! that people did
but know this to cleanse them, to circumcise them, to quicken them, and
to make them new creatures indeed; re-created, or re-generated after
Christ Jesus unto good works; that they might live to God and not to
themselves; and offer up living prayers and living praises to the living
God, through his own living Spirit, in which he is only to be worshipped
in this gospel day. O! that they that read me could but feel me; for my
heart is affected with this merciful visitation of the Father of Lights
and Spirits, to this poor nation, and the whole world, through the same
testimony. Why should the inhabitants thereof reject it? Why should they
lose the blessed benefit of it? Why should they not turn to the Lord
with all their hearts, and say, from the heart, “Speak, Lord, for now
thy poor servants hear? O! that thy will may be done, thy great, thy
good and holy will, in earth as it is in heaven: do it in us, do it upon
us, do what thou wilt with us, for we are thine and desire to glorify
thee our Creator, both for that, and because thou art our Redeemer; for
thou art redeeming us from the earth; from the vanities and pollutions
of it, to be a peculiar people unto thee.” O! this were a brave day for
England, if so she could say in truth. But alas, the case is otherwise,
for which some of thine inhabitants, O land of my nativity I have
mourned over thee with bitter wailing and lamentation. Their heads have
been indeed as waters, and their eyes as fountains of tears, because of
thy transgression and stiffneckedness; because thou wilt not hear and
fear, and return to the Rock, even thy Rock, O England! from whence thou
wert hewn. But be thou warned, O land of great profession, to receive
him into thy heart; behold at that door it is, he hath stood so long
knocking, but thou wilt yet have none of him. O! be thou awakened, lest
Jerusalem’s judgments do swiftly overtake thee, because of Jerusalem’s
sins that abound in thee. For she abounded in formality, but made void
the weighty things of God’s law, as thou daily doest.

She withstood the Son of God in the flesh, and thou resistest the Son of
God in the Spirit. He would have gathered her as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered
thee out of thy lifeless profession, and have brought thee to inherit
substance, to have known his power and kingdom, for which he often
knocked within by his grace and Spirit, and without, by his servants and
witnesses; but thou wouldst not be gathered. On the contrary, as
Jerusalem of old persecuted the manifestation of the Son of God in the
flesh, and crucified him, and whipped and imprisoned his servants; so
hast thou, O land, crucified to thyself afresh the Lord of life and
glory, and done despite to his Spirit of grace; slighting the fatherly
visitation, and persecuting the blessed dispensers of it by thy laws and
magistrates; though they have early and late pleaded with thee in the
power and Spirit of the Lord; in love and meekness, that thou mightest
know the Lord and serve him, and become the glory of all lands.

But thou hast evilly entreated and requited them. Thou hast set at
naught all their counsel, and wouldst have none of their reproof, as
thou shouldst have done. Their appearance was too strait, and their
qualifications were too mean for thee to receive them; like the Jews of
old, that cried, “Is not this the carpenter’s son, and are not his
brethren among us; which of the scribes, of the learned, (the orthodox)
believe in him?” prophesying their fall in a year or two, and making and
executing severe laws to bring it to pass; by endeavouring to terrify
them out of their holy way, or destroying them for abiding faithful to
it. But thou hast seen how many governments that rose against them, and
determined their downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and
that they are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable
people among the middle sort of thy numerous inhabitants. And
notwithstanding the many difficulties, without and within, which they
have laboured under, since the Lord God Eternal first gathered them,
they are an increasing people, the Lord still adding unto them, in
divers parts, such as shall be saved, if they persevere to the end. And
to thee were they, and are they lifted up as a standard, and as a city
set upon a hill, and to the nations round about thee, that in their
light thou mayest come to see light, even in Christ Jesus, the Light of
the world; and therefore thy Light, and Life too, if thou wouldst but
turn from thy many evil ways, and receive and obey it. For in the “Light
of the Lamb, must the nations of them that are saved walk,” as the
Scriptures testify.

Remember, O nation of great profession! how the Lord has waited upon
thee since the days of reformation, and the many mercies and judgments
with which he has pleaded with thee; awake and arise out of thy deep
sleep, and yet hear his Word in thy heart, that thou mayest live.

Let not this thy day of visitation pass over thy head, nor neglect thou
so great salvation as is this which is come to thy house, O England! For
why shouldst thou die, O land that God desires to bless? Be assured it
is He that has been in the midst of this people, in the midst of thee,
and no delusion, as thy mistaken teachers have made thee believe. And
this thou shalt find by their marks and fruits, if thou wilt consider
them in the spirit of moderation.

I. They were changed men themselves before they went about to change
others. Their hearts were rent as well as their garments; and they knew
the power and work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great
alteration it made, and their stricter course of life, and more godly
conversation, that immediately followed upon it.

II. They went not forth, or preached in their own time and will, but in
the will of God, and spoke not their own studied matter, but as they
were opened and moved of his Spirit, with which they were well
acquainted in their own conversion; which cannot be expressed to carnal
men so as to give them any intelligible account; for to such it is as
Christ said, “like the blowing of the wind, which no man knows whence it
cometh, or whither it goeth;” yet this proof and seal went along with
their ministry, that many were turned from their lifeless professions,
and the evil of their ways, to the knowledge of God, and a holy life, as
thousands can witness. And as they freely received what they had to say
from the Lord, so they freely administered it to others.

III. The bent and stress of their ministry was conversion to God,
regeneration, and holiness; not schemes of doctrines and verbal creeds,
or new forms of worship; but a leaving off in religion, the superfluous,
and reducing the ceremonious and formal part, and pressing earnestly the
substantial, the necessary and profitable part; as all upon a serious
reflection must and do acknowledge.

IV. They directed people to a principle by which all that they asserted,
preached and exhorted others to, might be wrought in them, and known to
them, through experience, to be true; which is a high and distinguishing
mark of the truth of their ministry; both that they knew what they said,
and were not afraid of coming to the test. For as they were bold from
certainty, so they required conformity upon no human authority, but upon
conviction, and the conviction of this principle, which they asserted
was in them that they preached unto, and unto that they directed them,
that they might examine and prove the reality of those things which they
had affirmed of it, and its manifestation and work in man. And this is
more than many ministries in the world pretend to. They declare of
religion, say many things true in words, of God, Christ, and the Spirit,
of holiness and heaven; that all men should repent and mend their lives,
or they will go to hell, &c. But which of them all pretend to speak of
their own knowledge and experience; or ever directed men to a divine
principle or agent, placed of God in man, to help him; and how to know
it, and wait to feel its power to work that good and acceptable will of
God in them?

Some of them indeed have spoken of the Spirit and the operations of it
to sanctification, and the performance of worship to God; but _where_
and _how_ to find it, and wait in it to perform this duty, was yet as a
mystery reserved for this further degree of reformation. So that this
people did not only in words more than equally press repentance,
conversion, and holiness, but did it knowingly and experimentally; and
directed those to whom they preached to a sufficient principle, and told
them where it is, and by what tokens they might know it, and which way
they might experience the power and efficacy of it to their soul’s
happiness; which is more than theory and speculation, upon which most
other ministries depend; for here is certainty,—a bottom upon which man
may boldly appear before God in the great day of account.

V. They reached to the inward state and condition of people, which is an
evidence of the virtue of their principle, and of their ministering from
it, and not from their own imaginations, glosses, or comments upon
Scripture. For nothing reaches the heart, but what is from the heart, or
pierces the conscience, but what comes from a living conscience:
insomuch that as it hath often happened, where people have under secrecy
revealed their state or condition to some choice friends for advice or
ease, they have been so particularly directed in the ministry of this
people, that they have challenged their friends with discovering their
secrets, and telling the preachers their cases. Yea, the very thoughts
and purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly detected, that
they have, like Nathaniel, cried, out of this inward appearance of
Christ, “Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.” And
those that have embraced this divine principle have found this mark of
its truth and divinity (that the woman of Samaria did of Christ when in
the flesh, to be the Messiah, viz.), “it had told them all that ever
they had done;” shown them their insides, the most inward secrets of
their hearts; and laid judgment to the line and righteousness to the
plummet; of which thousands can at this day give in their witness. So
that nothing has been affirmed by this people of the power and virtue of
this heavenly principle, that such as have turned to it have not found
true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they
have seen of the power, purity, wisdom, mercy, and goodness of God
herein.

VI. The accomplishments with which this principle fitted, even some of
the meanest of this people, for their work and service; furnishing some
of them with an extraordinary understanding in divine things, and an
admirable fluency and taking way of expression, which gave occasion to
some to wonder, saying of them, as of their Master, “Is not this such a
mechanic’s son? how came he by this learning?” As from thence others
took occasion to suspect and insinuate they were Jesuits in disguise,
who have had the reputation of learned men for an age past, though there
was not the least ground of truth for any such reflection.

VII. They came forth, low, and despised, and hated, as the primitive
Christians did, and not by the help of worldly wisdom or power, as
former reformations in part did: but in all things, it may be said, this
people were brought forth in the cross, in a contradiction to the ways,
worships, fashions, and customs of this world; yea, against wind and
tide, that so no flesh might glory before God.

VIII. They could have no design to themselves in this work, thus to
expose themselves to scorn and abuse, to spend and be spent; leaving
wife and children, house and land, and all that can be accounted dear to
men, with their lives in their hands, being daily in jeopardy, to
declare this primitive message, revived in their spirits by the good
Spirit and power of God, viz., “That God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all; and that he has sent his Son a light into the world to
enlighten all men in order to salvation; and that they that say they
have fellowship with God and are his children and people, and yet walk
in darkness, viz., in disobedience to the light in their consciences,
and after the vanity of this world, lie, and do not the truth. But that
all such as love the light, and bring their deeds to it, and walk in the
light, as God is in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son should
cleanse them from all sin.”

IX. Their known great constancy and patience in suffering for their
testimony, in all the branches of it, and that, sometimes unto death, by
beatings, bruisings, long and crowded imprisonments, and noisome
dungeons. Four of them in New England dying by the hands of the
executioner, purely for preaching amongst that people; besides
banishments and excessive plunders and sequestrations of their goods and
estates, almost in all parts, not easily to be expressed, and less to be
endured, but by those that have the support of a good and glorious
cause: refusing deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as often as
it was offered to them.

X. That they did not only not show any disposition to revenge, when it
was at any time in their power, but forgave their cruel enemies; showing
mercy to those that had none for them.

XI. Their plainness with those in authority; not unlike the ancient
prophets, not fearing to tell them to their faces of their private and
public sins; and their prophecies to them of their afflictions and
downfall, when in the top of their glory: also of some national
judgments, as of the plague, and fire of London, in express terms, and
likewise particular ones to divers persecutors, which accordingly
overtook them, and which were very remarkable in the places where they
dwelt, and in time they may be made public for the glory of God.

Thus, reader, thou seest this people in their rise, principles,
ministry, and progress, both their general and particular testimony, by
which thou mayest be informed how and upon what foot they sprung, and
became so considerable a people. It remains next that I show also their
care, conduct, and discipline, as a Christian and reformed Society, that
they might be found living up to their own principles and profession.
And this, the rather, because they have hardly suffered more in their
character from the unjust charge of error, than by the false imputation
of disorder; which calumny indeed has not failed to follow all the true
steps that were ever made to reformation, and under which reproach none
suffered more than the primitive Christians themselves, that were the
honour of Christianity, and the great lights and examples of their own
and succeeding ages.

This people increasing daily, both in town and country, a holy care fell
upon some of the elders among them, for the benefit and service of the
church. And the first business in their view, after the example of the
primitive saints, was the exercise of charity; to supply the necessities
of the poor, and answer the like occasions. Wherefore collections were
early and liberally made for that and divers other services in the
church, and entrusted with faithful men, fearing God, and of good
report, who were not weary in well-doing; adding often of their own, in
large proportions, which they never brought to account, or desired
should be known, much less restored to them, that none might want, nor
any service be retarded or disappointed.

They were also very careful that every one that belonged to them,
answered their profession in their behaviour among men upon all
occasions; that they lived peaceably, and were in all things good
examples. They found themselves engaged to record their sufferings and
services; and in case of marriage, which they could not perform in the
usual methods of the nation, but among themselves, they took care that
all things were clear between the parties and all others. And it was
rare then, that any one entertained such inclinations to a person on
that account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some very
weighty and eminent friends among them, that they might have a sense of
the matter; looking to the counsel and unity of their brethren as of
great moment to them. But because the charge of the poor, the number of
orphans, marriages, sufferings, and other matters multiplied, and that
it was good that the churches were in some way and method of proceeding
in such affairs among them, to the end they might the better correspond
upon occasion, where a member of one meeting might have to do with one
of another; it pleased the Lord, in his wisdom and goodness, to open the
understanding of the first instrument of this dispensation of life,
about a good and orderly way of proceeding; and he felt a holy concern
to visit the churches in person throughout this nation, to begin and
establish it among them; and by his epistles the like was done in other
nations and provinces abroad; which he also afterwards visited, and
helped in that service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of
him.

Now the care, conduct, and discipline I have been speaking of, and which
are now practised among this people, are as followeth:—

This godly elder, in every county where he travelled, exhorted them,
that some out of every meeting of worship, should meet together once in
the month, to confer about the wants and occasions of the church. And as
the case required, so those monthly meetings were fewer or more in
number in every respective county; four or six meetings of worship
usually making one monthly meeting of business. And accordingly the
brethren met him from place to place, and began the said meetings, viz.,
for the Poor; Orphans; Orderly Walking; Integrity to their Profession;
Births, Marriages, Burials, Sufferings, &c. And that these monthly
meetings should, in each county, make up one quarterly meeting, where
the most zealous and eminent friends of the county should assemble to
communicate, advise, and help one another, especially when any business
seemed difficult, or a monthly meeting was tender of determining a
matter.

Also these quarterly meetings should digest the reports of the monthly
meetings, and prepare one for the county, against the yearly meeting, in
which the quarterly meetings resolve, which is held yearly in London;
where the churches in this nation and other nations[1] and provinces
meet, by chosen members of their respective counties, both mutually to
communicate their church affairs, and to advise, and be advised in any
depending case to edification; also to provide a requisite stock for the
discharge of general expenses for general services in the church, not
needful to be here particularized.

Footnote 1:

  At present (1891), there are eleven Yearly Meetings on the American
  continent also, in association with each other, and with that of
  London.

At these meetings any of the members of the churches may come if they
please, and speak their minds freely, in the fear of God, to any matter;
but the mind of each meeting therein represented is chiefly understood,
as to particular cases, in the sense delivered by the persons deputed or
chosen for that purpose.

During their yearly meeting, to which their other meetings refer in
their order and resolve themselves, care is taken by a select number,
for that service chosen by the general assembly, to draw up the
minutes[2] of the said meeting, upon the several matters that have been
under consideration therein, to the end that the respective quarterly
and monthly meetings may be informed of all proceedings, together with a
general exhortation to holiness, unity, and charity. Of all which
proceedings in yearly, quarterly, and monthly meetings, due record is
kept by some one appointed for that service, or that hath voluntarily
undertaken it. These meetings are opened, and usually concluded, in
their solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to
answer them with as signal evidences of his love and presence, as in any
of their meetings for worship.

Footnote 2:

  This is not now quite correct. A committee still draws up the General
  Epistle; but the minutes of the transactions of the meeting are made
  as matters occur during its several sittings.

It is further to be noted, that in these solemn assemblies for the
church’s service, there is no one who presides among them after the
manner of the assemblies of other people; Christ only being their
president, as he is pleased to appear in life and wisdom in any one or
more of them, to whom, whatever be their capacity or degree, the rest
adhere with a firm unity, not of authority but conviction, which is the
divine authority and way of Christ’s power and Spirit in his people:
making good his blessed promise, “that he would be in the midst of his,
where and whenever they were met together in his name, even to the end
of the world.” So be it.

Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of authority is
exercised by this people, upon such members of their society, as
correspond not in their lives with their profession, and that are
refractory to this good and wholesome order settled among them; and the
rather, because they have not wanted their reproach and suffering from
some tongues, upon this occasion, in a plentiful manner.

The power they exercise is such as Christ has given to his own people,
to the end of the world, in the persons of his disciples, viz., “to
oversee, exhort, reprove,” and after long suffering and waiting upon the
disobedient and refractory, “to disown them, as any more of their
communion, or that they will any longer stand charged in the sight and
judgment of God or men, with their conversation or behaviour as one of
them until they repent.” The subject matter about which this authority,
in any of the foregoing branches of it, is exercised, is first, in
relation to common and general practice; and secondly, about those
things that more strictly refer to their own character and profession,
and distinguish them from all other professors of Christianity; avoiding
two extremes upon which many split, viz., persecution and libertinism;
that is, a coercive power to whip people into the temple; that such as
will not conform, though against faith and conscience, shall be punished
in their persons or estates; or leaving all loose and at large, as to
practice, unaccountable to all but God and the magistrate. To which
hurtful extreme nothing has more contributed than the abuse of church
power, by such as suffer their passions and private interests to prevail
with them to carry it to outward force and corporal punishment—a
practice they have been taught to dislike, by their extreme sufferings,
as well as their known principle for an universal liberty of conscience.

On the other hand, they equally dislike an independency in society, an
unaccountableness in practice and conversation to the terms of their own
communion, and to those that are the members of it. They distinguish
between imposing any practice that immediately regards faith or worship
(which is never to be done, nor suffered, or submitted unto), and
requiring Christian compliance with those methods that only respect
church-business in its more civil part and concern, and that regard the
discreet and orderly maintenance of the character of the society, as a
sober and religious community. In short, what is for the promotion of
holiness and charity, that men may practice what they profess, live up
to their own principles, and not be at liberty to give the lie to their
own profession, without rebuke, is their use and limit of church power.
They compel none to them, but oblige those that are of them to walk
suitably, or they are denied by them; that is all the mark they set upon
them, and the power they exercise, or judge a Christian society can
exercise, upon those that are the members of it.

The way of their proceeding against one who has lapsed or transgressed
is this. He is visited by some of them, and the matter of fact laid home
to him, be it any evil practice against known and general virtue, or any
branch of their particular testimony, which he, in common, professeth
with them. They labour with him in much love and zeal for the good of
his soul, the honour of God, and reputation of their profession, to own
his fault and condemn it, in as ample a manner as the evil or scandal
was given by him; which, for the most part, is performed by some written
testimony under the party’s hand; and if it so happen that the party
proves refractory, and is not willing to clear the truth they profess
from the reproach of his or her evil-doing or unfaithfulness, they,
after repeated entreaties and due waiting for a token of repentance,
give forth a paper to disown such a fact, and the party offending;
recording the same as a testimony of their care for the honour of the
truth they profess.

And if such shall clear their profession and themselves, by sincere
acknowledgment of their fault, and godly sorrow for so doing, they are
received and looked upon again as members of their communion. For as
God, so his true people, upbraid no man after repentance.

This is the account I had to give of the people of God called Quakers,
as to their rise, appearance, principles, and practices, in this age of
the world, both with respect to their faith and worship, discipline and
conversation. And I judge it very proper in this place, because it is to
preface the Journal of the first blessed and glorious instrument of this
work, and for a testimony to him in his singular qualifications and
services, in which he abundantly excelled in this day, and which are
worthy to be set forth as an example to all succeeding times; to the
glory of the most high God, and for a just memorial to that worthy and
excellent man, his faithful servant and apostle to this generation of
the world.

I am now come to the third head or branch of my Preface, viz., the
instrumental author. For it is natural for some to say, Well, here is
the people and work, but where and who was the man, the instrument? he
that in this age was sent to begin this work and people? I shall, as God
shall enable me, declare who and what he was, not only by report of
others, but from my own long and most inward converse, and intimate
knowledge of him; for which my soul blesseth God, as it hath often done;
and I doubt not, that by the time I have discharged myself of this part
of my Preface, my serious readers will believe I had good cause so to
do.

The blessed instrument of this work in this day of God, of whom I am now
about to write, was GEORGE FOX, distinguished from another of that name,
by that other’s addition of Younger to his name in all his writings; not
that he was so in years, but that he was so in the truth; but he was
also a worthy man, witness, and servant of God in his time.

But this George Fox was born in Leicestershire, about the year 1624. He
descended of honest and sufficient parents, who endeavoured to bring him
up, as they did the rest of their children, in the way and worship of
the nation; especially his mother, who was a woman accomplished above
most of her degree in the place where she lived. But from a child he
appeared of another frame of mind than the rest of his brethren; being
more religious, inward, still, solid, and observing, beyond his years,
as the answers he would give, and the questions he would put upon
occasion, manifested to the astonishment of those that heard him,
especially in divine things.

His mother taking notice of his singular temper, and the gravity,
wisdom, and piety that very early shined through him, refusing childish
and vain sports and company, when very young, she was tender and
indulgent over him, so that from her he met with little difficulty. As
to his employment, he was brought up in country business: and as he took
most delight in sheep, so he was very skilful in them; an employment
that very well suited his mind in several respects, both from its
innocency and solitude; and was a just figure of his after ministry and
service.

I shall not break in upon his own account, which is by much the best
that can be given, and therefore desire, what I can, to avoid saying any
thing of what is said already, as to the particular passages of his
coming forth; but, in general, when he was somewhat above twenty, he
left his friends, and visited the most retired and religious people in
those parts; and some there were in this nation, who waited for the
consolation of Israel night and day; as Zacharias, Anna, and good old
Simeon did of old time. To these he was sent, and these he sought out in
the neighbouring counties, and among them he sojourned till his more
ample ministry came upon him. At this time he taught, and was an example
of silence, endeavouring to bring them from self-performances,
testifying and turning to the Light of Christ within them, and
encouraging them to wait in patience to feel the power of it to stir in
their hearts, that their knowledge and worship of God might stand in the
power of an endless life, which was to be found in the Light, as it was
obeyed in the manifestation of it in man. “For in the Word was Life, and
that Life is the Light of men,” Life in the Word, Light in men—and Life
in men too, as the Light is obeyed; the children of the Light living in
the Life of the Word, by which the Word begets them again to God, which
is the regeneration and new birth, without which there is no coming unto
the kingdom of God; and which, whoever comes to, is greater than John,
that is, than John’s dispensation, which was not that of the kingdom,
but the consummation of the legal, and forerunning of the gospel
dispensation. Accordingly, several meetings were gathered in those
parts; and thus his time was employed for some years.

In 1652, he being in his usual retirement to the Lord upon a very high
mountain, in some of the higher parts of Yorkshire, as I take it, his
mind exercised towards the Lord, he had a vision of the great work of
God in the earth, and of the way that he was to go forth to begin it. He
saw people as thick as motes in the sun, that should in time be brought
home to the Lord; that there might be but one shepherd and one sheepfold
in all the earth. There his eye was directed northward, beholding a
great people that should receive him and his message in those parts.
Upon this mountain he was moved of the Lord to sound forth his great and
notable day, as if he had been in a great auditory, and from thence went
north, as the Lord had shown him; and in every place where he came, if
not before he came to it, he had his particular exercise and service
shown to him, so that the Lord was his leader indeed; for it was not in
vain that he travelled, God in most places sealing his commission with
the convincement of some of all sorts, as well publicans as sober
professors of religion. Some of the first and most eminent of them which
are at rest, were Richard Farnsworth, James Naylor, William Dewsbury,
Francis Howgill, Edward Burrough, John Camm, John Audland, Richard
Hubberthorn, T. Taylor, John Aldam, T. Holmes, Alexander Parker, William
Simpson, William Caton, John Stubbs, Robert Widders, John Burnyeat,
Robert Lodge, Thomas Salthouse, and many more worthies, that cannot be
well here named, together with divers yet living of the first and great
convincement, who, after the knowledge of God’s purging judgments in
themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel and
receive power from on high to speak in his name (which none else rightly
can, though they may use the same words), felt the divine motions, and
were frequently drawn forth, especially to visit the public assemblies,
to reprove, inform, and exhort them; sometimes in markets, fairs,
streets, and by the highway-side, calling people to repentance, and to
turn to the Lord with their hearts as well as their mouths; directing
them to the Light of Christ within them, to see, examine, and consider
their ways by, and to eschew the evil, and do the good and acceptable
will of God. They suffered great hardships for this their love and
goodwill, being often put in the stocks, stoned, beaten, whipped, and
imprisoned, though honest men and of good report where they lived, that
had left wives and children, and houses and lands, to visit them with a
living call to repentance. And though the priests generally set
themselves to oppose them, and write against them, and insinuated most
false and scandalous stories to defame them, stirring up the magistrates
to suppress them, especially in those northern parts; yet God was
pleased so to fill them with his living power, and give them such an
open door of utterance in his service, that there was a mighty
convincement over those parts.

And through the tender and singular indulgence of Judge Bradshaw and
Judge Fell, who were wont to go that circuit in the infancy of things,
the priests were never able to gain the point they laboured for, which
was to have proceeded to blood, and, if possible, Herod-like, by a cruel
exercise of the civil power, to have cut them off and rooted them out of
the country. Especially Judge Fell, who was not only a check to their
rage in the course of legal proceedings, but otherwise upon occasion,
and finally countenanced this people; for his wife receiving the truth
with the first, it had that influence upon his spirit, being a just and
wise man, and seeing in his own wife and family a full confutation of
all the popular clamours against the way of truth, that he covered them
what he could, and freely opened his doors, and gave up his house to his
wife and her friends, not valuing the reproach of ignorant or
evil-minded people, which I here mention to his and her honour, and
which will be, I believe, an honour and a blessing to such of their name
and family, as shall be found in that tenderness, humility, love, and
zeal for the truth and people of the Lord.

That house was for some years at first, till the truth had opened its
way in the southern parts of this island, an eminent receptacle of this
people. Others of good note and substance in those northern counties,
had also opened their houses with their hearts, to the many publishers,
that in a short time the Lord had raised to declare his salvation to the
people, and where meetings of the Lord’s messengers were frequently
held, to communicate their services and exercises, and comfort and edify
one another in their blessed ministry.

But lest this may be thought a digression, having touched upon this
before, I return to this excellent man; and for his personal qualities,
both natural, moral, and divine, as they appeared in his converse with
his brethren, and in the church of God, take as follows:—

I. He was a man that God endued with a clear and wonderful depth, a
discerner of others’ spirits, and very much a master of his own. And
though the side of his understanding which lay next to the world, and
especially the expression of it, might sound uncouth and unfashionable
to nice ears, his matter was nevertheless very profound; and would not
only bear to be often considered, but the more it was so, the more
weighty and instructing it appeared. And as abruptly and brokenly as
sometimes his sentences would fall from him, about divine things, it is
well known they were often as texts to many fairer declarations. And
indeed it showed, beyond all contradiction, that God sent him; that no
arts or parts had any share in the matter or manner of his ministry; and
that so many great, excellent, and necessary truths as he came forth to
preach to mankind, had therefore nothing of man’s wit or wisdom to
recommend them; so that as to man he was an original, being no man’s
copy. And his ministry and writings show they are from one that was not
taught of man, nor had learned what he said by study. Nor were they
notional or speculative, but sensible and practical truths, tending to
conversion and regeneration, and the setting up of the kingdom of God in
the hearts of men; and the way of it was his work. So that I have many
times been overcome in myself, and been made to say, with my Lord and
Master upon the like occasion; “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent of
this world, and revealed them to babes.” For many times hath my soul
bowed in an humble thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any
of the wise and learned of this world to be the first messenger, in our
age, of his blessed truth to men; but that he took one that was not of
high degree, or elegant speech, or learned after the way of this world,
that his message and work he sent him to do, might come with less
suspicion or jealousy of human wisdom and interest, and with more force
and clearness upon the consciences of those that sincerely sought the
way of truth in the love of it. I say, beholding with the eye of my
mind, which the God of heaven had opened in me, the marks of God’s
finger and hand visibly, in this testimony, from the clearness of the
principle, the power and efficacy of it, in the exemplary sobriety,
plainness, zeal, steadiness, humility, gravity, punctuality, charity,
and circumspect care in the government of church affairs, which shined
in his and their life and testimony that God employed in this work, it
greatly confirmed me that it was of God, and engaged my soul in a deep
love, fear, reverence, and thankfulness for his love and mercy therein
to mankind; in which mind I remain, and shall, I hope, to the end of my
days.

II. In his testimony or ministry, he much laboured to open truth to the
people’s understandings, and to bottom them upon the principle and
principal, Christ Jesus, the Light of the world, that by bringing them
to something that was of God in themselves, they might the better know
and judge of him and themselves.

III. He had an extraordinary gift in opening the Scriptures. He would go
to the marrow of things, and show the mind, harmony, and fulfilling of
them with much plainness, and to great comfort and edification.

IV. The mystery of the first and second Adam, of the fall and
restoration, of the law and gospel, of shadows and substance, of the
servant’s and Son’s state, and the fulfilling of the Scriptures in
Christ, and by Christ, the true Light, in all that are his through the
obedience of faith, were much of the substance and drift of his
testimonies. In all which he was witnessed to be of God, being sensibly
felt to speak that which he had received of Christ, and which was his
own experience, in that which never errs nor fails.

V. But above all he excelled in prayer. The inwardness and weight of his
spirit, the reverence and solemnity of his address and behaviour, and
the fewness and fulness of his words, have often struck, even strangers,
with admiration, as they used to reach others with consolation. The most
awful, living, reverent frame I ever felt or beheld, I must say, was his
in prayer. And truly it was a testimony he knew and lived nearer to the
Lord than other men; for they that know Him most, will see most reason
to approach him with reverence and fear.

VI. He was of an innocent life, no busy-body, nor self-seeker, neither
touchy nor critical; what fell from him was very inoffensive if, not
very edifying. So meek, contented, modest, easy, steady, tender, it was
a pleasure to be in his company. He exercised no authority but over
evil, and that everywhere and in all; but with love, compassion, and
long-suffering. A most merciful man, as ready to forgive, as unapt to
take or give an offence. Thousands can truly say, he was of an excellent
spirit and savour among them, and because thereof, the most excellent
spirits loved him with an unfeigned and unfading love.

VII. He was an incessant labourer; for in his younger time, before his
many great and deep sufferings and travels had enfeebled his body for
itinerant services, he laboured much in the word, and doctrine, and
discipline in England, Scotland, and Ireland, turning many to God, and
confirming those that were convinced of the truth, and settling good
order as to church affairs among them. And towards the conclusion of his
travelling services, between the years 1671 and 1677, he visited the
churches of Christ in the plantations in America, and in the United
Provinces, and Germany, as his following Journal relates, to the
convincement and consolation of many. After that time he chiefly resided
in and about the city of London; and besides the services of his
ministry, which were frequent and serviceable, he wrote much, both to
them that are within, and those that are without, the communion. But the
care he took of the affairs of the church in general was very great.

VIII. He was often where the records of the affairs of the church are
kept, and the letters from the many meetings of God’s people over all
the world, where settled, come upon occasions; which letters he had read
to him, and communicated them to the meeting that is weekly[3] held
there for such services; and he would be sure to stir them up to
discharge them, especially in suffering cases, showing great sympathy
and compassion upon all such occasions, carefully looking into the
respective cases, and endeavouring speedy relief, according to the
nature of them. So that the churches, or any of the suffering members
thereof, were sure not to be forgotten or delayed in their desires, if
he were there.

Footnote 3:

  Called the Meeting for Sufferings, and now held monthly, except
  exigencies require more frequent sittings.

IX. As he was unwearied, so he was undaunted in his services for God and
his people; he was no more to be moved to fear than to wrath. His
behaviour at Derby, Lichfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell, at
Launceston, Scarborough, Worcester, and Westminster-Hall, with many
other places and exercises, did abundantly evidence it to his enemies as
well as his friends.

But as in the primitive times, some rose up against the blessed apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to
the hope of the gospel, who became their greatest trouble; so this man
of God had his share of suffering from some that were convinced by him,
who through prejudice or mistake ran against him, as one that sought
dominion over conscience; because he pressed by his presence or
epistles, a ready and zealous compliance with such good and wholesome
things as tended to an orderly conversation about the affairs of the
church, and in their walking before men. That which contributed much to
this ill work, was, in some, a begrudging of this meek man the love and
esteem he had and deserved in the hearts of the people; and weakness in
others, that were taken with their groundless suggestions of imposition
and blind obedience.

They would have had every man independent; that as he had the principle
in himself, he should only stand and fall to that, and nobody else; not
considering that the principle is one in all; and though the measure of
light or grace might differ, yet the nature of it was the same; and
being so, they struck at the spiritual unity, which a people, guided by
the same principle, are naturally led into; so that what is evil to one,
is so to all, and what is virtuous, honest, and of good report to one,
is so to all, from the sense and savour of the one universal principle
which is common to all, and, which the disaffected also profess to be,
the root of all true Christian fellowship, and that Spirit into which
the people of God drink, and come to be spiritually-minded, and of one
heart and one soul.

Some weakly mistook good order in the government of church affairs, for
discipline in worship, and that it was so pressed or recommended by him
and other brethren. And they were ready to reflect the same things that
Dissenters had very reasonably objected upon the national churches, that
have coercively pressed conformity to their respective creeds and
worships. Whereas these things related wholly to conversation, and the
outward (and as I may say) civil part of the church, that men should
walk up to the principles of their belief, and not be wanting in care
and charity. But though some have stumbled and fallen through mistakes,
and an unreasonable obstinacy, even to a prejudice; yet, blessed be God,
the generality have returned to their first love, and seen the work of
the enemy, that loses no opportunity or advantage by which he may check
or hinder the work of God, disquiet the peace of his church, and chill
the love of his people to the truth and one to another; and there is
hope of divers of the few that are yet at a distance.

In all these occasions, though there was no person the discontented
struck so sharply at as this good man, he bore all their weakness and
prejudice, and returned not reflection for reflection; but forgave them
their weak and bitter speeches, praying for them that they might have a
sense of their hurt, see the subtilty of the enemy to rend and divide,
and return into their first love that thought no ill.

And truly, I must say, that though God had visibly clothed him with a
divine preference and authority, and indeed his very presence expressed
a religious majesty, yet he never abused it; but held his place in the
church of God with great meekness, and a most engaging humility and
moderation. For upon all occasions, like his blessed Master, he was a
servant to all; holding and exercising his eldership, in the invisible
power that had gathered them, with reverence to the Head and care over
the body; and was received only in that spirit and power of Christ, as
the first and chief elder in this age; who, as he was therefore worthy
of double honour, so for the same reason it was given by the faithful of
this day; because his authority was inward and not outward, and that he
got it and kept it by the love of God, and power of an endless life. I
write my knowledge and not report, and my witness is true, having been
with him for weeks and months together on divers occasions, and those of
the nearest and most exercising nature, and that by night and by day, by
sea and by land, in this and in foreign countries: and I can say I never
saw him out of his place, or not a match for every service or occasion.
For in all things he acquitted himself like a man, yea, a strong man, a
new and heavenly-minded man; a divine and a naturalist, and all of God
Almighty’s making. I have been surprised at his questions and answers in
natural things; that whilst he was ignorant of useless and sophistical
science, he had in him the foundation of useful and commendable
knowledge, and cherished it everywhere. Civil, beyond all forms of
breeding, in his behaviour; very temperate, eating little, and sleeping
less, though a bulky person.

Thus he lived and sojourned among us: and as he lived, so he died;
feeling the same eternal power, that had raised and preserved him, in
his last moments. So full of assurance was he, that he triumphed over
death; and so even in his spirit to the last, as if death were hardly
worth notice or a mention; recommending to some with him, the despatch
and dispersion of an epistle, just before written to the churches of
Christ throughout the world, and his own books; but above all, Friends,
and, of all Friends, those in Ireland and America, twice over saying,
“Mind poor Friends in Ireland and America.”

And to some that came in and inquired how he found himself, he answered,
“Never heed, the Lord’s power is over all weakness and death; the Seed
reigns, blessed be the Lord:” which was about four or five hours before
his departure out of this world. He was at the great meeting near
Lombard Street on the first day of the week, and it was the third
following, about ten at night, when he left us, being at the house of
Henry Goldney at the same court. In a good old age he went, after having
lived to see his children’s children, to many generations, in the truth.
He had the comfort of a short illness, and the blessing of a clear sense
to the last; and we may truly say, with a man of God of old, that “being
dead, he yet speaketh;” and though absent in body, he is present in
spirit; neither time nor place being able to interrupt the communion of
saints, or dissolve the fellowship of the spirits of the just. His works
praise him, because they are to the praise of Him that wrought by him;
for which his memorial is, and shall be blessed. I have done, as to this
part of my Preface, when I have left this short epitaph to his name:
“Many sons have done virtuously in this day; but, dear George, thou
excellest them all.”

And now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way this blessed man
was sent of God to turn us into, suffer, I beseech you, the word of
exhortation, as well fathers as children, and elders as young men. The
glory of this day, and foundation of the hope that has not made us
ashamed since we were a people, you know, is that blessed principle of
Light and Life of Christ which we profess, and direct all people to, as
the great instrument and agent of man’s conversion to God. It was by
this we were first touched, and effectually enlightened as to our inward
state, which put us upon the consideration of our latter end, causing us
to set the Lord before our eyes, and to number our days, that we might
apply our hearts to wisdom. In that day we judged not after the sight of
the eye, or after the hearing of the ear; but according to the light and
sense this blessed principle gave us, we judged and acted in reference
to things and persons, ourselves and others, yea, towards God our Maker.
For being quickened by it in our inward man, we could easily discern the
difference of things; and feel what was right and what was wrong, and
what was fit and what not, both in reference to religious and civil
concerns. That being the ground of the fellowship of all saints, it was
in that our fellowship stood. In this we desired to have a sense one of
another, and acted towards one another, and all men, in love,
faithfulness, and fear.

In the feeling of the motions of this principle we drew near to the
Lord, and waited to be prepared by it, that we might feel those drawings
and movings before we approached the Lord in prayer, or opened our
mouths in ministry. And in our beginning and ending with this, stood our
comfort, service, and edification. And as we ran faster, or fell short,
we made burdens for ourselves to bear; our service finding in ourselves
a rebuke instead of an acceptance, and in lieu of “Well done,” “Who hath
required this at your hands?” In that day we were an exercised people;
our very countenances and deportment declared it.

Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for ourselves,
especially the young convinced. Often had we the burden of the word of
the Lord to our neighbours, relations, and acquaintance; and sometimes
strangers also. We were in travail for one another’s preservation; not
seeking but shunning occasions of any coldness or misunderstanding,
treating one another as those that believed and felt God present; which
kept our conversation innocent, serious, and weighty, guarding ourselves
against the cares and friendships of the world. We held the truth in the
spirit of it, and not in our own spirits, or after our own wills and
affections. These were bowed and brought into subjection, insomuch that
it was visible to them that knew us. We did not think ourselves at our
own disposal, to go where we list, or say or do what we list, or when we
list. Our liberty stood in the liberty of the Spirit of Truth; and no
pleasure, no profit, no fear, no favour, could draw us from this
retired, strict and watchful frame. We were so far from seeking
occasions of company, that, we avoided them what we could, pursuing our
own business with moderation, instead of meddling with other people’s
unnecessarily.

Our words were few and savoury, our looks composed and weighty, and our
whole deportment very observable. True it is, that this retired and
strict sort of life from the liberty of the conversation of the world,
exposed us to the censures of many, as humourists, conceited and
self-righteous persons, &c.; but it was our preservation from many
snares, to which others were continually exposed from the prevalency of
the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, that
wanted no occasions or temptations to excite them abroad in the converse
of the world.

I cannot forget the humility and chaste zeal of that day. O how constant
at meetings, how retired in them, how firm to Truth’s life, as well as
Truth’s principles! and how entire and united in our communion, as
indeed became those that profess One Head, even Christ Jesus the Lord!

This being the testimony and example the man of God before mentioned was
sent to declare and leave amongst us, and we having embraced the same as
the merciful visitation of God to us, the word of exhortation at this
time is, that we continue to be found in the way of this testimony with
all zeal and integrity, and so much the more, by how much the day
draweth near.

And first, as to you, my beloved and much honoured brethren in Christ,
that are in the exercise of the ministry: Oh, feel Life in your
ministry! Let Life be your commission, your well-spring and treasury on
all such occasions, else, you will know, there can be no begetting to
God, since nothing can quicken or make people alive to God, but the Life
of God: and it must be a ministry in and from Life, that enlivens any
people to God. We have seen the fruit of all other ministries, by the
few that are turned from the evil of their ways. It is not our parts or
memory, the repetition of former openings in our own will and time, that
will do God’s work. A dry, doctrinal ministry, however sound in words,
can reach but the ear, and is but a dream at the best. There is another
soundness, that is soundest of all, viz., Christ the power of God. This
is the key of David, that opens and none shuts, and shuts, and none can
open; as the oil to the lamp, and the soul to the body, so is that to
the best of words: which made Christ to say, “My words they are spirit,
and they are life;” that is, they are from life and therefore they make
you alive, that receive them. If the disciples that had lived with Jesus
were to stay at Jerusalem till they received it, so must we wait to
receive before we minister, if we will turn people from darkness to
light, and from Satan’s power to God.

I fervently bow my knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you may always be like-minded, that you may ever wait reverently
for the coming and opening of the Word of Life, and attend upon it in
your ministry and service, that you may serve God in his Spirit. And be
it little, or be it much, it is well; for much is not too much, and the
least is enough, if from the motion of God’s Spirit; and without it
verily, ever so little is too much, because to no profit.

For it is the spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the ministry of
his servants, that teacheth his people to profit; and to be sure, so far
as we take him along with us in our services, so far we are profitable,
and no farther. For if it be the Lord that must work all things in us,
and for our own salvation, much more is it the Lord, that must work in
us, for the conversion of others. If therefore it was once a cross to us
to speak, though the Lord required it at our hands, let it never be so
to be silent, when he does not.

It is one of the most dreadful sayings in the book of God, that “he that
adds to the words of the prophecy of this book, God will add the plagues
written in this book.” To keep back the counsel of God is as terrible;
for “he that takes away from the words of the prophecy of this book, God
shall take away his part out of the book of life.” And truly, it has
great caution in it to those that use the name of the Lord, to be well
assured that the Lord speaks, that they may not be found of the number
of those that add to the words of the testimony of prophecy, which the
Lord giveth them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the same, both
being so very offensive to God.

Wherefore, brethren, let us be careful neither to out-go our Guide, nor
yet loiter behind him; since he that makes haste may miss his way, and
he that stays behind, lose his Guide: for even those that have received
the word of the Lord, had need wait for wisdom, that they may see how to
divide the word aright; which plainly implieth, that it is possible for
one that hath received the word of the Lord, to miss in the division and
application of it, which must come from an impatiency of spirit, and a
self-working, which makes an unsound and dangerous mixture; and will
hardly beget a right-minded, living people to God.

I am earnest in this, above all other considerations, as to public
brethren, well knowing how much it concerns the present and future
state, and preservation of the church of Christ Jesus, that has been
gathered and built up by a living and powerful minister, that the
ministry be held, preserved, and continued in the manifestations,
motions, and supplies, of the same life and power, from time to time.

And wherever it is observed that any one does minister more from gifts
and parts than life and power, though they have an enlightened and
doctrinal understanding, let them in time be advised and admonished for
their preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a
self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and to hew out
unto themselves cisterns that will hold no living waters; and by degrees
draw others from waiting upon the gift of God in themselves, and to feel
it in others, in order to their strength and refreshment, to wait upon
them, and to turn from God to man again, and so to make shipwreck of the
faith once delivered to the saints, and of a good conscience towards
God; which are only kept by that Divine gift of life, that begat the
one, and awakened and sanctified the other in the beginning.

Nor is it enough that we have known the Divine gift, and in it have
reached to the spirits in prison, and been the instruments of the
convincing of others of the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor
in ourselves, and as depending upon the Lord as ever; since no memory,
no repetitions of former openings, revelations, or enjoyments, will
bring a soul to God, or afford bread to the hungry, or water to the
thirsty, unless life go with what we say; and that must be waited for.

O that we may have no other fountain, treasury or dependence! that none
may presume at any rate to act of themselves for God; because they have
long acted from God; that we may not supply want of waiting with our own
wisdom, or think that we may take less care, and more liberty in
speaking, than formerly; and that where we do not feel the Lord by his
power to open us and enlarge us, whatever be the expectation of the
people, or has been our customary supply and character, we may not
exceed or fill up the time with our own.

I hope we shall ever remember who it was that said, “Of yourselves you
can do nothing;” our sufficiency is in Him. And if we are not to speak
our own words, or take thought what we shall say to men in our defence,
when exposed for our testimony, surely we ought to speak none of our own
words, or take thought what we shall say in our testimony and ministry
in the name of the Lord to the souls of the people; for then of all
times, and of all other occasions, should it be fulfilled in us, “for it
is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that speaketh in
you.”

And indeed, the ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its analogy
and agreement with the birth of the Spirit; that as no man can inherit
the kingdom of God unless he be born of the Spirit, so no ministry can
beget a soul to God but that which is from the Spirit. For this, as I
said before, the disciples waited before they went forth; and in this
our elder brethren, and messengers of God in our day, waited, visited,
and reached to us. And having begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or
seek to be made perfect in the flesh. For what is the flesh to the
Spirit, or the chaff to the wheat? And if we keep in the Spirit, we
shall keep in the unity of it, which is the ground of true fellowship.
For by drinking into that one Spirit, we are made one people to God, and
by it we are continued in the unity of the faith, and the bond of peace.
No envying, no bitterness, no strife, can have place with us. We shall
watch always for good, and not for evil, over one another and rejoice
exceedingly and not begrudge one another’s increase in the riches of the
grace with which God replenisheth his faithful servants.

And, brethren, as to you is committed the dispensation of the oracles of
God, which give you frequent opportunities, and great place with the
people among whom you travel, I beseech you that you would not think it
sufficient to declare the word of life in their assemblies, however
edifying and comfortable such opportunities may be to you and them. But,
as was the practice of the man of God before mentioned, in great
measure, when among us, inquire the state of the several churches you
visit; who among them are afflicted or sick, who are tempted, and if any
are unfaithful or obstinate; and endeavour to issue those things in the
wisdom and power of God, which will be a glorious crown upon your
ministry. As that prepares your way in the hearts of the people to
receive you as men of God, so it gives you credit with them to do them
good by your advice in other respects. The afflicted will be comforted
by you; the tempted, strengthened; the sick, refreshed; the unfaithful,
convicted and restored; and such as are obstinate, softened and fitted
for reconciliation: which is clenching the nail, and applying and
fastening the general testimony by that particular care of the several
branches of it, in reference to them more immediately concerned in it.

For though good and wise men, and elders too, may reside in such places,
who are of worth and importance in the general, and in other places; yet
it does not always follow, that they may have the room they deserve in
the hearts of the people they live among; or some particular occasion
may make it unfit for him or them to use that authority. But you that
travel as God’s messengers, if they receive you in the greater, shall
they refuse you in the less? And if they own the general testimony, can
they withstand the particular application of it in their own cases? Thus
ye will show yourselves workmen indeed, and carry your business before
you to the praise of His name that hath called you from darkness to
light, that you might turn others from Satan’s power unto God and his
kingdom, which is _within_. And O that there were more of such faithful
labourers in the vineyard of the Lord!—Never more need since the day of
God.

Wherefore I cannot but cry and call aloud to you, that have been long
professors of the truth, and know the truth in the convincing power of
it, and have had a sober conversation among men, yet content yourselves
only to know truth for yourselves, to go to meetings, and exercise an
ordinary charity in the church, and an honest behaviour in the world,
and limit yourselves within those bounds; feeling little or no concern
upon your spirits for the glory of the Lord in the prosperity of his
truth in the earth, more than to be glad that others succeed in such
service. Arise ye in the name and power of the Lord Jesus! Behold how
white the fields are unto harvest, in this and other nations, and how
few able and faithful labourers there are to work therein! Your country
folks, neighbours, and kindred, want to know the Lord and his truth, and
to walk in it. Does nothing lie at your door upon their account? Search
and see, and lose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at hand. I do
not judge you, there is one that judgeth all men, and his judgment is
true. You have mightily increased in your outward substance; may you
equally increase in your inward riches, and do good with both, while you
have a day to do good. Your enemies would once have taken what you had
from you, for his name’s sake, in whom you have believed; wherefore he
has given you much of the world in the face of your enemies. But, O let
it be your servant and not your master—your diversion rather than your
business! Let the Lord be chiefly in your eye, and ponder your ways, and
see if God has nothing more for you to do; and if you find yourselves
short in your account with him, then wait for his preparation, and be
ready to receive the word of command, and be not weary of well-doing,
when you have put your hand to the plough; and assuredly you shall reap
(if you faint not) the fruit of your heavenly labour in God’s
everlasting kingdom.

And you, young convinced ones, be you entreated, and exhorted to a
diligent and chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his blessed
manifestation and appearance of himself to you. Look not out, but
within. Let not another’s liberty be your snare. Neither act by
imitation, but sense and feeling of God’s power in yourselves. Crush not
the tender buddings of it in your souls, nor overrun in your desires,
and warmness of affections, the holy and gentle motions of it. Remember
it is a still voice that speaks to us in this day, and that it is not to
be heard in the noises and hurries of the mind; but it is distinctly
understood in a retired frame. Jesus loved and chose solitudes; often
going to mountains, to gardens, and sea-sides, to avoid crowds and
hurries, to show his disciples it was good to be solitary, and sit loose
to the world. Two enemies lie near your states, imagination and liberty;
but the plain, practical, living, holy truth, that has convinced you,
will preserve you, if you mind it in yourselves, and bring all thoughts,
imaginations, and affections to the test of it, to see if they are
wrought in God, or of the enemy, or your ownselves. So will a true
taste, discerning, and judgment, be preserved to you, of what you should
do and leave undone. And in your diligence and faithfulness in this way
you will come to inherit substance: and Christ, the eternal wisdom, will
fill your treasury. And when you are converted, as well as convinced,
then confirm your brethren, and be ready to every good word and work,
that the Lord shall call you to; that you may be to his praise, who has
chosen you to be partakers, with the saints in light, of a kingdom that
cannot be shaken, an inheritance incorruptible, in eternal habitations.

And now, as for you that are the children of God’s people, a great
concern is upon my spirit for your good; and often are my knees bowed to
the God of your fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of
the same divine life and power, that has been the glory of this day;
that a generation you may be to God, a holy nation and a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, when all our heads are laid in the dust.
O you young men and women, let it not suffice you, that you are the
children of the people of the Lord! you must also be born again, if you
will inherit the kingdom of God. Your fathers are but such after the
flesh, and could but beget you in the likeness of the first Adam; but
you must be begotten into the likeness of the second Adam by a spiritual
generation. And therefore look carefully about you, O ye children of the
children of God! consider your standing, and see what you are in
relation to this divine kindred, family, and birth. Have you obeyed the
Light, and received and walked in the Spirit, that is the incorruptible
Seed of the Word and kingdom of God, of which you must be born again?
God is no respecter of persons. The father cannot save or answer for the
child, or the child for the father, but “in the sin thou sinnest, thou
shalt die; and in the righteousness thou doest, through Jesus Christ,
thou shalt live;” for it is the willing and obedient that shall eat the
good of the land. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; such as all
nations and people sow, such they shall reap at the hand of the just
God. And then your many and great privileges, above the children of
other people, will add weight in the scale against you, if you choose
not the way of the Lord. For you have had line upon line, and precept
upon precept, and not only good doctrine, but good example; and which is
more, you have been turned to, and acquainted with, a principle in
yourselves, which others have been ignorant of; and you know, you may be
as good as you please, without the fear of frowns and blows, or being
turned out of doors and forsaken of father and mother for God’s sake,
and his holy religion, as has been the case of some of your fathers, in
the day they first entered into this holy path. If you, after hearing
and seeing the wonders that God has wrought in the deliverance and
preservation of them, through a sea of troubles, and the manifold
temporal, as well as spiritual blessings, that he has filled them with,
in the sight of their enemies, should neglect and turn your backs upon
so great and so near a salvation, you would not only be most ungrateful
children to God and them, but must expect that God will call the
children of those that knew him not, to take the crown out of your
hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful judgment at the hand of the
Lord. But O, that it may never be so with any of you! The Lord forbid,
saith my soul.

Wherefore, O ye young men and women, look to the rock of your fathers!
choose the God of your fathers. There is no other God but he; no other
Light but his; no other grace but his, nor Spirit but his, to convince
you, quicken, and comfort you: to lead, guide, and preserve you to God’s
everlasting kingdom. So will you be possessors, as well as professors,
of the truth; embracing it not only by education, but judgment and
conviction, from a sense begotten in your souls, through the operation
of the eternal Spirit and power of God in your hearts, by which you may
come to be the seed of Abraham through faith, and the circumcision not
made with hands, and so heirs of the promise made to the fathers of an
incorruptible crown; that (as I said before) a generation you may be to
God, holding up the profession of the blessed truth in the life and
power of it. For formality in religion is nauseous to God and good men;
and the more so, where any form or appearance has been new and peculiar,
and begun and practised upon a principle, with an uncommon zeal and
strictness. Therefore, I say, for you to fall flat and formal, and
continue the profession, without that salt and savour, by which it is
come to obtain a good report among men, is not to answer God’s love, nor
your parents’ care, nor the mind of truth in yourselves, nor in those
that are without; who, though they will not obey the truth, have sight
and sense enough to see if they do, that make a profession of it. For
where the divine virtue of it is not felt in the soul, and waited for,
and lived in, imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves,
and detect the unfaithfulness of such persons, and that their insides
are not seasoned with the nature of that holy principle which they
profess.

Wherefore, dear children, let me entreat you to shut your eyes at the
temptations and allurements of this low and perishing world, and not
suffer your affections to be captivated by those lusts and vanities that
your fathers, for truth’s sake, long since turned their backs upon. But
as you believe it to be the truth, receive it into your hearts, that you
may become the children of God; so that it may never be said of you, as
the Evangelist writes of the Jews of his time, that Christ, the true
Light, “came to his own, but his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the children of God; which
were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God.” A most close and comprehensive passage to this
occasion. You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in
that you bear the name of God’s people, by being the children and
wearing the form of God’s people; so that he, by his light in you, may
be said to come to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your back
upon it, and walk after the vanities of your minds, you will be of those
that receive him not, which, I pray God, may never be your case and
judgment; but that you may be thoroughly sensible of the many and great
obligations you lie under to the Lord for his love, and to your parents
for their care; and with all your heart, and all your soul, and all your
strength, turn to the Lord, to his gift and Spirit in you, and hear his
voice, and obey it, that you may seal to the testimony of your fathers,
by the truth and evidence of your own experience; that your children’s
children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a
faithful example, as well as record of the truth of God unto them. So
will the grey hairs of your dear parents yet alive, go down to the grave
with joy, to see you the posterity of truth, as well as theirs, and that
not only their nature but spirit shall live in you when they are gone.

I shall conclude this Preface with a few words to those that are not of
our communion, into whose hands this may come; especially those of our
own nation.

Friends, as you are the sons and daughters of Adam, and my brethren
after the flesh, many and earnest have been my desires and prayers to
God on your behalf, that you may come to know your Creator to be your
Redeemer and Restorer to the image that, through sin, you have lost, by
the power and Spirit of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he hath given for the
light and life of the world. And O that you who are called Christians,
would receive him into your heart! for there it is you want him, and at
that door he stands knocking, that you should let him in, but you do not
open to him; you are full of other guests, so that a manger is his lot
among you now, as well as of old. Yet you are full of profession, as
were the Jews when he came among them, who knew him not, but rejected
and evilly entreated him. So that if you come not to the possession and
experience of what you profess, all your formality in religion will
stand you in no stead in the day of God’s judgment.

I beseech you ponder with yourselves your eternal condition, and see
what title, what ground and foundation you have for your Christianity;
if more than a profession, and an historical belief of the gospel. Have
you known the baptism of fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the fan of Christ
that winnows away the chaff,—the carnal lusts and affections?—that
divine leaven of the kingdom, that, being received, leavens the whole
lump of man, sanctifying him throughout, in body, soul, and spirit? If
this be not the ground of your confidence, you are in a miserable state.

You will say, perhaps, that though you are sinners, and live in the
daily commission of sin, and are not sanctified, as I have been
speaking, yet you have faith in Christ, who has borne the curse for you,
and in him you are complete by faith; his righteousness being imputed to
you.

But, my friends, let me entreat you not to deceive yourselves in so
important a point, as is that of your immortal souls. If you have _true_
faith in Christ, your faith will make you clean, it will sanctify you:
for the saints’ faith was their victory. By this they overcame sin
within, and sinful men without. And if thou art in Christ, thou walkest
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, whose fruits are manifest.
Yea, thou art a new creature, new made, new fashioned after God’s will
and mould; old things are done away, and, behold, all things are become
new; new love, desires, will, affections, and practices. It is not any
longer thou that livest, thou disobedient, carnal, worldly one; but it
is Christ that liveth in thee; and to live is Christ, and to die is thy
eternal gain; because thou art assured, that “thy corruptible shall put
on incorruption, and thy mortal immortality:” and that thou hast a
glorious house, eternal in the heavens, that will never wax old or pass
away. All this follows being in Christ, as the sensation of heat follows
fire, and light the sun.

Therefore have a care how you presume to rely upon such a notion, as
that you are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen nature. For what
communion hath light with darkness, or Christ with Belial? Hear what the
beloved disciple tells you; “If we say we have fellowship with God, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.” That is, if we go on in
a sinful way, are captivated by our carnal affections, and are not
converted to God, we walk in darkness, and cannot possibly have any
fellowship with God. Christ clothes them with his righteousness, that
receive his grace in their hearts, and deny themselves, and take up his
cross daily, and follow him. Christ’s righteousness makes men inwardly
holy, of holy minds, wills, and practices. It is nevertheless Christ’s,
because we have it; for it is ours, not by nature, but by faith and
adoption. It is the gift of God. But still, though not ours, as of or
from ourselves, for in that sense it is Christ’s, for it is of and from
him; yet it is ours, and must be ours in possession, efficacy, and
enjoyment, to do us any good, or Christ’s righteousness will profit us
nothing. It was after this manner, that he was made to the primitive
Christians, righteousness, sanctification, justification, and
redemption; and if ever you will have the comfort, kernel, and marrow of
the Christian religion, thus you must come to learn and obtain it.

Now, my friends, by what you have read, and will read in what follows,
you may perceive that God has visited a poor people among you with this
saving knowledge and testimony; whom he has upheld and increased to this
day, notwithstanding the fierce opposition they have met withal. Despise
not the meanness of this appearance; it was, and yet is (we know) a day
of small things, and of small account with too many; and many hard and
ill names are given to it; but it is of God; it came from Him because it
leads to Him. This we know, but we cannot make another know it, as we
know it, unless he will take the same way to know it that we took. The
world talks of God; but what do they do? They pray for power, but reject
the principle in which it is. If you would know God, and worship and
serve God as you should do, you must come to the means he has ordained
and given for that purpose. Some seek it in books, some in learned men,
but what they look for is _in themselves_, yet they overlook it. The
voice is too still, the Seed too small, and the Light shineth in
darkness. They are abroad, and so cannot divide the spoil; but the woman
that lost her silver, found it at home, after she had lighted her candle
and swept her house. Do you so too, and you shall find what Pilate
wanted to know, viz., Truth.

The Light of Christ within, who is the Light of the world (and so a
light to you, that tells you the truth of your condition), leads all
that take heed unto it, out of darkness into God’s marvellous light; for
light grows upon the obedient. It is sown for the righteous, and their
way is a shining light, that shines forth more and more to the perfect
day.

Wherefore, O friends, turn in, turn in, I beseech you! Where is the
poison, there is the antidote; there you want Christ, and there you must
find him; and, blessed be God, there you may find him. “Seek and you
shall find,” I testify for God; but then you must seek aright, with your
whole heart, as men that seek for their lives, yea, for their eternal
lives; diligently, humbly, patiently, as those that can taste no
pleasure, comfort, or satisfaction in anything else, unless you find him
whom your souls want, and desire to know and love above all. O, it is a
travail, a spiritual travail! let the carnal, profane world think and
say as it will. And through this path you must walk to the city of God,
that has eternal foundations, if ever you will come there.

And what does this blessed Light do for you? 1. It sets all your sins in
order before you; it detects the spirit of this world in all its baits
and allurements, and shows how man came to fall from God, and the fallen
estate he is in. 2. It begets a sense and sorrow, in such as believe in
it, for this fearful lapse. You will then see Him distinctly whom you
have pierced, and all the blows and wounds you have given him by your
disobedience; and how you have made him to serve with your sins, and you
will weep and mourn for it, and your sorrow will be a godly sorrow. 3.
After this it will bring you to the holy watch, to take care that you do
so no more, that the enemy surprise you not again. Then thoughts as well
as words and works, will come to judgment, which is the way of holiness,
in which the redeemed of the Lord do walk. Here you will come to love
God above all, and your neighbours as yourselves. Nothing hurts, nothing
harms, nothing makes afraid on this holy mountain; now you come to be
Christ’s indeed, for you are his in nature and spirit, and not your own.
And when you are thus Christ’s, then Christ is yours, and not before;
and here communion with the Father and with the Son you will know, and
the efficacy of the blood of cleansing, even the blood of Jesus Christ,
that immaculate Lamb, which speaketh better things than the blood of
Abel, and which cleanseth from all sin the consciences of those that,
through the living faith, come to be sprinkled with it from dead works
to serve the living God.

To conclude; behold the testimony and doctrine of the people called
Quakers! Behold their practice and discipline! and behold the blessed
man and men that were sent of God in this excellent work and service!
all which will be more particularly expressed in the ensuing annals of
the man of God; which I do heartily recommend to my reader’s most
serious perusal, and beseech Almighty God, that his blessing may go
along with it, to the convincing of many, as yet strangers to this holy
dispensation, and also to the edification of the church of God in
general; who, for his manifold and repeated mercies and blessings to his
people, in this day of his great love, is worthy ever to have the glory,
honour, thanksgiving, and renown; and be it rendered and ascribed, with
fear and reverence, through Him in whom he is well pleased, his beloved
Son and Lamb, our Light and Life, that sits with him upon the throne,
world without end. Amen,

Says one whom God has long since mercifully favoured with his fatherly
    visitation, and who was not disobedient to the heavenly vision and
    call; to whom the way of Truth is more lovely and precious than
    ever, and who knowing the beauty and benefit of it above all worldly
    treasure, has chosen it for his chiefest joy; and therefore
    recommends it to thy love and choice, because he is with great
    sincerity and affection thy soul’s friend,

                                                       WILLIAM PENN.








              -------------------------------------------








[For the testimonies respecting George Fox, which were here inserted in
    former editions of this work, see Appendix at the conclusion of Vol.
    II.]


                         JOURNAL OF GEORGE FOX.


                         ---------------------

                               CHAPTER I.

1624-1647.—George Fox’s birth and parentage—his gravity and piety in
    youth. Apprenticed to a shoemaker, who is also a grazier, &c.—his
    integrity in dealing. Refuses to drink healths—his exercises of mind
    commence—he lives retired—is tempted to despair. His sorrows
    continue for some years—has a sense of Christ’s sufferings. Confutes
    a people who held women to be devoid of souls—begins to travel on
    Truth’s account—meets with Elizabeth Hooton—fasts often, and retires
    to solitary places with his Bible—his exercises intermit. Sees why
    none but Christ could speak to his condition. Visits a woman who had
    fasted twenty-two days—first declares the Truth at Dukinfield and
    Manchester. Preaches at a great meeting at Broughton. His troubles
    wear off, and he weeps for joy—sees things which cannot be
    uttered—is reported to have a discerning spirit—overcomes his
    temptations through the power of Christ.


That all may know the dealings of the Lord with me, and the various
exercises, trials, and troubles through which he led me, in order to
prepare and fit me for the work unto which he had appointed me, and may
thereby be drawn to admire and glorify his infinite wisdom and goodness,
I think fit (before I proceed to set forth my public travels in the
service of Truth), briefly to mention how it was with me in my youth,
and how the work of the Lord was begun, and gradually carried on in me,
even from my childhood.

I was born in the month called July, 1624, at DRAYTON-IN-THE-CLAY, in
LEICESTERSHIRE. My father’s name was Christopher Fox: he was by
profession a weaver, an honest man; and there was a seed of God in him.
The neighbours called him Righteous Christer. My mother was an upright
woman; her maiden name was Mary Lago, of the family of the Lagos, and of
the stock of the martyrs.

In my very young years I had a gravity and stayedness of mind and
spirit, not usual in children; insomuch, that when I saw old men behave
lightly and wantonly towards each other, I had a dislike thereof raised
in my heart, and said within myself, “If ever I come to be a man, surely
I shall not do so, nor be so wanton.”

When I came to eleven years of age, I knew pureness and righteousness;
for while a child I was taught how to walk to be kept pure. The Lord
taught me to be faithful in all things, and to act faithfully two ways,
viz., inwardly to God, and outwardly to man; and to keep to Yea and Nay
in all things. For the Lord showed me, that though the people of the
world have mouths full of deceit, and changeable words, yet I was to
keep to Yea and Nay in all things; and that my words should be few and
savoury, seasoned with grace; and that I might not eat and drink to make
myself wanton, but for health, using the creatures in their service, as
servants in their places, to the glory of Him that created them; they
being in their covenant, and I being brought up into the covenant, as
sanctified by the Word which was in the beginning, by which all things
are upheld; wherein is unity with the creation.

But people being strangers to the covenant of life with God, they eat
and drink to make themselves wanton with the creatures, wasting them
upon their own lusts, and living in all filthiness, loving foul ways,
and devouring the creation; and all this in the world, in the pollutions
thereof, without God: therefore I was to shun all such.

Afterwards, as I grew up, my relations thought to make me a priest; but
others persuaded to the contrary: whereupon I was put to a man, a
shoemaker by trade, but who dealt in wool, and was a grazier, and sold
cattle; and a great deal went through my hands. While I was with him, he
was blessed; but after I left him he broke, and came to nothing. I never
wronged man or woman in all that time; for the Lord’s power was with me,
and over me to preserve me. While I was in that service, I used in my
dealings the word Verily, and it was a common saying among people that
knew me, “If George says Verily, there is no altering him.” When boys
and rude people would laugh at me, I let them alone, and went my way;
but people had generally a love to me for my innocency and honesty.

When I came towards nineteen years of age, being upon business at a
fair, one of my cousins, whose name was Bradford, a professor, and
having another professor with him, came to me and asked me to drink part
of a jug of beer with them, and I, being thirsty, went in with them; for
I loved any that had a sense of good, or that sought after the Lord.
When we had drunk each a glass, they began to drink healths, calling for
more, and agreeing together, that he that would not drink should pay
all. I was grieved that any who made profession of religion, should do
so. They grieved me very much, having never had such a thing put to me
before, by any sort of people; wherefore I rose up to go, and putting my
hand into my pocket, laid a groat on the table before them, and said,
“If it be so, I will leave you.” So I went away; and when I had done
what business I had to do, I returned home, but did not go to bed that
night, nor could I sleep, but sometimes walked up and down, and
sometimes prayed and cried to the Lord, who said unto me, “Thou seest
how young people go together into vanity, and old people into the earth;
thou must forsake all, both young and old, and keep out of all, and be
as a stranger unto all.”

Then at the command of God, on the ninth day of the seventh month, 1643,
I left my relations, and broke off all familiarity or fellowship with
old or young. I passed to LUTTERWORTH, where I stayed some time; and
thence to NORTHAMPTON, where also I made some stay: then to
NEWPORT-PAGNELL, whence, after I had stayed a while, I went to BARNET,
in the fourth month, called June,[4] in 1644. As I thus travelled
through the country, professors took notice and sought to be acquainted
with me; but I was afraid of them, for I was sensible they did not
possess what they professed.

Footnote 4:

  Old Style.

Now during the time that I was at BARNET, a strong temptation to despair
came upon me. Then I saw how Christ was tempted, and mighty troubles I
was in; sometimes I kept myself retired in my chamber, and often walked
solitary in the chace, to wait upon the Lord. I wondered why these
things should come to me; and I looked upon myself and said, “Was I ever
so before?” Then I thought, because I had forsaken my relations, I had
done amiss against them; so I was brought to call to my mind all the
time that I had spent, and to consider whether I had wronged any. But
temptations grew more and more, and I was tempted almost to despair; and
when Satan could not effect his design upon me that way, he laid snares
for me, and baits to draw me to commit some sin, whereby he might take
advantage to bring me to despair. I was about twenty years of age when
these exercises came upon me; and I continued in that condition some
years, in great trouble, and fain would have put it from me. I went to
many a priest to look for comfort, but found no comfort from them.

From BARNET I went to LONDON, where I took a lodging, and was under
great misery and trouble there; for I looked upon the great professors
of the city, and I saw all was dark and under the chain of darkness. I
had an uncle there, one Pickering, a Baptist (and they were tender
then,) yet I could not impart my mind to him, nor join with them; for I
saw all, young and old, where they were. Some tender people would have
had me stay, but I was fearful, and returned homewards into
LEICESTERSHIRE again, having a regard upon my mind unto my parents and
relations, lest I should grieve them; who, I understood, were troubled
at my absence.

When I was come down into Leicestershire, my relations would have had me
marry, but I told them I was but a lad, and I must get wisdom. Others
would have had me into the auxiliary band among the soldiery, but I
refused; and I was grieved that they proffered such things to me, being
a tender youth. Then I went to COVENTRY, where I took a chamber for a
while at a professor’s house, till people began to be acquainted with
me; for there were many tender people in that town. After some time I
went into my own country again, and was there about a year, in great
sorrows and troubles, and walked many nights by myself.

Then the priest of DRAYTON, the town of my birth, whose name was
Nathaniel Stevens, came often to me, and I went often to him; and
another priest sometimes came with him; and they would give place to me
to hear me, and I would ask them questions, and reason with them. And
this priest Stevens asked me a question, viz., Why Christ cried out upon
the cross, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” and why he said,
“If it be possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not my will, but
thine be done?” I told him that at that time the sins of all mankind
were upon Him, and their iniquities and transgressions with which He was
wounded, which He was to bear, and to be an offering for, as He was man,
but He died not as He was God; and so, in that He died for all men, and
tasted death for every man, He was an offering for the sins of the whole
world. This I spoke, being at that time in a measure sensible of
Christ’s sufferings, and what He went through. And the priest said, “It
was a very good, full answer, and such a one as he had not heard.” At
that time he would applaud and speak highly of me to others; and what I
said in discourse to him on the week-days, he would preach on the
first-days; for which I did not like him. This priest afterwards became
my great persecutor.

After this I went to another ancient priest at MANCETTER, in
Warwickshire, and reasoned with him about the ground of despair and
temptations; but he was ignorant of my condition; he bade me take
tobacco and sing psalms. Tobacco was a thing I did not love, and psalms
I was not in a state to sing; I could not sing. Then he bid me come
again, and he would tell me many things; but when I came he was angry
and pettish, for my former words had displeased him. He told my
troubles, sorrows, and griefs to his servants; which grieved me that I
had opened my mind to such a one. I saw they were all miserable
comforters; and this brought my troubles more upon me. Then I heard of a
priest living about TAMWORTH, who was accounted an experienced man, and
I went seven miles to him; but I found him only like an empty hollow
cask. I heard also of one called Dr. Cradock, of COVENTRY, and went to
him. I asked him the ground of temptations and despair, and how troubles
came to be wrought in man? He asked me, Who was Christ’s father and
mother? I told him, Mary was his mother, and that he was supposed to be
the son of Joseph, but he was the Son of God. Now, as we were walking
together in his garden, the alley being narrow, I chanced, in turning,
to set my foot on the side of a bed, at which the man was in a rage, as
if his house had been on fire. Thus all our discourse was lost, and I
went away in sorrow, worse than I was when I came. I thought them
miserable comforters, and saw they were all as nothing to me; for they
could not reach my condition. After this I went to another, one Macham,
a priest in high account. He would needs give me some physic, and I was
to have been let blood; but they could not get one drop of blood from
me, either in arms or head (though they endeavoured to do so,) my body
being as it were, dried up with sorrows, grief and troubles, which were
so great upon me that I could have wished I had never been born, or that
I had been born blind, that I might never have seen wickedness or
vanity; and deaf, that I might never have heard vain and wicked words,
or the Lord’s name blasphemed. When the time called Christmas came,
while others were feasting and sporting themselves, I looked out poor
widows from house to house, and gave them some money. When I was invited
to marriages (as I sometimes was,) I went to none at all, but the next
day, or soon after, I would go and visit them; and if they were poor, I
gave them some money; for I had wherewith both to keep myself from being
chargeable to others, and to administer something to the necessities of
those who were in need.

About the beginning of the year 1646, as I was going to COVENTRY, and
approaching towards the gate, a consideration arose in me, how it was
said that “all Christians are believers, both Protestants and Papists;”
and the Lord opened to me that, if all were believers, then they were
all born of God, and passed from death to life, and that none were true
believers but such; and though others said they were believers, yet they
were not. At another time, as I was walking in a field on a first-day
morning, the Lord opened to me, “that being bred at Oxford or Cambridge
was not enough to fit and qualify men to be ministers of Christ;” and I
wondered at it, because it was the common belief of people. But I saw it
clearly as the Lord opened it to me, and was satisfied, and admired the
goodness of the Lord who had opened this thing unto me that morning.
This struck at priest Stevens’ ministry, namely, “that to be bred at
Oxford or Cambridge was not enough to make a man fit to be a minister of
Christ.” So that which opened in me, I saw struck at the priest’s
ministry. But my relations were much troubled that I would not go with
them to hear the priest; for I would get into the orchards, or the
fields, with my Bible by myself. I asked them, Did not the apostle say
to believers, that “they needed no man to teach them, but as the
anointing teacheth them?” And though they knew this was Scripture, and
that it was true, yet they were grieved because I could not be subject
in this matter, to go to hear the priest with them. I saw that to be a
true believer was another thing than they looked upon it to be; and I
saw that being bred at Oxford or Cambridge did not qualify or fit a man
to be a minister of Christ: what then should I follow such for? So
neither these, nor any of the Dissenting people, could I join with, but
was as a stranger to all, relying wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

At another time it was opened in me, “That God, who made the world, did
not dwell in temples made with hands.” This at first seemed a strange
word, because both priests and people used to call their temples or
churches, dreadful places, holy ground, and the temples of God. But the
Lord showed me clearly, that he did not dwell in these temples which men
had commanded and set up, but in people’s hearts: for both Stephen and
the apostle Paul bore testimony, that he did not dwell in temples made
with hands, not even in that which he had once commanded to be built,
since he put an end to it; but that his people were his temple, and he
dwelt in them. This opened in me as I walked in the fields to my
relations’ house. When I came there, they told me that Nathaniel
Stevens, the priest, had been there, and told them “he was afraid of me,
for going after new lights.” I smiled in myself, knowing what the Lord
had opened in me concerning him and his brethren; but I told not my
relations, who though they saw beyond the priests, yet they went to hear
them, and were grieved because I would not go also. But I brought them
Scriptures, and told them, there was an anointing within man to teach
him, and that the Lord would teach his people himself. I had also great
openings concerning the things written in the Revelations; and when I
spoke of them, the priests and professors would say that was a sealed
book, and would have kept me out of it: but I told them, Christ could
open the seals, and that they were the nearest things to us; for the
Epistles were written to the saints that lived in former ages, but the
Revelations were written of things to come.

After this, I met with a sort of people that held women have no souls,
(adding in a light manner,) no more than a goose. But I reproved them,
and told them that was not right; for Mary said, “My soul doth magnify
the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.”

Removing to another place, I came among a people that relied much on
dreams. I told them, except they could distinguish between dream and
dream, they would confound all together; for there were three sorts of
dreams; multitude of business sometimes caused dreams; and there were
whisperings of Satan in man in the night-season; and there were
speakings of God to man in dreams. But these people came out of these
things, and at last became Friends.

Now though I had great openings, yet great trouble and temptation came
many times upon me; so that when it was day, I wished for night, and
when it was night, I wished for day: and by reason of the openings I had
in my troubles, I could say as David said, “Day unto day uttereth
speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge.” When I had openings,
they answered one another, and answered the Scriptures; for I had great
openings of the Scriptures: and when I was in troubles, one trouble also
answered to another.

About the beginning of the year 1647, I was moved of the Lord to go into
DERBYSHIRE, where I met with some friendly people, and had many
discourses with them. Then passing further into the PEAK-COUNTRY, I met
with more friendly people, and with some in empty, high notions.
Travelling on through some parts of LEICESTERSHIRE and into
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, I met with a tender people, and a very tender woman,
whose name was Elizabeth Hooton;[5] and with these I had some meetings
and discourses. But my troubles continued, and I was often under great
temptations; I fasted much, and walked abroad in solitary places many
days, and often took my Bible, and went and sat in hollow trees and
lonesome places till night came on; and frequently, in the night, walked
mournfully about by myself: for I was a man of sorrows in the times of
the first workings of the Lord in me.

Footnote 5:

  Elizabeth Hooton was born at Nottingham about the year 1600; was the
  wife of a person who occupied a respectable position in society. In
  1647, when George Fox first met with her, she formed one of a company
  of serious persons, who occasionally met together. Little is known of
  her, but “the meetings and discourses” she had with George Fox appear
  to have been the means of convincing her of the spiritual views of
  Friends. Sewell says in 1650—“From a true experience of the Lord’s
  work in man, she felt herself moved publicly to preach the way of
  salvation to others.” She was therefore not only the first of her sex,
  but the second individual who appeared in the character of a minister
  amongst the newly-gathered society. The preaching of women was not at
  this period considered singular, several being thus engaged among the
  various religious sects then in England. Elizabeth Hooton had not long
  publicly testified as a minister, before her sincerity and
  faithfulness were tested by persecution. Besides suffering in other
  ways, she endured several imprisonments, sometimes for months
  together. As a gospel minister, she stood high in the estimation of
  her friends, and in advanced life performed two religious visits to
  America and the West Indies, the latter of which occupied her several
  years. She was one who travelled with George Fox amongst the West
  India Islands, as related elsewhere in these volumes, being suddenly
  taken ill in Jamaica, where she died the day following, aged about 71
  years, a minister 21 years.

During all this time I was never joined in profession of religion with
any, but gave myself up to the Lord, having forsaken all evil company,
and taken leave of father and mother, and all other relations, and
travelled up and down as a stranger in the earth, which way the Lord
inclined my heart; taking a chamber to myself in the town where I came,
and tarrying sometimes a month, more or less, in a place; for I durst
not stay long in any place, being afraid both of professor and profane,
lest, being a tender young man, I should be hurt by conversing much with
either. For which reason I kept myself much as a stranger, seeking
heavenly wisdom and getting knowledge from the Lord; and was brought off
from outward things, to rely wholly on the Lord alone. Though my
exercises and troubles were very great, yet were they not so continual
but that I had some intermissions, and was sometimes brought into such a
heavenly joy, that I thought I had been in Abraham’s bosom. As I cannot
declare the misery I was in, it was so great and heavy upon me; so
neither can I set forth the mercies of God unto me in all my misery. O,
the everlasting love of God to my soul, when I was in great distress!
when my troubles and torments were great, then was his love exceedingly
great. “Thou, Lord, makest a fruitful field a barren wilderness, and a
barren wilderness a fruitful field; thou bringest down and settest up;
thou killest and makest alive; all honour and glory be to thee, O Lord
of glory; the knowledge of thee in the Spirit, is life; but that
knowledge which is fleshly, works death.” While there is this knowledge
in the flesh, deceit and self-will conform to anything, and will say
yes, yes, to that it doth not know. The knowledge which the world hath
of what the prophets and apostles spoke, is a fleshly knowledge; and the
apostates from the life, in which the prophets and apostles were, have
gotten their words, the Holy Scriptures, in a form, but not in their
life nor Spirit that gave them forth. So they all lie in confusion, and
are making provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof; but not
to fulfil the law and command of Christ in his power and Spirit: this,
they say, they cannot do; but to fulfil the lusts of the flesh, that
they can do with delight.

Now after I had received that opening from the Lord, that “to be bred at
Oxford or Cambridge was not sufficient to fit a man to be a minister of
Christ,” I regarded the priests less, and looked more after the
Dissenting people. Among them I saw there was some tenderness; and many
of them came afterwards to be convinced, for they had some openings. But
as I had forsaken the priests, so I left the separate preachers also,
and those esteemed the most experienced people; for I saw there was none
among them all that could speak to my condition. When all my hopes in
them and in all men were gone, so that I had nothing outwardly to help
me, nor could I tell what to do; then, O! then I heard a voice which
said, “There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can speak to thy
condition;” and when I heard it, my heart did leap for joy. Then the
Lord let me see why there was none upon the earth that could speak to my
condition, namely, that I might give him all the glory; for all are
concluded under sin, and shut up in unbelief, as I had been, that Jesus
Christ might have the pre-eminence, who enlightens, and gives grace, and
faith, and power. Thus when God doth work, who shall hinder it? and this
I knew experimentally. My desires after the Lord grew stronger, and zeal
in the pure knowledge of God, and of Christ alone, without the help of
any man, book, or writing. For though I read the Scriptures that spoke
of Christ and of God; yet I knew him not, but by revelation, as he who
hath the key did open, and as the Father of Life drew me to his Son by
his Spirit. Then the Lord gently led me along, and let me see his love,
which was endless and eternal, surpassing all the knowledge that men
have in the natural state, or can obtain from history or books; and that
love let me see myself, as I was without him. I was afraid of all
company, for I saw them perfectly where they were, through the love of
God, which let me see myself. I had not fellowship with any people,
priests, or professors, or any sort of separated people, but with
Christ, who hath the key, and opened the door of Light and Life unto me.
I was afraid of all carnal talk and talkers, for I could see nothing but
corruptions, and the life lay under the burthen of corruptions. When I
myself was in the deep, shut up under all, I could not believe that I
should ever overcome; my troubles, my sorrows, and my temptations were
so great, that I thought many times I should have despaired, I was so
tempted. But when Christ opened to me, how he was tempted by the same
devil, and overcame him and bruised his head, and that through him and
his power, light, grace, and Spirit, I should overcome also, I had
confidence in him; so he it was that opened to me, when I was shut up,
and had no hope nor faith. Christ, who had enlightened me, gave me his
light to believe in; he gave me hope, which he himself revealed in me,
and he gave me his Spirit and grace, which I found sufficient in the
deeps and in weakness. Thus, in the deepest miseries, and in the
greatest sorrows and temptations, that many times beset me, the Lord in
his mercy did keep me. I found that there were two thirsts in me; the
one after the creatures, to get help and strength there; and the other
after the Lord, the Creator, and his Son Jesus Christ. I saw all the
world could do me no good; if I had had a king’s diet, palace, and
attendance, all would have been as nothing; for nothing gave me comfort,
but the Lord by his power. I saw professors, priests, and people, were
whole and at ease in that condition which was my misery; and they loved
that which I would have been rid of. But the Lord stayed my desires upon
himself, from whom came my help, and my care was cast upon him alone.
Therefore, all wait patiently upon the Lord, whatsoever condition you be
in; wait in the grace and truth that comes by Jesus: for if ye so do,
there is a promise to you, and the Lord God will fulfil it in you.
Blessed are all they that do indeed hunger and thirst after
righteousness, they shall be satisfied with it. I have found it so,
praised be the Lord who filleth with it, and satisfieth the desires of
the hungry soul. O let the house of the spiritual Israel say, “His mercy
endureth for ever!” It is the great love of God to make a wilderness of
that which is pleasant to the outward eye and fleshly mind; and to make
a fruitful field of a barren wilderness. This is the great work of God.
But while people’s minds run in the earthly, after the creatures and
changeable things, changeable ways and religions, and changeable,
uncertain teachers, their minds are in bondage, they are brittle and
changeable, tossed up and down with windy doctrines and thoughts, and
notions and things; their minds being out of the unchangeable truth in
the inward parts, the Light of Jesus Christ, which would keep them to
the unchangeable. He is the way to the Father; and in all my troubles he
preserved me by his Spirit and power; praised be his holy name for ever!

Again I heard a voice which said, “Thou serpent! thou dost seek to
destroy the life, but canst not; for the sword which keepeth the tree of
life shall destroy thee.” So Christ, the Word of God, that bruised the
head of the serpent, the destroyer, preserved me; my inward mind being
joined to his good Seed, that bruised the head of this serpent, the
destroyer. This inward life sprung up in me, to answer all the opposing
professors and priests, and brought Scriptures to my memory to refute
them with.

At another time I saw the great love of God, and I was filled with
admiration at the infinitude of it; I saw what was cast out from God,
and what entered into God’s kingdom; and how by Jesus, the opener of the
door, with his heavenly key, the entrance was given; and I saw death,
how it had passed upon all men, and oppressed the seed of God, in man,
and in me; and how I in the seed came forth, and what the promise was
to. Yet it was so with me, that there seemed to be two pleading in me;
questionings arose in my mind about gifts and prophecies; and I was
tempted again to despair, as if I had sinned against the Holy Ghost. I
was in great perplexity and trouble for many days; yet I gave up myself
to the Lord still.

One day when I had been walking solitarily abroad, and was come home, I
was wrapped up in the love of God, so that I could not but admire the
greatness of his love. While I was in that condition it was opened unto
me by the eternal Light and Power, and I saw clearly therein, “that all
was done, and to be done, in and by Christ; and how he conquers and
destroys this tempter, the Devil, and all his works, and is above him;
and that all these troubles were good for me, and temptations for the
trial of my faith, which Christ had given me.” The Lord opened me, that
I saw through all these troubles and temptations; my living faith was
raised, that I saw all was done by Christ, the Life, and my belief was
in Him. When at any time my condition was veiled, my secret belief was
stayed firm, and hope underneath held me, as an anchor in the bottom of
the sea, and anchored my immortal soul to its Bishop, causing it to swim
above the sea, the world, where all the raging waves, foul weather,
tempests, and temptations are. But, O! then did I see my troubles,
trials, and temptations more clearly than ever I had done. As the light
appeared, all appeared that is out of the light; darkness, death,
temptations, the unrighteous, the ungodly; all was manifest and seen in
the light. After this, a pure fire appeared in me: then I saw how he sat
as a refiner’s fire and as fullers’ soap;—then the spiritual discerning
came into me, by which I did discern my own thoughts, groans, and sighs;
and what it was that veiled me, and what it was that opened me. That
which could not abide in the patience, nor endure the fire, in the light
I found it to be the groans of the flesh, that could not give up to the
will of God, which had veiled me; and that could not be patient in all
trials, troubles, and perplexities;—could not give up self to die by the
cross, the power of God, that the living and quickened might follow him;
and that that which would cloud and veil from the presence of
Christ—that which the sword of the Spirit cuts down, and which must die,
might not be kept alive. I discerned also the groans of the Spirit,
which opened me, and made intercession to God; in which Spirit is the
true waiting upon God, for the redemption of the body and of the whole
creation. By this Spirit, in which the true sighing is, I saw over the
false sighings and groanings. By this invisible Spirit I discerned all
the false hearing, the false seeing, and the false smelling which was
above the Spirit, quenching and grieving it; and that all they that were
there, were in confusion and deceit, where the false asking and praying
is, in deceit, in that nature and tongue that takes God’s holy name in
vain, wallows in the Egyptian sea, and asketh, but hath not; for they
hate his light and resist the Holy Ghost; turn grace into wantonness,
and rebel against the Spirit; and are erred from the faith they should
ask in, and from the Spirit they should pray by. He that knoweth these
things in the true Spirit, can witness them. The divine light of Christ
manifesteth all things; the spiritual fire trieth all things, and
severeth all things. Several things did I then see as the Lord opened
them to me; for he showed me that which can live in his holy refining
fire, and that can live to God under his law. He made me sensible how
the law and the prophets were until John; and how the least in the
everlasting kingdom of God is greater than John.

The pure and perfect law of God is over the flesh, to keep it and its
works, which are not perfect, under, by the perfect law; and the law of
God that is perfect, answers the perfect principle of God in every one.
This law the Jews, and the prophets, and John were to perform and do.
None know the giver of this law but by the Spirit of God; neither can
any truly read it, or hear its voice, but by the Spirit of God; he that
can receive it, let him. John, who was the greatest prophet that was
born of a woman, did bear witness to the light, which Christ, the great
heavenly prophet, hath enlightened every man that cometh into the world
withal; that they might believe in it, and become the children of light,
and so have the light of life, and not come into condemnation. For the
true belief stands in the light that condemns all evil, and the Devil,
who is the prince of darkness, and would draw out of the light into
condemnation. They that walk in this light, come to the mountain of the
house of God, established above all mountains, and to God’s teaching,
who will teach them his ways. These things were opened to me in the
light.

I saw also the mountains burning up, and the rubbish; the rough and
crooked ways and places, made smooth and plain, that the Lord might come
into his tabernacle. These things are to be found in man’s heart. But to
speak of these things being within, seemed strange to the rough, and
crooked, and mountainous ones. Yet the Lord saith, “O Earth, hear the
word of the Lord!” The law of the Spirit crosseth the fleshly mind,
spirit, and will, which lives in disobedience, and doth not keep within
the law of the Spirit. I saw this law was the pure love of God, which
was upon me, and which I must go through though I was troubled while I
was under it; for I could not be dead to the law, but through the law
which did judge and condemn that which is to be condemned. I saw many
talked of the law, who had never known the law to be their schoolmaster;
and many talked of the gospel of Christ, who had never known life and
immortality brought to light in them by it. You that have been under
that schoolmaster, and the condemnation of it, know these things; for
though the Lord in that day opened these things unto me in secret, they
have since been published by his eternal Spirit, as on the house top.
And as you are brought into the law, and through the law to be dead to
it, and witness the righteousness of the law fulfilled in you, you will
afterwards come to know what it is to be brought into the faith, and
through faith from under the law; and abiding in the faith, which Christ
is the author of, you will have peace and access to God. But if ye look
out from the faith, and from that which would keep you in the victory,
and look after fleshly things or words, you will be brought into bondage
to flesh again, and to the law, which takes hold upon the flesh and sin,
and worketh wrath, and the works of the flesh will appear again. The law
of God takes hold upon the law of sin and death; but the law of faith,
or the law of the Spirit of life, which is the love of God, and which
comes by Jesus (who is the end of the law for righteousness’ sake,)
makes free from the law of sin and death. This law of life
fleshly-minded men do not know; yet they will tempt you, to draw you
from the Spirit into the flesh, and so into bondage.

Therefore ye, who know the love of God, and the law of his Spirit, and
the freedom that is in Jesus Christ, stand fast in him, in that divine
faith which he is the author of in you; and be not entangled with the
yoke of bondage. For the ministry of Christ Jesus, and his teaching,
bring into liberty and freedom; but the ministry that is of man, and by
man, and which stands in the will of man, bringeth into bondage, and
under the shadow of death and darkness. Therefore none can be ministers
of Christ Jesus but in the eternal Spirit, which was before the
Scriptures were given forth; for if they have not his Spirit, they are
none of his. Though they may have his light to condemn them that hate
it, yet they can never bring any into unity and fellowship in the
Spirit, except they be in it; for the Seed of God is a burdensome stone
to the selfish, fleshly, earthly will, which reigns in its own knowledge
and understanding that must perish, and in its wisdom that is devilish.
And the Spirit of God is grieved, and vexed, and quenched with that
which brings into the fleshly bondage; and that which wars against the
Spirit of God, must be mortified by it; for the flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the
one to the other. The flesh would have its liberty, and the Spirit would
have its liberty; but the Spirit is to have its liberty and not the
flesh. If therefore ye quench the Spirit, and join to the flesh, and be
servants of it, then ye are judged and tormented by the Spirit; but if
ye join to the Spirit and serve God in it, ye have liberty and victory
over the flesh and its works. Therefore keep in the daily cross, the
power of God, by which you may witness all that to be crucified which is
contrary to the will of God, and which shall not come into his kingdom.
These things are here mentioned and opened for information, exhortation,
and comfort to others, as the Lord opened them unto me in that day. In
that day I wondered that the children of Israel should murmur for water
and victuals, for I could have fasted long without murmuring or minding
victuals. But I was judged at other times, that I was not contented to
be sometimes without the water and bread of life, that I might learn to
know how to want, and how to abound.

I heard of a woman in LANCASHIRE, that had fasted two and twenty days,
and I travelled to see her; but when I came to her I saw that she was
under a temptation. When I had spoken to her what I had from the Lord, I
left her, her father being one high in profession. Passing on, I went
among the professors at DUKINFIELD and MANCHESTER, where I stayed a
while, and declared truth among them. There were some convinced, who
received the Lord’s teaching, by which they were confirmed and stood in
the truth. But the professors were in a rage, all pleading for sin and
imperfection, and could not endure to hear talk of perfection, and of a
holy and sinless life. But the Lord’s power was over all; though they
were chained under darkness and sin, which they pleaded for, and
quenched the tender thing in them.

About this time there was a great meeting of the Baptists, at BROUGHTON,
in Leicestershire, with some that had separated from them; and people of
other notions went thither, and I went also. Not many of the Baptists
came, but many others were there. The Lord opened my mouth, and the
everlasting truth was declared amongst them, and the power of the Lord
was over them all. For in that day the Lord’s power began to spring, and
I had great openings in the Scriptures. Several were convinced in those
parts, and were turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan
unto God; and many were raised up to praise God. When I reasoned with
professors and other people, some became convinced.

I was still under great temptations sometimes, and my inward sufferings
were heavy; but I could find none to open my condition to but the Lord
alone, unto whom I cried night and day. I went back into
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, and there the Lord showed me that the natures of those
things, which were hurtful without, were within, in the hearts and minds
of wicked men. The natures of dogs, swine, vipers, of Sodom and Egypt,
Pharaoh, Cain, Ishmael, Esau, &c.; the natures of these I saw within,
though people had been looking without. I cried to the Lord, saying,
“Why should I be thus, seeing I was never addicted to commit those
evils?” and the Lord answered, “That it was needful I should have a
sense of all conditions, how else should I speak to all conditions?” and
in this I saw the infinite love of God. I saw also, that there was an
ocean of darkness and death; but an infinite ocean of light and love,
which flowed over the ocean of darkness. In that also I saw the infinite
love of God, and I had great openings.

And as I was walking by the steeple-house,[6] in MANSFIELD, the Lord
said unto me, “That which people trample upon, must be thy food.” And as
the Lord spoke he opened it to me, that people and professors trampled
upon the life, even the life of Christ; they fed upon words, and fed one
another with words; but they trampled upon the life; trampled underfoot
the blood of the Son of God, which blood was my life, and lived in their
airy notions, talking of him. It seemed strange to me at first, that I
should feed on that which the high professors trampled upon; but the
Lord opened it clearly to me by his eternal Spirit and Power.

Footnote 6:

  The term “steeplehouse” occurs not unfrequently in this _Journal_, and
  in the early writings and records of Friends. Though it may sound
  harsh, and appear to savour of the scurrility and intolerance of that
  zealous age, yet this, or any other mode of speech adopted by Friends,
  was by no means taken up for the purpose of opprobrium, but rather
  significantly to discover the little veneration or distinction they
  could show for these buildings more than others; believing that the
  Almighty is equally present everywhere, to bless and to sanctify every
  place and everything to those that walk uprightly on the earth, his
  footstool.

  One of the chief points of George Fox’s ministry was to overturn that
  insidious reverence for names and things which is too frequently
  substituted for the worship that is “in spirit and in truth.” Few
  instances more distinctly exhibit this sort of covert idolatry, than
  the general notion of _sanctity_ which is attached to the building
  called a “_church_.” The word “church” is, in the Holy Scriptures,
  never applied to an outward temple or building, but to a company of
  believers, whether generally or particularly. The use of this term
  appears to have crept in among Christians, and with it a superstitious
  consecration of those places, as possessing some latent quality not
  affecting other works of art or nature. To this Stephen the martyr
  evidently alluded when he said, “Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not in
  temples made with hands,” &c., Acts vii. 48. Clemens of Alexandria
  says, “Not the place, but the congregation of the elect, I call a
  church,” Stromat. vii., 715 B.

Then came people from far and near to see me; but I was fearful of being
drawn out by them; yet I was made to speak, and open things to them.
There was one Brown, who had great prophecies and sights of me upon his
death-bed. He spoke openly of what I should be made instrumental by the
Lord to bring forth. And of others he spoke, that they should come to
nothing, which was fulfilled on some, who then were something in show.
When this man was buried, a great work of the Lord fell upon me, to the
admiration of many, who thought I had been dead; and many came to see me
for about fourteen days. I was very much altered in countenance and
person, as if my body had been new moulded or changed. While I was in
that condition, I had a sense and discerning given me by the Lord,
through which I saw plainly, that when many people talked of God and of
Christ, &c., the serpent spoke in them; but this was hard to be borne.
Yet the work of the Lord went on in some, and my sorrows and troubles
began to wear off, and tears of joy dropped from me, so that I could
have wept night and day with tears of joy to the Lord, in humility and
brokenness of heart. I saw into that which was without end, and things
which cannot be uttered, and of the greatness and infinitude of the love
of God, which cannot be expressed by words. For I had been brought
through the very ocean of darkness and death, and through and over the
power of Satan, by the eternal, glorious power of Christ; even through
that darkness was I brought, which covered over all the world, and which
chained down all, and shut up all in death. The same eternal power of
God, which brought me through these things, was that which afterwards
shook the nations, priests, professors, and people. Then could I say I
had been in spiritual Babylon, Sodom, Egypt, and the grave; but by the
eternal power of God I was come out of it, and was brought over it, and
the power of it, into the power of Christ. I saw the harvest white, and
the seed of God lying thick in the ground, as ever did wheat that was
sown outwardly, and none to gather it; for this I mourned with tears. A
report went abroad of me that I was a young man that had a discerning
spirit; whereupon many came to me, from far and near, professors,
priests, and people. The Lord’s power broke forth; and I had great
openings and prophecies; and spoke unto them of the things of God, which
they heard with attention and silence, and went away, and spread the
fame thereof. Then came the tempter, and set upon me again, charging me,
that I had sinned against the Holy Ghost; but I could not tell in what.
Then Paul’s condition came before me, how, after he had been taken up
into the third heavens, and seen things not lawful to be uttered, a
messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. Thus, by the power of Christ,
I got over that temptation also.




                              CHAPTER II.

1648-1649.—Begins to have great meetings—at Mansfield he is moved to
    pray—the Lord’s power so great the house is shaken—cannot pray in
    his own will—a temptation besets him that there is no God, which is
    dissipated by an inward voice—he afterwards disputes with and
    confounds some Atheists—goes to courts and steeple-houses, &c., to
    warn against oppression and oaths—reproves a notorious drunkard, who
    is reformed—sees who are the greatest deceivers—shows how people
    read and understand the Scriptures—various mysteries are revealed to
    him—he is sent to turn people to the Inward Light, Spirit, and
    Grace, the Divine Spirit which he infallibly knew would not
    deceive—priests and professors rage at these innovations—he cries
    for justice in courts and against various wrong things—denounces the
    trade of preaching—is sent to preach freely.

In the year 1648, as I was sitting in a friend’s house in
Nottinghamshire (for by this time the power of God had opened the hearts
of some to receive the word of life and reconciliation,) I saw there was
a great crack to go throughout the earth, and a great smoke to go as the
crack went; and that after the crack there should be a great shaking:
this was the earth in people’s hearts, which was to be shaken before the
seed of God was raised out of the earth. And it was so; for the Lord’s
power began to shake them, and great meetings we begun to have, and a
mighty power and work of God there was amongst people, to the
astonishment of both people and priests.

And there was a meeting of priests and professors at a justice’s house,
and I went among them. Here they discoursed how Paul said, “He had not
known sin, but by the law, which said, Thou shalt not lust:” and they
held that to be spoken of the outward law. But I told them, Paul spoke
that after he was convinced; for he had the outward law before, and was
brought up in it, when he was in the lust of persecution; but this was
the law of God in his mind, which he served, and which the law in his
members warred against; for that which he thought had been life to him,
proved death. So the more sober of the priests and professors yielded,
and consented that it was not the outward law, but the inward, which
showed the inward lust which Paul spoke of after he was convinced: for
the outward law took hold upon the outward action; but the inward law
upon the inward lust.

After this I went again to MANSFIELD, where was a great meeting of
professors and people; here I was moved to pray; and the Lord’s power
was so great, that the house seemed to be shaken. When I had done, some
of the professors said it was now as in the days of the apostles, when
the house was shaken where they were. After I had prayed, one of the
professors would pray, which brought deadness and a veil over them: and
others of the professors were grieved at him and told him, it was a
temptation upon him. Then he came to me, and desired that I would pray
again; but I could not pray in man’s will.

Soon after there was another great meeting of professors, and a captain,
whose name was Amor Stoddard, came in. They were discoursing of the
blood of Christ; and as they were discoursing of it, I saw, through the
immediate opening of the Invisible Spirit, the blood of Christ. And I
cried out among them, and said, “Do ye not see the blood of Christ? See
it in your hearts, to sprinkle your hearts and consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God:” for I saw it, the blood of the New
Covenant, how it came into the heart. This startled the professors, who
would have the blood only without them, and not in them. But Captain
Stoddard was reached, and said, “Let the youth speak; hear the youth
speak;” when he saw they endeavoured to bear me down with many words.

There was also a company of priests, that were looked upon to be tender;
one of their names was Kellett; and several people that were tender,
went to hear them. I was moved to go after them, and bid them mind the
Lord’s teaching in their inward parts. That priest Kellett was against
parsonages then; but afterwards he got a great one, and turned a
persecutor.

Now, after I had had some service in these parts, I went through
DERBYSHIRE into my own county, LEICESTERSHIRE, again, and several tender
people were convinced. Passing thence, I met with a great company of
professors in WARWICKSHIRE, who were praying, and expounding the
Scriptures in the fields. They gave the Bible to me, and I opened it on
the fifth of Matthew, where Christ expounded the law; and I opened the
inward state to them, and the outward state; upon which they fell into a
fierce contention, and so parted; but the Lord’s power got ground.

Then I heard of a great meeting to be at LEICESTER, for a dispute,
wherein Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists, and Common-prayer-men
were said to be all concerned. The meeting was in a steeple-house; and
thither I was moved by the Lord God to go, and be amongst them. I heard
their discourse and reasonings, some being in pews, and the priest in
the pulpit; abundance of people being gathered together. At last one
woman asked a question out of Peter, What that birth was, viz., a being
born again of incorruptible seed, by the Word of God, that liveth and
abideth for ever? And the priest said to her, “I permit not a woman to
speak in the church;” though he had before given liberty for any to
speak. Whereupon I was wrapped up, as in a rapture, in the Lord’s power;
and I stepped up and asked the priest, “Dost thou call this (the
steeple-house) a church? Or dost thou call this mixed multitude a
church?” For the woman asking a question, he ought to have answered it,
having given liberty for any to speak. But, instead of answering me, he
asked me what a church was? I told him, “The church was the pillar and
ground of truth, made up of living stones, living members, a spiritual
household, which Christ was the head of: but he was not the head of a
mixed multitude, or of an old house made up of lime, stones, and wood.”
This set them all on fire: the priest came down out of his pulpit, and
others out of their pews, and the dispute there was marred. But I went
to a great inn, and there disputed the thing with the priests and
professors of all sorts; and they were all on a fire. But I maintained
the true church, and the true head thereof, over the heads of them all,
till they all gave out and fled away. One man seemed loving, and
appeared for a while to join with me; but he soon turned against me, and
joined with a priest, in pleading for infants’ baptism, though he
himself had been a Baptist before; and so left me alone. Howbeit, there
were several convinced that day; and the woman that asked the question
was convinced, and her family; and the Lord’s power and glory shone over
all.

After this I returned into Nottinghamshire, and went into the VALE OF
BEAVOR. As I went, I preached repentance to the people; and there were
many convinced in the Vale of Beavor, in many towns; for I stayed some
weeks amongst them. One morning, as I was sitting by the fire, a great
cloud came over me, and a temptation beset me; but I sat still. And it
was said, “All things come by nature;” and the elements and stars came
over me, so that I was in a manner quite clouded with it. But as I sat
still, and silent, the people of the house perceived nothing. And as I
sat still under it, and let it alone, a living hope arose in me, and a
true voice, which said, “There _is_ a living God who made all things.”
And immediately the cloud and temptation vanished away, and life rose
over it all; my heart was glad, and I praised the living God. After some
time, I met with some people who had a notion that there was no God, but
that all things came by nature. I had a great dispute with them, and
overturned them, and made some of them confess that there is a living
God. Then I saw that it was good that I had gone through that exercise.
We had great meetings in those parts, for the power of the Lord broke
through in that part of the country. Returning into NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, I
found there a company of shattered Baptists, and others; and the Lord’s
power wrought mightily, and gathered many of them. Afterwards I went to
MANSFIELD and thereaway, where the Lord’s power was wonderfully
manifested both at Mansfield and other neighbouring towns. In Derbyshire
the mighty power of God wrought in a wonderful manner. At EATON, a town
near Derby, there was a meeting of Friends, where there was such a
mighty power of God that they were greatly shaken, and many mouths were
opened in the power of the Lord God. Many were moved by the Lord to go
to steeple-houses, to the priests and to the people, to declare the
everlasting truth unto them.

At a certain time, when I was at MANSFIELD, there was a sitting of the
justices about hiring of servants; and it was upon me from the Lord to
go and speak to the justices, that they should not oppress the servants
in their wages. So I walked towards the inn where they sat; but finding
a company of fiddlers there, I did not go in, but thought to come in the
morning, when I might have a more serious opportunity to discourse with
them, not thinking that a seasonable time. But when I came again in the
morning, they were gone, and I was struck even blind, that I could not
see. I inquired of the innkeeper where the justices were to sit that
day; and he told me, at a town eight miles off. My sight began to come
to me again; and I went and ran thitherward as fast as I could. When I
was come to the house where they were, and many servants with them, I
exhorted the justices not to oppress the servants in their wages, but to
do that which was right and just to them; and I exhorted the servants to
do their duties, and serve honestly, &c. They all received my
exhortation kindly; for I was moved of the Lord therein.

Moreover, I was moved to go to several courts and steeple-houses at
Mansfield, and other places, to warn them to leave off oppression and
oaths, and to turn from deceit to the Lord, and do justly. Particularly
at Mansfield, after I had been at a court there, I was moved to go and
speak to one of the most wicked men in the country, one who was a common
drunkard, a noted whore-master, and a rhyme-maker; and I reproved him in
the dread of the mighty God, for his evil courses. When I had done
speaking, and left him, he came after me, and told me, that he was so
smitten when I spoke to him, that he had scarcely any strength left in
him. So this man was convinced, and turned from his wickedness, and
remained an honest, sober man, to the astonishment of the people who had
known him before. Thus the work of the Lord went forward, and many were
turned from the darkness to the light, within the compass of these three
years, 1646, 1647, and 1648. Divers meetings of Friends, in several
places, were then gathered to God’s teaching, by his light, Spirit, and
power; for the Lord’s power broke forth more and more, wonderfully.

Now was I come up in Spirit through the flaming sword, into the paradise
of God. All things were new; and all the creation gave another smell
unto me than before, beyond what words can utter. I knew nothing but
pureness, and innocency, and righteousness, being renewed into the image
of God by Christ Jesus, to the state of Adam, which he was in before he
fell. The creation was opened to me; and it was showed me how all things
had their names given them, according to their nature and virtue. I was
at a stand in my mind, whether I should practise physic for the good of
mankind, seeing the nature and virtues of things were so opened to me by
the Lord. But I was immediately taken up in Spirit, to see into another
or more steadfast state than Adam’s innocency, even into a state in
Christ Jesus, that should never fall. And the Lord showed me that such
as were faithful to him, in the power and light of Christ, should come
up into that state in which Adam was before he fell; in which the
admirable works of creation, and the virtues thereof, may be known,
through the openings of that divine Word of wisdom and power, by which
they were made. Great things did the Lord lead me into, and wonderful
depths were opened unto me, beyond what can by words be declared; but as
people come into subjection to the Spirit of God, and grow up in the
image and power of the Almighty, they may receive the Word of Wisdom,
that opens all things, and come to know the hidden unity in the Eternal
Being.

Thus I travelled on in the Lord’s service, as the Lord led me. And when
I came to NOTTINGHAM, the mighty power of God was there among Friends.
From thence I went to CLAWSON in Leicestershire, in the VALE of BEAVOR,
and the mighty power of God was there also, in several towns and
villages where Friends were gathered. While I was there, the Lord opened
to me three things, relating to those three great professions in the
world, physic, divinity (so called), and law. He showed me that the
physicians were out of the wisdom of God, by which the creatures were
made; and so knew not their virtues, because they were out of the Word
of Wisdom; by which they were made. He showed me that the priests were
out of the true faith, which Christ is the author of; the faith which
purifies and gives victory, and brings people to have access to God, by
which they please God; which mystery of faith is held in a pure
conscience. He showed me also, that the lawyers were out of the equity,
and out of the true justice, and out of the law of God, which went over
the first transgression, and over all sin, and answered the Spirit of
God, that was grieved and transgressed in man. And that these three, the
physicians, the priests, and the lawyers, ruled the world out of the
wisdom, out of the faith, and out of the equity and law of God; the one
pretending the cure of the body, the other the cure of the soul, and the
third the property of the people. But I saw they were all out of wisdom,
out of the faith, out of the equity and perfect law of God. And as the
Lord opened these things unto me, I felt his power went forth over all,
by which all might be reformed, if they would receive and bow unto it.
The priests might be reformed, and brought into the true faith, which
was the gift of God. The lawyers might be reformed, and brought into the
law of God, which answers that of God, which is transgressed, in every
one, and brings to love one’s neighbour as himself. This lets man see,
if he wrongs his neighbour he wrongs himself; and this teaches him to do
unto others as he would they should do unto him. The physicians might be
reformed, and brought into the wisdom of God, by which all things were
made and created; that they might receive a right knowledge of them, and
understand their virtues, which the Word of Wisdom, by which they were
made and are upheld, hath given them. Abundance was opened concerning
these things; how all lay out of the wisdom of God, and out of the
righteousness and holiness that man at the first was made in. But as all
believe in the light, and walk in the light, which Christ hath
enlightened every man that cometh into the world withal, and so become
children of the light, and of the day of Christ; in his day all things
are seen, visible and invisible, by the divine light of Christ, the
spiritual, heavenly man, by whom all things were made and created.

Then I saw concerning the priests, that although they stood in deceit,
and acted by the dark power, which both they and their people were kept
under; yet they were not the greatest deceivers spoken of in the
Scriptures; for these were not come so far as many of them had come. But
the Lord opened to me who the greatest deceivers were, and how far they
might come; even such as came as far as Cain, to hear the voice of God;
and such as came out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, and to praise
God on the banks of the sea-shore; such as could speak by experience of
God’s miracles and wonders; such as were come as far as Korah and
Dathan, and their company; such as were come as far as Balaam, who could
speak the word of the Lord, who heard his voice and knew it, and knew
his Spirit, and could see the star of Jacob, and the goodliness of
Israel’s tent; the second birth, which no enchantment could prevail
against: these that could speak so much of their experiences of God, and
yet turned from the Spirit and the Word, and went into the gainsaying;
these were, and would be, the great deceivers, far beyond the priests.
Likewise among the Christians, such as should preach in Christ’s name,
and should work miracles, cast out devils, and go as far as a Cain, a
Korah, and a Balaam, in the gospel times, these were and would be the
great deceivers. They that could speak some experiences of Christ and
God, but lived not in the life: these were they that led the world after
them, who got the form of godliness, but denied the power; who inwardly
ravened from the Spirit, and brought people into the form, but
persecuted them that were in the power, as Cain did; and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam, through covetousness, loving the wages of
unrighteousness, as Balaam did. These followers of Cain, Korah, and
Balaam have brought the world, since the apostles’ days, to be like a
sea. And such as these, I saw, might deceive now, as they had in former
ages: but it is impossible for them to deceive the elect, who are chosen
in Christ, who was before the world began, and before the deceiver was;
though others may be deceived in their openings and prophecies, not
keeping their minds to the Lord Jesus Christ, who doth open and reveal
to his.

I saw the state of those, both priests and people, who, in reading the
Scriptures, cry out much against Cain, Esau, and Judas, and other wicked
men of former times, mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; but do not see
the nature of Cain, of Esau, of Judas, and those others, in themselves.
These said, it was they, they, they, that were the bad people; putting
it off from themselves: but when some of these came, with the light and
Spirit of truth, to see into themselves, then they came to say, I, I, I,
it is I myself that have been the Ishmael, and the Esau, &c. For then
they came to see the nature of wild Ishmael in themselves; the nature of
Cain, of Esau, of Korah, of Balaam, and of the son of perdition in
themselves, sitting above all that is called God in them. Thus I saw it
was the fallen man that was got up into the Scriptures, and was finding
fault with those before mentioned; and, with the backsliding Jews,
calling them the sturdy oaks, and tall cedars, and fat bulls of Bashan,
wild heifers, vipers, serpents, &c.; and charging them that it was they
that closed their eyes, and stopped their ears, and hardened their
hearts, and were dull of hearing: that it was they that hated the light
and rebelled against it; that quenched the Spirit, and vexed, and
grieved it; that walked despitefully against the Spirit of grace, and
turned the grace of God into wantonness; and that it was they that
resisted the Holy Ghost, that got the form of godliness, and turned
against the power: and they were the inwardly ravening wolves, that had
got the sheep’s clothing; they were the wells without water, and clouds
without rain, and trees without fruit, &c. But when these, who were so
much taken up with finding fault with others, and thought themselves
clear from these things, came to look into themselves, and with the
light of Christ thoroughly to search themselves, they might see enough
of this in themselves; and then the cry could not be, it is he, or they,
as before; but I and we are found in these conditions.

I saw also, how people read the Scriptures without a right sense of
them, and without duly applying them to their own states. For, when they
read that death reigned from Adam to Moses; that the law and the
prophets were until John; and that the least in the kingdom is greater
than John; they read these things and applied them to others, but they
did not turn in to find the truth of these things in themselves. As
these things came to be opened in me, I saw death reigned over them from
Adam to Moses; from the entrance into transgression, till they came to
the ministration of condemnation, which restrains people from sin that
brings death. Then, when the ministration of Moses is passed through,
the ministry of the prophets comes to be read and understood, which
reaches through the figures, types, and shadows unto John, the greatest
prophet born of a woman; whose ministration prepares the way of the
Lord, by bringing down the exalted mountains, and making straight paths.
And as this ministration is passed through, an entrance comes to be
known into the everlasting kingdom. Thus I saw plainly that none could
read Moses aright, without Moses’ spirit, by which Moses saw how man was
in the image of God in Paradise, and how he fell, how death came over
him, and how all men have been under this death. I saw how Moses
received the pure law, that went over all transgressors; and how the
clean beasts, which were figures and types, were offered up, when the
people were come into the righteous law that went over the first
transgression. Both Moses and the prophets saw through the types and
figures and beyond them, and saw Christ, the great prophet, that was to
come to fulfil them. I saw that none could read John’s words aright, and
with a true understanding of them, but in and with the same divine
Spirit by which John spoke them; and by his burning, shining light,
which is sent from God. For by that Spirit their crooked natures might
be made straight, and their rough natures smooth, and the exacter and
violent doer in them might be cast out; and they that had been
hypocrites might come to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, and
their mountain of sin and earthliness might be laid low, and their
valley exalted in them, that there might be a way prepared for the Lord
in them: then the least of the kingdom is greater than John. But all
must first know the voice crying in the wilderness, in their hearts,
which through transgression, were become a wilderness. Thus I saw it was
an easy matter to say death reigned from Adam to Moses; and that the law
and the prophets were until John; and that the least in the kingdom is
greater than John; but none could know _how_ death reigned from Adam to
Moses, &c., but by the same Holy Spirit that Moses, the prophets, and
John were in. They could not know the spiritual meaning of Moses’, the
prophets’, and John’s words, nor see their path and travels, much less
see through them, and to the end of them into the kingdom, unless they
had the Spirit and light of Jesus; nor could they know the words of
Christ, and of his apostles, without his Spirit. But as man comes
through by the Spirit and power of God, to Christ, who fulfils the
types, figures, shadows, promises, and prophecies that were of him, and
is led by the Holy Ghost into the truth and substance of the Scriptures,
sitting down in him who is the author and end of them; then are they
read, and understood with profit and great delight.

Moreover, when I was brought up into his image in righteousness and
holiness, and into the paradise of God, He let me see how Adam was made
a living soul: and also the stature of Christ, the mystery that had been
hid from ages and generations; which things are hard to be uttered and
cannot be borne by many. For, of all the sects in Christendom (so
called) that I discoursed withal, I found none that could bear to be
told that any should come to Adam’s perfection, into the image of God,
that righteousness and holiness that Adam was in before he fell; to be
clear and pure without sin, as he was. Therefore how should they be able
to bear being told that any should grow up to the measure of the stature
of the fulness of Christ, when they cannot bear to hear that any should
come, whilst upon earth, into the same power and Spirit that the
prophets and apostles were in? Though it is a certain truth, that none
can understand their writings aright, without the same Spirit by which
they were written.

Now the Lord God opened to me by his invisible power, “that every man
was enlightened by the divine light of Christ;” and I saw it shine
through all; and that they that believed in it came out of condemnation
to the light of life, and became the children of it; but they that hated
it, and did not believe in it, were condemned by it, though they made a
profession of Christ. This I saw in the pure openings of the light,
without the help of any man; neither did I then know where to find it in
the Scriptures, though afterwards, searching the Scriptures, I found it.
For I saw in that Light and Spirit which was before the Scriptures were
given forth, and which led the holy men of God to give them forth, that
all must come to that Spirit, if they would know God, or Christ, or the
Scriptures aright, which they that gave them forth were led and taught
by.

But I observed a dulness and drowsy heaviness upon people, which I
wondered at: for sometimes when I would set myself to sleep, my mind
went over all to the beginning, in that which is from everlasting to
everlasting. I saw death was to pass over this sleepy heavy state; and I
told people they must come to witness death to that sleepy, heavy
nature, and a cross to it in the power of God, that their minds and
hearts might be on things above.

On a certain time, as I was walking in the fields, the Lord said unto
me: “Thy name is written in the Lamb’s book of life, which was before
the foundation of the world;” and, as the Lord spoke it, I believed, and
saw it in the new birth. Then, some time after, the Lord commanded me to
go abroad into the world, which was like a briery thorny wilderness; and
when I came, in the Lord’s mighty power, with the word of life into the
world, the world swelled, and made a noise like the great raging waves
of the sea. Priests and professors, magistrates and people, were all
like a sea, when I came to proclaim the day of the Lord amongst them,
and to preach repentance to them.

I was sent to turn people from darkness to the light, that they might
receive Christ Jesus: for, to as many as should receive him in his
light, I saw that he would give power to become the sons of God; which I
had obtained by receiving Christ. I was to direct people to the Spirit,
that gave forth the Scriptures, by which they might be led into all
truth, and so up to Christ and God, as they had been who gave them
forth. I was to turn them to the grace of God, and to the truth in the
heart, which came by Jesus; that by this grace they might be taught,
which would bring them salvation, that their hearts might be established
by it, and their words might be seasoned, and all might come to know
their salvation nigh. I saw that Christ died for all men, and was a
propitiation for all; and enlightened all men and women with his divine
and saving light; and that none could be a true believer, but who
believed in it. I saw that the grace of God, which bringeth salvation,
had appeared to all men, and that the manifestation of the Spirit of God
was given to every man, to profit withal. These things I did not see by
the help of man, nor by the letter, though they are written in the
letter, but I saw them in the light of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his
immediate Spirit and power, as did the holy men of God, by whom the Holy
Scriptures were written. Yet I had no slight esteem of the holy
Scriptures, but they were very precious to me, for I was in that Spirit
by which they were given forth: and what the Lord opened in me, I
afterwards found was agreeable to them. I could speak much of these
things, and many volumes might be written, but all would prove too short
to set forth the infinite love, wisdom, and power of God, in preparing,
fitting, and furnishing me for the service he had appointed me to;
letting me see the depths of Satan on the one hand, and opening to me,
on the other hand, the divine mysteries of His own everlasting kingdom.

Now, when the Lord God and his son Jesus Christ sent me forth into the
world, to preach his everlasting gospel and kingdom, I was glad that I
was commanded to turn people to that inward light, Spirit, and grace, by
which all might know their salvation, and their way to God; even that
Divine Spirit which would lead them into all truth, and which I
infallibly knew would never deceive any.

But with and by this divine power and Spirit of God, and the light of
Jesus, I was to bring people off from all their own ways, to Christ, the
new and living way; and from their churches, which men had made and
gathered, to the church in God, the general assembly written in heaven
which Christ is the head of: and off from the world’s, teachers, made by
men, to learn of Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, of
whom the Father said, “This is my beloved Son, hear ye him;” and off
from all the world’s worships, to know the Spirit of Truth in the inward
parts, and to be led thereby; that in it they might worship the Father
of spirits, who seeks such to worship him; which Spirit they that
worshipped not in, knew not what they worshipped. And I was to bring
people off from all the world’s religions, which are vain; that they
might know the pure religion, might visit the fatherless, the widows,
and the strangers, and keep themselves from the spots of the world; then
there would not be so many beggars, the sight of whom often grieved my
heart, as it denoted so much hard-heartedness amongst them that
professed the name of Christ. I was to bring them off from all the
world’s fellowships, and prayings, and singings, which stood in forms
without power; that their fellowship might be in the Holy Ghost, and in
the Eternal Spirit of God; that they might pray in the Holy Ghost, and
sing in the Spirit, and with the grace that comes by Jesus; making
melody in their hearts to the Lord, who hath sent his beloved Son to be
their Saviour, and caused his heavenly sun to shine upon all the world,
and through them all, and his heavenly rain to fall upon the just and
the unjust (as his outward rain doth fall, and his outward sun doth
shine on all), which is God’s unspeakable love to the world. I was to
bring people off from Jewish ceremonies, and from heathenish fables, and
from men’s inventions and windy doctrines, by which they blew the people
about this way and the other way, from sect to sect; and from all their
beggarly rudiments, with their schools and colleges for making ministers
of Christ, who are indeed ministers of their own making, but not of
Christ’s; and from all their images and crosses, and sprinkling of
infants, with all their holy days (so called) and all their vain
traditions, which they had instituted since the apostles’ days, which
the Lord’s power was against: in the dread and authority of which, I was
moved to declare against them all, and against all that preached and not
freely, as being such as had not received freely from Christ.

Moreover, when the Lord sent me forth into the world, he forbade me to
put off my hat to any, high or low; and I was required to Thee and Thou
all men and women, without any respect to rich or poor, great or small.
And as I travelled up and down, I was not to bid people Good morrow or
Good evening; neither might I bow or scrape with my leg to any one; and
this made the sects and professions to rage. But the Lord’s power
carried me over all to his glory, and many came to be turned to God in a
little time; for the heavenly day of the Lord sprung from on high, and
broke forth apace, by the light of which many came to see where they
were.

But O! the rage that then was in the priests, magistrates, professors,
and people of all sorts; but especially in priests and professors! for,
though Thou, to a single person, was according to their own learning,
their accidence, and grammar rules, and according to the Bible, yet they
could not bear to hear it: and as to the hat-honour, because I could not
put off my hat to them, it set them all into a rage. But the Lord showed
me that it was an honour below, which he would lay in the dust, and
stain;—an honour which proud flesh looked for, but sought not the honour
which came from God only;—an honour invented by men in the fall, and in
the alienation from God, who were offended if it were not given them;
and yet they would be looked upon as saints, church-members and great
Christians: but Christ saith, “How can ye believe, who receive honour
one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?” “And
I (saith Christ) receive not honour of men:” showing that men have an
honour, which men will receive and give; but Christ will have none of
it. This is the honour which Christ will not receive, and which must be
laid in the dust. O! the rage and scorn, the heat and fury that arose!
O! the blows, punchings, beatings, and imprisonments that we underwent,
for not putting off our hats to men! for that soon tried all men’s
patience and sobriety what it was. Some had their hats violently plucked
off and thrown away, so that they quite lost them. The bad language and
evil usage we received on this account are hard to be expressed, besides
the danger we were sometimes in, of losing our lives for this matter,
and that by the great professors of Christianity, who thereby evinced
that they were not true believers. And though it was but a small thing
in the eye of man, yet a wonderful confusion it brought among all
professors and priests; but, blessed be the Lord, many came to see the
vanity of that custom of putting off the hat to men, and felt the weight
of Truth’s testimony against it.

About this time I was sorely exercised in going to their courts to cry
for justice, and in speaking and writing to judges and justices to do
justly; in warning such as kept public-houses for entertainment, that
they should not let people have more drink than would do them good; and
in testifying against their wakes or feasts, may-games, sports, plays,
and shows, which trained up people to vanity and looseness, and led them
from the fear of God; and the days they had set forth for holy-days were
usually the times wherein they most dishonoured God by these things.[7]
In fairs, also, and in markets, I was made to declare against their
deceitful merchandise, cheating, and cozening; warning all to deal
justly, to speak the truth, to let their yea be yea, and their nay be
nay; and to do unto others as they would have others do unto them;
forewarning them of the great and terrible day of the Lord, which would
come upon them all. I was moved also to cry against all sorts of music,
and against the mountebanks playing tricks on their stages, for they
burthened the pure life, and stirred up people’s minds to vanity. I was
much exercised, too, with school-masters and school-mistresses, warning
them to teach their children sobriety in the fear of the Lord, that they
might not be nursed and trained up in lightness, vanity, and wantonness.
Likewise I was made to warn masters and mistresses, fathers and mothers
in private families, to take care that their children and servants might
be trained up in the fear of the Lord; and that they themselves should
be therein examples and patterns of sobriety and virtue to them. For I
saw that as the Jews were to teach their children the law of God and the
old covenant, and to train them up in it, and their servants, yea, the
very strangers were to keep the Sabbath amongst them, and be
circumcised, before they might eat of their sacrifices; so all
Christians, and all that made a profession of Christianity, ought to
train up their children and servants in the new covenant of light,
Christ Jesus, who is God’s salvation to the ends of the earth, that all
may know their salvation: and they ought to train them up in the law of
life, the law of the Spirit, the law of love and of faith; that they
might be made free from the law of sin and death. And all Christians
ought to be circumcised by the Spirit, which puts off the body of the
sins of the flesh, that they may come to eat of the heavenly sacrifice,
Christ Jesus, that true spiritual food, which none can rightly feed upon
but they that are circumcised by the Spirit. Likewise, I was exercised
about the star-gazers, who drew people’s minds from Christ, the bright
and the morning star; and from the Sun of righteousness, by whom the
sun, and moon, and stars, and all things else were made, who is the
wisdom of God, and from whom the right knowledge of all things is
received.

Footnote 7:

  By a royal proclamation of James I., issued in 1618 (for Lancashire),
  these pastimes were made lawful recreations for the First-day of the
  week, provided they did not interfere with the times appointed for
  worship. Many of the clergy at first refused to promulgate the
  proclamation, though by so doing they acted contrary to their
  canonical obedience, and laid themselves open to penalties. In the
  seventh year of Charles I., this proclamation, at the instigation of
  Archbishop Laud, was revived, and extended to the whole nation, and
  was enjoined to be published and advocated from the pulpit by all
  ministers, to their disgrace. By the revival of this offensive
  proclamation, these disorderly revels had arrived to such a height of
  licentious depravity, that some well-disposed justices, in the county
  of Somerset, petitioned the judges on the western circuit, Sir Thomas
  Richardson, Lord Chief Justice, and Baron Denham, to suppress them.
  For so doing, they were summoned before the King and Council, by
  Archbishop Laud, for illegally interfering with the ecclesiastical
  jurisdiction, and the council rescinded the prohibitions, and
  cashiered the judges.—(See Fuller’s _Church Hist._, Book x., p. 74:
  and Book xi., p. 147).

But the earthly spirit of the priests wounded my life; and when I heard
the bell toll to call people together to the steeple-house, it struck at
my life; for it was just like a market-bell, to gather people together,
that the priest might set forth his ware to sale. O! the vast sums of
money that are gotten by the trade they make of selling the Scriptures,
and by their preaching, from the highest bishop to the lowest priest!
What one trade else in the world is comparable to it? notwithstanding
the Scriptures were given forth freely, and Christ commanded his
ministers to preach freely, and the prophets and apostles denounced
judgment against all covetous hirelings and diviners for money. But in
this free Spirit of the Lord Jesus was I sent forth to declare the Word
of life and reconciliation freely, that all might come to Christ, who
gives freely, and who renews up into the image of God, which man and
woman were in before they fell, that they might sit down in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus.




                              CHAPTER III.

1649-1650—George Fox is first imprisoned at Nottingham, where the
    Sheriff is convinced—he is liberated and quiets a distracted
    woman—he is cruelly treated at Mansfield-Woodhouse—is taken before
    the magistrates at Derby—acknowledges that he is sanctified—is
    temptingly asked if he were Christ, which he denies, yet is
    committed for blasphemy—his mittimus to Derby prison—writes to the
    priests at Derby against preaching for hire, &c.—also against
    persecution—to Barton and Bennet, justices, on the same subject—to
    Justice Bennet against covetousness—to Justice Barton, a preacher
    and a persecutor—to the Mayor of Derby against persecution and
    oppression—to the court of Derby against oaths and oppression—to the
    bell-ringers of Derby against vanities and worldly pleasures—his
    jailer is convinced—Justice Bennet first gives Friends the name of
    Quakers in derision—writes to Friends and others, to open their
    understandings, and to direct them to their true Teacher within
    themselves—to the convinced people, directing them to internal
    silence and to true obedience—an encouragement to the faithful—to
    the justices of Derby against persecution, thrice repeated—to the
    priests of Derby, on the same subject—to the justices of Derby, to
    prize their time, and to depart from evil—the like to Colonel
    Barton, justice, and warning of the plagues and vengeance hanging
    over the oppressor.


Now as I went towards NOTTINGHAM on a First-day in the morning, with
Friends to a meeting there, when I came on the top of a hill in sight of
the town, I espied the great steeple-house; and the Lord said unto me,
“thou must go cry against yonder great idol, and against the worshippers
therein.” I said nothing of this to the Friends that were with me, but
went on with them to the meeting, where the mighty power of the Lord was
amongst us; in which I left Friends sitting in the meeting, and I went
away to the steeple-house. When I came there, all the people looked like
fallow-ground, and the priest (like a great lump of earth) stood in his
pulpit above. He took for his text these words of Peter, “We have also a
more sure Word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as
unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day-star arise in your hearts.” And he told the people that this was the
Scriptures, by which they were to try all doctrines, religions, and
opinions. Now the Lord’s power was so mighty upon me, and so strong in
me, that I could not hold, but was made to cry out and say, “O no, it is
not the Scriptures;” and I told them what it was, namely, the Holy
Spirit, by which the holy men of God gave forth the Scriptures, whereby
opinions, religions, and judgments were to be tried; for it led into all
truth, and so gave the knowledge of all truth. The Jews had the
Scriptures, and yet resisted the Holy Ghost, and rejected Christ, the
bright morning-star. They persecuted Christ and his apostles, and took
upon them to try their doctrines by the Scriptures, but erred in
judgment, and did not try them aright, because they tried without the
Holy Ghost. As I spoke thus amongst them, the officers came and took me
away, and put me into a nasty, stinking prison; the smell whereof got so
into my nose and throat, that it very much annoyed me.

But that day the Lord’s power sounded so in their ears, that they were
amazed at the voice; and could not get it out of their ears for some
time after, they were so reached by the Lord’s power in the
steeple-house. At night they took me before the mayor, aldermen, and
sheriffs of the town; and when I was brought before them, the mayor was
in a peevish, fretful temper, but the Lord’s power allayed him. They
examined me at large; and I told them how the Lord had moved me to come.
After some discourse between them and me, they sent me back to prison
again; but some time after the head sheriff, whose name was John
Reckless, sent for me to his house. When I came in, his wife met me in
the hall, and said, “Salvation is come to our house.” She took me by the
hand, and was much wrought upon by the power of the Lord God; and her
husband, and children, and servants were much changed, for the power of
the Lord wrought upon them. I lodged at the sheriff’s, and great
meetings we had in his house. Some persons of considerable condition in
the world came to them, and the Lord’s power appeared eminently amongst
them. This sheriff sent for the other sheriff, and for a woman they had
had dealings with in the way of trade; and he told her before the other
sheriff, that they had wronged her in their dealings with her (for the
other sheriff and he were partners), and that they ought to make her
restitution. This he spoke cheerfully; but the other sheriff denied it;
and the woman said she knew nothing of it. But the friendly sheriff said
it was so, and that the other knew it well enough; and having discovered
the matter, and acknowledged the wrong done by them, he made restitution
to the woman, and exhorted the other sheriff to do the like.

The Lord’s power was with this friendly sheriff, and wrought a mighty
change in him, and great openings he had. The next market-day, as he was
walking with me in the chamber, in his slippers, he said, “I must go
into the market, and preach repentance to the people;” and accordingly
he went into the market, and into several streets, and preached
repentance to the people. Several others also in the town were moved to
speak to the mayor and magistrates, and to the people, exhorting them to
repent. Hereupon the magistrates grew very angry, and sent for me from
the Sheriff’s house, and committed me to the common prison. When the
assize came on, there was one moved to come and offer up himself for me,
body for body; yea, life also: but when I should have been brought
before the judge, the sheriff’s man being somewhat long in fetching me
to the sessions-house, the judge was risen before I came. At which I
understood the judge was somewhat offended, and said, “he would have
admonished the youth, if he had been brought before him;” for I was then
imprisoned by the name of A YOUTH. So I was returned to prison again,
and put into the common jail. The Lord’s power was great among Friends;
but the people began to be very rude; wherefore the governor of the
castle sent down soldiers, and dispersed them; and after that they were
quiet. But both priests and people were astonished at the wonderful
power that broke forth; and several of the priests were made tender, and
some did confess to the power of the Lord.

Now, after I was released from Nottingham jail, where I had been kept
prisoner some time, I travelled as before, in the work of the Lord.
Coming to MANSFIELD-WOODHOUSE, there was a distracted woman under a
doctor’s hand, with her hair loose all about her ears. He was about to
bleed her, she being first bound, and many people being about her,
holding her by violence; but he could get no blood from her. I desired
them to unbind her, and let her alone, for they could not touch the
spirit in her, by which she was tormented. So they unbound her; and I
was moved to speak to her, and in the name of the Lord to bid her be
quiet and still; and she was so. The Lord’s power settled her mind, and
she mended; and afterwards she received the truth, and continued in it
to her death. The Lord’s name was honoured; to whom the glory of all his
works belongs. Many great and wonderful things were wrought by the
heavenly power in those days; for the Lord made bare his omnipotent arm,
and manifested his power to the astonishment of many, by the healing
virtue whereof many have been delivered from great infirmities, and the
devils were made subject through his name; of which particular instances
might be given, beyond what this unbelieving age is able to receive or
bear. But blessed for ever be the name of the Lord, and everlastingly
honoured, and over all exalted and magnified be the arm of his glorious
power, by which he hath wrought gloriously; let the honour and praise of
all his works be ascribed to him alone.

Now while I was at Mansfield-Woodhouse, I was moved to go to the
steeple-house there, and declare the truth to the priest and people; but
the people fell upon me in great rage, struck me down, and almost
stifled and smothered me; and I was cruelly beaten and bruised by them
with their hands, Bibles, and sticks. Then they haled me out, though I
was hardly able to stand, and put me into the stocks, where I sat some
hours; and they brought dog-whips and horse-whips, threatening to whip
me. After some time they had me before the magistrate, at a knight’s
house, where were many great persons; who, seeing how evilly I had been
used, after much threatening, set me at liberty. But the rude people
stoned me out of the town, for preaching the word of life to them. I was
scarcely able to move or stand, by reason of the ill-usage I had
received; yet with considerable effort I got about a mile from the town,
and then I met with some people who gave me something to comfort me,
because I was inwardly bruised; but the Lord’s power soon healed me
again. That day some people were convinced of the Lord’s truth, and
turned to his teaching, at which I rejoiced.

Then I went into LEICESTERSHIRE, several Friends accompanying me. There
were some Baptists in that country whom I desired to see and speak with,
because they were separated from the public worship. So one Oates, who
was one of their chief teachers, and others of the heads of them, with
several others of their company, came to meet us at BARROW; and there we
discoursed with them. One of them said, “What was not of faith was sin.”
Whereupon I asked them, What faith was? and how it was wrought in man?
But they turned off from that, and spoke of their baptism in water. Then
I asked them, Whether their mountain of sin was brought down and laid
low in them? and their rough and crooked ways made smooth and straight
in them? for they looked upon that Scripture as meaning outward
mountains and ways. But I told them they must find them in their own
hearts; which they seemed to wonder at. We asked them who baptized John
the Baptist? and who baptized Peter, John, and the rest of the Apostles?
and put them to prove by Scripture that these were baptized in water;
but they were silent. Then I asked them, “Seeing Judas, who betrayed
Christ, and was called the Son of Perdition, had hanged himself, what
Son of Perdition was that which Paul spoke of, that sat in the temple of
God, exalted above all that is called God? and what temple of God that
was in which this Son of Perdition sat? and whether he, that betrays
Christ within in himself, be not one in nature with that Judas, that
betrayed Christ without?” But they could not tell what to make of this,
nor what to say to it. So after some discourse we parted; and some of
them were loving to us. On the First-day following we came to BAGWORTH,
and went to a steeple-house, where some Friends were got in; and the
people locked them in, and themselves too, with the priest. But after
the priest had done, they opened the door, and we went in also, and had
a service for the Lord amongst them. Afterwards we had a meeting in the
town, amongst several people that were in high notions.

Passing from thence, I heard of a people that were in prison in COVENTRY
for religion. And as I walked towards the jail, the word of the Lord
came to me saying, “MY LOVE WAS ALWAYS TO THEE, AND THOU ART IN MY
LOVE.” And I was ravished with the sense of the love of God, and greatly
strengthened in my inward man. But when I came into the jail, where the
prisoners were, a great power of darkness struck at me, and I sat still,
having my spirit gathered into the love of God. At last these prisoners
began to rant, and vapour, and blaspheme, at which my soul was greatly
grieved. They said they were God; but that we could not bear such
things. When they were calm, I stood up and asked them whether they did
such things by motion, or from Scripture; and they said, from Scripture.
A Bible being at hand, I asked them to point out that Scripture; and
they showed me the place where the sheet was let down to Peter, and it
was said to him, what was sanctified he should not call common or
unclean. When I had showed them that that Scripture proved nothing for
their purpose, they brought another, which spoke of God’s reconciling
all things to himself, things in heaven, and things in earth. I told
them I owned that Scripture also, but showed them that that was nothing
to their purpose either. Then seeing they said they were God, I asked
them, if they knew whether it would rain to-morrow? they said they could
not tell. I told them, God could tell. Again, I asked them, if they
thought they should be always in that condition, or should change? and
they answered they could not tell. Then said I unto them, God can tell,
and God doth not change. You say you are God; and yet you cannot tell
whether you shall change or not. So they were confounded, and quite
brought down for the time. After I had reproved them for their
blasphemous expressions, I went away; for I perceived they were Ranters.
I had met with none before; and I admired the goodness of the Lord in
appearing so unto me before I went amongst them. Not long after this,
one of these Ranters, whose name was Joseph Salmon, put forth a paper,
or book of recantation; upon which they were set at liberty.

From Coventry I went to ATHERSTONE; and it being their lecture-day, I
was moved to go to their chapel to speak to the priests and people. They
were generally pretty quiet; only some few raged, and would have had my
relations to have me bound. I declared largely to them how that God was
come to teach his people himself, and to bring them off from all their
man-made teachers to hear his Son. Some were convinced there.

Then I went to MARKET-BOSWORTH, and there was a lecture there also. He
that preached that day was Nathaniel Stevens, who was priest of the town
where I was born. He raged much when I spoke to him and to the people,
and told them I was mad. He had said before, to one Colonel Purfoy, that
there was never such a plant bred in England; and he bid the people not
to hear me. So the people, being stirred up by this deceitful priest,
fell upon us, and stoned us out of the town; yet they did not do us much
hurt. Howbeit, some people were made loving that day, and others were
confirmed, seeing the rage of both priests and professors; and some
cried out, that the priest durst not stand to prove his ministry.

As I travelled through markets, fairs, and divers places, I saw death
and darkness in all people, where the power of the Lord God had not
shaken them. As I was passing on in Leicestershire, I came to TWY-CROSS,
where there were excise-men. I was moved of the Lord to go to them, and
warn them to take heed of oppressing the poor; and people were much
affected with it. There was in that town a great man, that had long lain
sick, and was given up by the physicians; and some Friends in the town
desired me to go to see him. I went up to him in his chamber, and spoke
the word of life to him, and was moved to pray by him; and the Lord was
entreated, and restored him to health. But when I was come down stairs,
into a lower room, and was speaking to the servants, and to some people
that were there, a serving-man of his came raving out of another room,
with a naked rapier in his hand, and set it just to my side. I looked
steadfastly on him, and said, “Alack for thee, poor creature! what wilt
thou do with thy carnal weapon; it is no more to me than a straw.” The
standers-by were much troubled, and he went away in a rage, and full of
wrath. But when the news of it came to his master, he turned him out of
his service. Thus the Lord’s power preserved me, and raised up the weak
man, who afterwards was very loving to Friends; and when I came to that
town again, both he and his wife came to see me.

After this I was moved to go into Derbyshire, where the mighty power of
God was among Friends. And I went to CHESTERFIELD, where one Britland
was priest. He saw beyond the common sort of priests, for he had been
partly convinced, and had spoken much on behalf of Truth, before he was
priest there; but when the priest of that town died, he got the
parsonage, and choked himself with it. I was moved to speak to him and
the people in the great love of God, that they might come off from all
men’s teaching unto God’s teaching; and he was not able to gainsay. But
they had me before the Mayor, and threatened to send me, with some
others, to the House of Correction; and kept us in custody till it was
late in the night. Then the officers, with the watchmen, put us out of
the town, leaving us to shift as we could. So I bent my course toward
Derby, having a friend or two with me. In our way we met with many
professors; and at KIDSEY-PARK many were convinced.

Then coming to DERBY, I lay at a doctor’s house, whose wife was
convinced; and so were several more in the town. As I was walking in my
chamber, the [steeple-house] bell rung, and it struck at my life at the
very hearing of it; so I asked the woman of the house what the bell rung
for? She said there was to be a great lecture there that day, and many
of the officers of the army, and priests, and preachers were to be
there, and a colonel, that was a preacher. Then was I moved of the Lord
to go up to them; and when they had done I spoke to them what the Lord
commanded me, and they were pretty quiet. But there came an officer and
took me by the hand, and said I must go before the magistrates, and the
other two that were with me. It was about the first hour after noon that
we came before them. They asked me, Why we came thither; I said, God
moved us so to do; and I told them, “God dwells not in temples made with
hands.” I told them also, All their preaching, baptism, and sacrifices
would never sanctify them; and bid them look unto Christ in them, and
not unto men; for it is Christ that sanctifies. Then they ran into many
words; but I told them they were not to dispute of God and Christ, but
to obey him. The power of God thundered amongst them, and they flew like
chaff before it. They put me in and out of the room often, hurrying me
backward and forward; for they were from the first hour till the ninth
at night in examining me. Sometimes they would tell me, in a deriding
manner, that I was taken up in raptures. At last they asked me, Whether
I was sanctified? I answered, Yes; for I was in the paradise of God.
Then they asked me, If I had no sin? I answered, “Christ, my Saviour,
has taken away my sin, and in him there is no sin.” They asked, How we
knew that Christ did abide in us? I said, By his Spirit, that he has
given us. They temptingly asked, If any of us were Christ? I answered,
Nay, we were nothing, Christ is all. They said, If a man steal, is it no
sin? I answered, All unrighteousness is sin. So when they had wearied
themselves in examining me, they committed me and one other man to the
House of Correction in Derby for six months, as blasphemers; as appears
by the following mittimus:—

      _To the Master of the House of Correction in Derby, greeting._

  “We have sent you herewithal the bodies of George Fox, late of
  Mansfield, in the county of Nottingham, and John Fretwell, late of
  Stainsby, in the county of Derby, husbandman, brought before us this
  present day, and charged with the avowed uttering and broaching of
  divers blasphemous opinions contrary to a late Act of Parliament,
  which, upon their examination before us, they have confessed. These
  are therefore to require you forthwith, upon sight thereof, to receive
  them, the said George Fox and John Fretwell, into your custody, and
  them therein safely to keep during the space of six months, without
  bail or mainprize, or until they shall find sufficient security to be
  of good behaviour, or be thence delivered by order from ourselves.
  Hereof you are not to fail. Given under our hands and seals this 30th
  day of October, 1650.

                                                      GER. BENNETT,
                                                      NATH. BARTON.”

Now did the priests bestir themselves in their pulpits to preach up sin
for term of life; and much of their work was to plead for it; so that
people said, never was the like heard. After some time, he that was
committed with me, not standing faithful to his testimony, got in with
the jailer, and by him made way to the justice to have leave to go to
see his mother; and so got his liberty. It was then reported, that he
said I had bewitched and deceived him; but my spirit was strengthened
when he was gone. The priests and professors, the justices and the
jailer, were all in a great rage against me. The jailer watched my words
and actions, and would often ask me questions to ensnare me; and
sometimes asked me such silly questions as, Whether the door was latched
or not? thinking to draw some sudden, unadvised answer from me, whence
he might take advantage to charge sin upon me; but I was kept watchful
and chaste, so that they could get no advantage of me, which they
wondered at.

Not long after my commitment, I was moved to write both to the priests
and magistrates of Derby. And first to the priests.

  “O friends, I was sent unto you to tell you, that if you had received
  the gospel freely, you would minister it freely without money or
  price: but you make a trade and sale of what the prophets and the
  apostles have spoken; and so you corrupt the truth. And you are the
  men that lead silly women captive, who are ever learning, and never
  able to come to the knowledge of the truth; you have a form of
  godliness, but you deny the power. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
  Moses, so do you resist the truth, being men of corrupt minds,
  reprobate concerning the faith. But you shall proceed no further; for
  your folly shall be made manifest to all men as theirs was. Moreover,
  the Lord sent me to tell you, that he doth look for fruits. You asked
  me, if Scripture was my rule? but it is not your rule, to rule your
  lives by, but to talk of in words. You are the men that live in
  pleasures, pride, and wantonness, in fulness of bread, and abundance
  of idleness: see if this be not the sin of Sodom. Lot received the
  angels, but Sodom was envious. You show forth the vain nature; you
  stand in the steps of them that crucified MY SAVIOUR, and mocked him;
  you are their children; you show forth their fruit. They had the chief
  place in the assemblies, and so have you; they loved to be called
  Rabbi, and so do you.”

                                                               G. F.

I wrote to the magistrates who committed me to this effect:—

        “FRIENDS,

  “I am forced, in tender love unto your souls, to write unto you, and
  beseech you to consider what you do, and what the commands of God call
  for. He requires justice and mercy, to break every yoke, and to let
  the oppressed go free. But who calleth for justice, or loveth mercy,
  or contendeth for the truth? Is not judgment turned backward, and doth
  not justice stand afar off? Is not truth silenced in the streets, or
  can equity enter? And do not they that depart from evil make
  themselves a prey? Oh! consider what ye do in time, and take heed whom
  ye imprison; for the magistrate is set for the punishment of
  evil-doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Now, I entreat
  you, in time take heed what you do; for surely the Lord will come, and
  will make manifest both the builders and the work. If it be of man, it
  will fail; but if it be of God, nothing will overthrow it. Therefore I
  desire and pray, that you would take heed, and beware what you do,
  lest ye be found fighters against God.”

                                                               G. F.

Now, after I had thus far cleared my conscience to them, I waited in
holy patience, leaving the event to God, in whose will I stood. After
some time I was moved to write again to the justices that had committed
me, to lay their evils before them, that they might repent. One of them,
Nathaniel Barton, was a colonel, a justice, and a preacher.

        “FRIENDS,

  “You spoke of the good old way which the prophet spoke of; but the
  prophet cried against the abominations which you hold up. Had you the
  power of God, ye would not persecute the good way. He that spoke of
  the good way was set in the stocks. The people cried, ‘Away with him
  to the stocks,’ for speaking the truth. Ah! foolish people, who have
  eyes and see not, ears and hear not, without understanding! ‘Fear ye
  not me,’ saith the Lord, ‘and will ye not tremble at my presence?’ O
  your pride and abominations are odious in the eyes of God! You that
  are preachers have the chief place in the assemblies, and are called
  of men, Master. Such were and are against my Saviour and Maker: they
  shut up the kingdom of heaven from men, and neither go in themselves,
  nor suffer others. Therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation,
  who have their places, and walk in their steps. You may say, if you
  had been in the days of the prophets, or Christ, you would not have
  persecuted them; wherefore be ye witnesses against yourselves, that ye
  are the children of them, seeing ye now persecute the way of truth. O
  consider, there is a true judge, that will give every one of you a
  reward according to your works. O mind where you are, you that hold up
  the abominations which the true prophet cried against! O come down,
  and sit in the dust! The Lord is coming with power, and he will throw
  down every one that is lifted up, that he alone may be exalted.”

As I had thus written unto them jointly, so, after some time, I wrote to
each of them by himself. To Justice Bennet thus:—

  “FRIEND,

  “Thou that dost profess God and Christ in words, see how thou
  followest him. To take off burthens, to visit them that are in
  prison, to show mercy, clothe thy own flesh, and deal thy bread to
  the hungry; these are God’s commandments. To relieve the fatherless,
  and to visit the widows in their afflictions, and to keep thyself
  unspotted of the world; this is pure religion before God. But if
  thou dost profess Christ, and follow covetousness, and greediness,
  and earthly-mindedness, thou deniest him in life, and deceivest
  thyself and others, and takest him for a cloak. Woe be to you,
  greedy and rich men; weep and howl, for your misery that shall come.
  Take heed of covetousness and extortion; God doth forbid that. Woe
  be to the man that coveteth an evil covetousness, that he may set
  his nest on high, and cover himself with thick clay. O! do not love
  that which God forbids. His servant thou art, whom thou dost obey,
  whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.
  Think of Lazarus and Dives; the one fared sumptuously every day, the
  other was a beggar. See if thou be not Dives: be not deceived, God
  is not mocked with vain words; evil communication corrupteth good
  manners; awake to righteousness, and sin not.”

                                                               G. F.

That to Justice Barton was in these words:—

        “FRIEND,

  “Thou that preachest Christ, and the Scriptures in words, when any
  come to follow that which thou hast spoken of, and to live the life of
  the Scriptures, then they that speak the Scriptures, but do not lead
  their lives according thereunto, persecute them that do. Mind the
  prophets, and Jesus Christ, and his apostles, and all the holy men of
  God; what they spoke was from the life; but they that had not the
  life, but the words, persecuted and imprisoned them that lived in the
  life, which those had backslidden from.”

                                                               G. F.

Having written to the justices and to the priests, it was upon me to
write to the Mayor of Derby also; who, though he did not sign the
mittimus, had a hand with the rest in sending me to prison. To him I
wrote after this manner:—

  “FRIEND,

  “Thou art set in place to do justice; but, in imprisoning my body,
  thou hast done contrary to justice, according to your own law. O take
  heed of pleasing men more than God, for that is the way of the Scribes
  and Pharisees; they sought the praise of men more than God. Remember
  who said, ‘I was a stranger, and ye took Me not in; I was in prison,
  and ye visited Me not.’ O friend, thy envy is not against me, but
  against the power of truth. I had no envy to you, but love. O take
  heed of oppression, ‘for the day of the Lord is coming, that shall
  burn as an oven; and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be
  as stubble; and the day that cometh, shall burn them up, saith the
  Lord of Hosts; it shall leave them neither root nor branch.’ O friend,
  if the love of God were in thee, thou wouldst love the truth, hear the
  truth spoken, and not imprison unjustly. The love of God beareth, and
  suffereth, and envieth no man. If the love of God had broken your
  hearts, you would show mercy; but you show forth what ruleth you.
  Every tree doth show forth its fruit; you do show forth your fruits
  openly. For drunkenness, swearing, pride, and vanity, rule among you,
  from the teacher to the people. O friend, mercy, and true judgment,
  and justice, are cried for in your streets! Oppression,
  unmercifulness, cruelty, hatred, pride, pleasures, wantonness, and
  fulness, are in your streets; but the poor are not regarded. O! take
  heed: ‘Woe be to the crown of pride! Woe be to them that drink wine in
  bowls, and the poor is ready to perish.’ O! remember Lazarus and
  Dives! One fared deliciously every day, and the other was a beggar. O
  friend, mind these things, for they are near; and see whether thou be
  not in Dives’ state.”

I wrote also to the court at Derby thus:—

  “I am moved to write unto you, to take heed of oppressing the poor in
  your courts, or laying burthens upon poor people, which they cannot
  bear; and of imposing false oaths, or making them to take oaths which
  they cannot perform. The Lord saith, ‘I will come near to judgment,
  and will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the false
  swearers, and against the idolaters, and against those that oppress
  widows and fatherless.’ Therefore take heed of all these things
  betimes. The Lord’s judgments are all true and righteous; and he
  delighteth in mercy. So love mercy, dear people, and consider in
  time.”

Likewise to the ringers of the bells in the steeple-house, called St.
Peter’s, in Derby, I sent these few lines:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “Take heed of pleasures, and prize your time now, while you have it,
  and do not spend it in pleasures or earthliness. The time may come,
  that you will say you had time, when it is past. Therefore look at the
  love of God now, while you have time; for it bringeth to loathe all
  vanities and worldly pleasures. O consider! Time is precious. Fear
  God, and rejoice in him, who hath made heaven and earth.”

While I was in prison, divers professors came to discourse with me; and
I had a sense, before they spoke, that they came to plead for sin and
imperfection. I asked them, Whether they were believers and had faith?
and they said, Yes. I asked them, In whom? and they said, In Christ. I
replied, If ye are true believers in Christ, you are passed from death
to life; and if passed from death, then from sin that bringeth death.
And if your faith be true, it will give you victory over sin and the
devil, purify your hearts and consciences (for the true faith is held in
a pure conscience,) and bring you to please God, and give you access to
him again. But they could not endure to hear of purity, and of victory
over sin and the devil; for they said they could not believe that any
could be free from sin on this side the grave. I bid them give over
babbling about the Scriptures, which were holy men’s words, whilst they
pleaded for unholiness.

At another time a company of professors came, and they also began to
plead for sin. I asked them, Whether they had hope? and they said, Yes:
God forbid but we should have hope. I asked them, What hope is it that
you have? Is Christ in you the hope of your glory? Doth it purify you,
as he is pure? But they could not abide to hear of being made pure here.
Then I bid them forbear talking of the Scriptures, which were holy men’s
words. For the holy men, that wrote the Scriptures, pleaded for holiness
in heart, life, and conversation here; but since you plead for impurity
and sin, which is of the devil, what have you to do with the holy men’s
words?

Now the keeper of the prison, being a high professor, was greatly
enraged against me, and spoke very wickedly of me: but it pleased the
Lord one day to strike him so, that he was in great trouble and under
great terror of mind. As I was walking in my chamber I heard a doleful
noise; and standing still, I heard him say to his wife, “Wife, I have
seen the day of judgment, and I saw George there, and I was afraid of
him, because I had done him so much wrong, and spoken so much against
him to the ministers and professors, and to the justices, and in taverns
and ale-houses.” After this, towards the evening, he came up into my
chamber, and said to me, “I have been as a lion against you; but now I
come like a lamb, and like the jailer that came to Paul and Silas
trembling.” And he desired that he might lodge with me; I told him that
I was in his power, he might do what he would: but he said nay, he would
have my leave, and he could desire to be always with me, but not to have
me as a prisoner; and he said “he had been plagued, and his house had
been plagued for my sake.” So I suffered him to lodge with me; and then
he told me all his heart, and said he believed what I had said of the
true faith and hope to be true; and he wondered that the other man that
was put into prison with me did not stand to it; and said, “That man was
not right, but I was an honest man.” He confessed also to me, that at
those times when I had asked him to let me go forth to speak the word of
the Lord to the people, and he had refused to let me, and I had laid the
weight thereof upon him, that he used to be under great trouble, amazed,
and almost distracted for some time after; and in such a condition that
he had little strength left him. When the morning came, he rose, and
went to the justices, and told them, “that he and his house had been
plagued for my sake:” and one of the justices replied (as he reported to
me), that the plagues were on them too for keeping me. This was Justice
Bennet of Derby, who was the first that called us Quakers, because I bid
them tremble at the word of the Lord. This was in the year 1650.[8]

Footnote 8:

  The designation “Quakers,” which was at first applied in scorn, has
  ever since been used by the world to distinguish Friends from other
  professors of religion. The first use of the term in the records of
  Parliament, occurs in the journals of the House of Commons in 1654.

After this the justices gave leave that I should have liberty to walk a
mile. I perceived their end, and told the jailer if they would show me
how far a mile was, I might walk it sometimes; for I believed they
thought I would go away. And the jailer confessed afterwards, that they
did it with that intent, to have me escape, to ease them of their
plague; but I told him I was not of that spirit.

This jailer had a sister, a sickly young woman. She came up into my
chamber to visit me; and after she had stayed some time, and I had
spoken the words of truth to her, she went down, and told them that “we
were an innocent people, and did none any hurt, but did good to all,
even to them that hated us;” and she desired them to use kindness
towards me.

As my restraint prevented my travelling about, to declare and spread
truth through the country, it came upon me to write a paper, and send it
forth to be spread abroad both amongst Friends and other tender people,
for the opening of their understandings in the way of truth, and
directing them to the true teacher in themselves. It was as follows:—

  “The Lord doth show unto man his thoughts, and discovereth all the
  secret workings in man. A man may be brought to see his evil thoughts,
  running mind, and vain imaginations, and may strive to keep them down,
  and to keep his mind in; but he cannot overcome them, nor keep his
  mind within, to the Lord. In this state and condition submit to the
  Spirit of the Lord, which discovers them, and which will bring to wait
  upon him, and destroy them. Therefore stand in the faith of the Lord
  Jesus Christ, who is the author of the true faith, and mind him; for
  he will discover the root of lusts, evil thoughts, and vain
  imaginations, and how they are begotten, conceived, and bred; then how
  they are brought forth, and how every evil member doth work. He will
  discover every principle from its own nature and root.

  “So mind the faith of Christ, and the anointing which is in you, to be
  taught by it, which will discover all workings in you; and as he
  teacheth you, so obey and forsake; else you will not grow up in the
  faith, nor in the life of Christ, where the love of God is received.
  Now love begetteth love, its own nature and image: and when mercy and
  truth meet, what joy there is! Mercy triumphs in judgment; and love
  and mercy bear the judgment of the world, in patience. That which
  cannot bear the world’s judgment is not the love of God; for love
  beareth all things, and is above the world’s judgment: for the world’s
  judgment is but foolishness. And though it be the world’s judgment and
  practice to cast all the world’s filthiness that is among themselves
  upon the saints, yet their judgment is false.

  “Now the chaste virgins follow Christ, the Lamb that takes away the
  sins of the world; but they that are of that spirit which is not
  chaste, will not follow Christ the Lamb in his steps, but are
  disobedient to him in his commands. So the fleshly mind doth mind the
  flesh, and talketh of the flesh! its knowledge is fleshly and not
  spiritual; and savours of death and not of the Spirit of life. Some
  men have the nature of swine wallowing in the mire. Some the nature of
  dogs to bite both the sheep and one another. Some of lions, to tear,
  devour, and destroy. Some of wolves, to tear and devour the lambs and
  sheep of Christ; and some men have the nature of the serpent (that old
  adversary), to sting, envenom, and poison. ‘He that hath an ear to
  hear, let him hear,’ and learn these things within himself. Some men
  have the natures of other beasts and creatures, minding nothing but
  earthly and visible things, and feeding without the fear of God. Some
  have the nature of a horse, to prance and vapour in their strength,
  and to be swift in doing evil; and some have the nature of tall,
  sturdy oaks, to flourish and spread in wisdom and strength; who are
  strong in evil, which must perish and come to the fire. Thus the evil
  is but one in all, but worketh many ways; and whatsoever a man’s or
  woman’s nature is addicted to, that is outward, the evil one will fit
  him with that, and will please his nature and appetite to keep his
  mind in his inventions, and in the creatures from the Creator.

  “O! therefore let not the mind go forth from God; for if it do, it
  will be stained, venomed, and corrupted. If the mind go forth from the
  Lord it is hard to bring it in again; therefore take heed of the
  enemy, and keep in the faith of Christ. O! therefore mind that which
  is eternal and invisible, and him who is the Creator and Mover of all
  things; for the things that are made are not made of things that do
  appear; for the visible covereth the invisible sight in you. But as
  the Lord who is invisible, opens you by his invisible Power and
  Spirit, and brings down the carnal mind in you, so the invisible and
  immortal things are brought to light in you. O! therefore you, that
  know the light, walk in the light! for there are children of darkness,
  that will talk of the light and of the truth, and not walk in it. The
  children of the light love the light, and walk in the light; but the
  children of darkness walk in darkness, and hate the light; and in
  these the earthly lust, and the carnal mind choke the seed of faith;
  and this bringeth oppression on the seed and death over themselves. O!
  therefore, mind the pure Spirit of the everlasting God, which will
  teach you to use the creatures in their right place, and which judgeth
  the evil. ‘To Thee, O God, be all glory and honour, who art Lord of
  all, visible and invisible! To Thee be all praise, who bringest out of
  the deep, to Thyself; O powerful God who art worthy of all glory!’ For
  the Lord, who created all, and gives life and strength to all, is over
  all, and merciful to all. ‘So Thou who hast made all, and art overall,
  to Thee be all glory! In Thee is my strength, my refreshment, and
  life, my joy and my gladness, my rejoicing and glorying for evermore!’
  To live and walk in the Spirit of God is joy, and peace, and life; but
  the mind going forth into the creatures, or into any visible things
  from the Lord, this bringeth death. Now when the mind is got into the
  flesh and into death, the accuser gets within, and the law of sin and
  death gets into the flesh. Then the life suffers under the law of sin
  and death; and then there is straitness and failings. For then the
  good is shut up, and the self-righteousness is exalted. Then man doth
  work in the outward law, though he cannot justify himself by the law
  but is condemned by the light; for he cannot get out of that state,
  but by abiding in the light, resting in the mercy of God and believing
  in him, from whom all mercy flows. For there is peace in resting in
  the Lord Jesus. This is the narrow way that leads to him, the life;
  but few will abide in it; keep therefore in the innocency, and be
  obedient to the faith in him; and take heed of conforming to the
  world, and of reasoning with flesh and blood, for that bringeth
  disobedience; and then imaginations and questionings arise to draw
  from obedience to the truth of Christ. But the obedience of faith
  destroyeth imaginations and questionings, and all the temptations in
  the flesh, and buffetings, and lookings forth, and fetching up things
  that are past. By not keeping in the life and light, and not crossing
  the corrupt will by the power of God, the evil nature grows up in man,
  and then burdens will come, and man will be stained with that nature.
  But Esau’s mountains shall be laid waste, and become a wilderness,
  where the dragons lie: but Jacob, the second birth, shall be fruitful,
  and shall arise. For Esau is hated, and must not be lord; but Jacob,
  the second birth, which is perfect and plain, shall be lord; for he is
  beloved of God.”

                                                               G. F.

I wrote another paper about the same time, and sent it forth amongst the
convinced people as follows:—

  “The LORD IS KING over all the earth! Therefore, all people, praise
  and glorify your King in true obedience, in uprightness, and in the
  beauty of holiness. O! consider, in the true obedience, the Lord is
  known, and an understanding from him is received. Mark and consider in
  silence, in lowliness of mind, and thou wilt hear the Lord speak unto
  thee in thy mind. His voice is sweet and pleasant; his sheep hear his
  voice, and they will not hearken to another. When they hear his voice,
  they rejoice and are obedient; they also sing for joy. O, their hearts
  are filled with everlasting triumph! They sing, and praise the eternal
  God in Sion; their joy man shall never take from them. Glory to the
  Lord God for evermore!”

But many that had been convinced of the truth, turned aside, because of
the persecution that arose; whereupon I wrote a few lines for the
comfort and encouragement of the faithful, thus:—

  “Come, ye blessed of the Lord, and rejoice together! keep in unity and
  oneness of spirit; triumph above the world! be joyful in the Lord,
  reigning above the world, and above all things that draw from the
  Lord; that in clearness, righteousness, pureness, and joy, you may be
  preserved to the Lord. O hear! O hearken to the call of the Lord! Come
  out of the world and keep out of it for evermore! Come, sing together,
  ye righteous ones, the song of the Lord, the song of the Lamb; which
  none can learn, but they who are redeemed from the earth, and from the
  world.”

While I was in the House of Correction, my relations came to see me; and
being troubled for my imprisonment, they went to the justices that cast
me into prison, and desired to have me home with them; offering to be
bound in one hundred pounds, and others of Derby with them in fifty
pounds each, that I should come no more thither to declare against the
priests. So I was had up before the justices; and because I would not
consent, that they, or any should be bound for me (for I was innocent
from any ill behaviour, and had spoken the word of life and truth unto
them,) Justice Bennet rose up in a rage; and as I was kneeling down to
pray to the Lord to forgive him, he ran upon me, and struck me with both
his hands, crying, “Away with him, jailer, take him away, jailer.”
Whereupon I was had again to prison, and there kept, until the time of
my commitment for six months was expired. But I had now the liberty of
walking a mile by myself, which I made use of, as I felt freedom.
Sometimes I went into the market, and streets, and warned the people to
repent of their wickedness; and so returned to prison again. And there
being persons of several sorts of religion in the prison, I sometimes
went and visited them in their meetings on first-days.

After I had been before the justices, and they had required sureties for
my good behaviour (which I could not consent should be given, to blemish
my innocency,) it came upon me to write to the justices again; which I
did as follows:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “See what it is in you that doth imprison; see, who is head in you;
  and see, if something do not accuse you? Consider, you must be brought
  to judgment. Think of Lazarus and Dives; the one fared sumptuously
  every day, the other was a beggar. Now you have time, prize it, while
  you have it. Would you have me to be bound to my good behaviour? I am
  bound to my good behaviour; and cry for good behaviour of all people,
  to turn from the vanities and pleasures, the oppression and deceits,
  of this world; and there will come a time that you shall know it.
  Therefore take heed of pleasures, and deceits, and pride; and look not
  at man, but at the Lord; for ‘Look unto me, all ye ends of the earth,
  and be ye saved,’ saith the Lord.”

Some little time after I wrote to them again:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “Would you have me to be bound to my good behaviour from drunkenness,
  or swearing, or fighting, or adultery, and the like? The Lord hath
  redeemed me from all these things; and the love of God hath brought me
  to loathe all wantonness, blessed be His name! Drunkards, and
  fighters, and swearers, have their liberty without bonds; and you lay
  your law upon me, whom neither you, nor any other can justly accuse of
  these things; praised be the Lord! I can look to no man for my
  liberty, but to the Lord alone, who hath all men’s hearts in his
  hand.”

And after some time, not finding my spirit clear of them, I wrote to
them again, as follows:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “Had you known who sent me to you, ye would have received me; for the
  Lord sent me to warn you of the woes that are coming upon you; and to
  bid you look at the Lord, and not at man. But when I told you my
  experience, what the Lord had done for me, then your hearts were
  hardened, and you sent me to prison, where you have kept me many
  weeks. If the love of God had broken your hearts, then would ye see
  what ye have done; you would not have imprisoned me, had not my Father
  suffered you; and by his power I shall be loosed; for he openeth and
  shutteth; to him be all glory! In what have I misbehaved myself, that
  any should be bound for me? All men’s words will do me no good, nor
  their bonds either, to keep my heart, if I had not a guide _within_,
  to keep me in the upright life to God. But I believe in the Lord, that
  through his strength and power, I shall be preserved from ungodliness
  and worldly lusts. The Scripture saith, ‘receive strangers,’ but you
  imprison such. As you are in authority, take heed of oppression and
  oaths, of injustice, and gifts or rewards, for God doth loathe all
  such. But love mercy, and true judgment, and justice, for that the
  Lord delights in. I do not write with hatred to you; but to keep my
  conscience clear; take heed how you spend your time.”

I was moved also to write again to the priests of Derby:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “You profess to be the ministers of Jesus Christ in words, but you
  show by your fruits what your ministry is. Every tree shows its fruit:
  the ministry of Jesus Christ is in mercy and love, to loose them that
  are bound, to bring out of bondage, and to let them that are in
  captivity go free. Where is your example, if the Scriptures be your
  rule, to imprison for religion? Have you any command for it from
  Christ? If that were in you, which you profess, you would walk in
  their steps, who wrote the Scriptures. ‘But he is not a Jew who is one
  outwardly, whose praise is of men; but he is a Jew who is one
  inwardly, whose praise is of God.’ But if you build upon the prophets
  and apostles in words, and pervert their life, remember the woes which
  Jesus Christ spoke against such. They that spoke the prophets’ words,
  but denied Christ, they professed a Christ to come; but had they known
  him they would not have crucified him. The saints, whom the love of
  God did change, were brought thereby to walk in love and mercy; for he
  that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God. But where envy, pride, and
  hatred rule, the nature of the world rules, and not the nature of
  Jesus Christ. I write with no hatred to you; but that you may weigh
  yourselves, and see how you pass your time.”

Thus having cleared my conscience to the priests, it was not long before
a concern came upon me to write again to the Justices, which I did as
follows:—

  “I am moved to warn you to take heed of giving way to your own wills.
  Love the cross; and satisfy not your own minds in the flesh; but prize
  your time, while you have it, and walk up to that you know, in
  obedience to God; then you shall not be condemned for that you know
  not; but for that you do know, and do not obey. Consider betimes,
  weigh yourselves, and see where you are, and whom you serve. For if ye
  blaspheme God, and take his name in vain; if ye swear and lie; if ye
  give way to envy and hatred, to covetousness and greediness, to
  pleasures and wantonness, or any other vices, be assured that ye do
  serve the Devil. But if ye fear the Lord, and serve him, you will
  loathe all these things. He that loveth God, will not blaspheme his
  name; but where there is opposing God, and serving the Devil, that
  profession is sad and miserable. O prize your time, and do not love
  that which God forbids; lying, wrath, malice, envy, hatred,
  greediness, covetousness, oppression, gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom,
  and all unrighteousness God doth forbid. So consider, and be not
  deceived; ‘Evil communication corrupts good manners.’ Be not deceived,
  God will not be mocked with vain words; the wrath of God is revealed
  from heaven against all ungodliness. Therefore obey that which
  convinces you of all evil, and tells you that you should do no evil;
  it will lead you to repentance, and keep you in the fear of the Lord.
  O look at the mercies of God, and prize them, and do not turn them
  into wantonness. O eye the Lord, and not earthly things!”

Besides this, I wrote the following to Colonel Barton, who was both a
justice and a preacher, as was hinted before:—

  “FRIEND,

  “Do not cloak and cover thyself; there is a God, who knoweth thy
  heart, and will uncover thee; he seeth thy way. ‘Woe be to him that
  covereth, and not with My Spirit,’ saith the Lord. Dost thou do
  contrary to the law, and then put it from thee? Mercy and true
  judgment thou neglectest; look what was spoken against such. My
  Saviour said to such, ‘I was sick and in prison, and ye visited Me
  not; I was hungry, and ye fed Me not; I was a stranger, and ye took Me
  not in.’ And when they said, ‘When saw we Thee in prison, and did not
  come to Thee,’ &c., he replied, ‘Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
  these little ones, ye did it not to Me.’ Thou hast imprisoned me for
  bearing witness to the life and power of truth, and yet thou
  professest to be a minister of Christ; but if Christ had sent thee,
  thou wouldst bring out of prison, and out of bondage, and wouldst
  receive strangers. Thou hast been wanton upon earth, thou hast lived
  plenteously, and nourished thy heart, as in a day of slaughter; thou
  hast killed the Just. O look where thou art, and how thou hast spent
  thy time! O remember thyself, and now, whilst thou hast time, prize
  it. Do not slight the free mercy, or despise the long-suffering of
  God, which is great salvation; but mind that in thee which doth
  convince, and would not let thee swear, nor lie, nor take God’s name
  in vain. Thou knowest thou shouldst do none of these things; thou hast
  learned that which will condemn thee; therefore obey the light, which
  doth convince thee, forsake thy sins, and look at the mercies of God;
  and prize his love in sparing thee till now. The Lord saith, ‘Look
  unto me all ye ends of the earth, and be ye saved; cease from man,
  whose breath is in his nostrils.’ Prize thy time, and see whom thou
  servest; for his servant thou art whom thou dost obey, whether of sin
  unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. If thou serve God, and
  fear him, thou wilt not blaspheme his name, or curse, or swear, or
  take his name in vain, or follow pleasures and wantonness, whoredom,
  and drunkenness, or wrath, or malice, or revenge, or rashness, or
  headiness, pride or gluttony, greediness, oppression, or covetousness,
  or foolish jestings, or vain songs. God doth forbid these things, and
  all unrighteousness. If thou profess God, and act any of these things,
  thou takest him for a cloak, and servest the Devil. Consider with
  thyself, and do not love that which God hateth. He that loveth God,
  keepeth his commandments. The Devil will tell thee, it is a hard thing
  to keep God’s commandments; but it is an easy thing to keep the
  Devil’s commandments, and to live in all unrighteousness and
  ungodliness, turning the grace of God into wantonness. But let the
  unrighteous man forsake his ways, and turn unto me, saith the Lord,
  and I will have mercy. ‘Turn ye, why will ye die?’ saith the Lord.

  “Howl, ye great ones, for the plagues are pouring out upon you! Howl,
  ye oppressors, for recompense and vengeance is coming upon you! Woe
  unto them that covetously join one house to another; and bring one
  field so nigh unto another that the poor can get no more ground, and
  that ye may dwell upon the earth alone; these things are in the ears
  of the Lord of Hosts. Woe unto him that covetously getteth evil-gotten
  goods into his house, that he may set his nest on high, to escape from
  the power of evil.”




                              CHAPTER IV.

1650-1651.—A trooper visits George Fox from an inward
    intimation—declines a commission in the army, and is put in the
    dungeon—confutes one who denied Christ’s outward appearance, from
    whence a slander is raised against Friends—testifies against capital
    punishments for small matters—writes for more speedy justice to
    prisoners—intercedes for the life of a young woman, imprisoned for
    stealing, who is brought to the gallows but reprieved, and
    afterwards convinced—again refuses to bear arms, and is committed
    close prisoner—writes to Barton and Bennet, justices, against
    persecution—addresses the convinced and tender people against
    hirelings—to the magistrates of Derby against persecution, and
    foretelling his own enlargement and their recompense—is greatly
    exercised for the wickedness of Derby—sees the visitation of God’s
    love pass away from the town, and writes a lamentation over it—a
    great judgment fell upon the town—he is liberated after a year’s
    imprisonment—visits Lichfield—preaches repentance through
    Doncaster—many dread “the man with leather breeches”—goes to
    steeple-houses, as the apostles did to the temples, to bring people
    off from them—is denied entertainment, and ill-treated at some
    places—refuses to inform against his persecutors—many are convinced
    in Yorkshire, amongst others, Richard Farnsworth, James Naylor,
    William Dewsbury, Justice Hotham, and Captain Pursloe.


While I was yet in the House of Correction, there came unto me a
trooper, and said, as he was sitting in the steeple-house, hearing the
priest, exceeding great trouble came upon him; and the voice of the Lord
came to him saying, “Dost thou not know that my servant is in prison? Go
to him for direction.” So I spoke to his condition, and his
understanding was opened. I told him, that which showed him his sins,
and troubled him for them, would show him his salvation; for he that
shows a man his sin, is the same that takes it away. While I was
speaking to him, the Lord’s power opened him, so that he began to have a
good understanding in the Lord’s truth, and to be sensible of God’s
mercies; and began to speak boldly in his quarters amongst the soldiers,
and to others, concerning truth (for the Scriptures were very much
opened to him), insomuch that he said, “his colonel was as blind as
Nebuchadnezzar, to cast the servant of the Lord into prison.” Upon this
his colonel had a spite against him; and at Worcester fight, the year
after, when the two armies were lying near one another, two came out of
the king’s army, and challenged any two of the Parliament army to fight
with them; his colonel made choice of him and another to answer the
challenge. And when in the encounter his companion was slain, he drove
both his enemies within musket-shot out of the town, without firing a
pistol at them. This, when he returned, he told me with his own mouth.
But, when the fight was over, he saw the deceit and hypocrisy of the
officers; and being sensible how wonderfully the Lord had preserved him,
and seeing also to the end of fighting, he laid down his arms.

Now the time of my commitment to the house of correction being nearly
ended, and there being many new soldiers raised, the commissioners would
have made me captain over them; and the soldiers said they would have
none but me.[9] So the keeper of the house of correction was commanded
to bring me before the commissioners and soldiers in the market-place;
and there they offered me that preferment, as they called it, asking me,
if I would not take up arms for the Commonwealth against Charles Stuart?
I told them, I knew from whence all wars arose, even from the lust,
according to James’s doctrine; and that I lived in the virtue of that
life and power that took away the occasion of all wars. But they courted
me to accept their offer, and thought I did but compliment them. But I
told them, I was come into the covenant of peace, which was before wars
and strifes were. They said, they offered it in love and kindness to me,
because of my virtue; and such like flattering words they used. But I
told them, if that was their love and kindness, I trampled it under my
feet. Then their rage got up, and they said, “Take him away, jailer, and
put him into the dungeon amongst the rogues and felons.” So I was had
away and put into a lousy, stinking place, without any bed, amongst
thirty felons, where I was kept almost half a year, unless it were at
times; for they would sometimes let me walk in the garden, having a
belief that I would not go away. Now when they had got me into Derby
dungeon, it was the belief and saying of people that I should never come
out; but I had faith in God, and believed I should be delivered in his
time; for the Lord had said to me before, that I was not to be removed
from that place yet, being set there for a service which he had for me
to do.

Footnote 9:

  The English nation at this period was much engrossed with the great
  subjects of religion and politics, and both were mingled together in
  strange conjunction. The chief rulers of the Commonwealth, more
  especially Oliver Cromwell, had contrived to interweave their own
  views on spiritual matters into the minds of the soldiers; who, in
  those days, commonly united, with the profession of arms, the
  profession also of Christianity. The unsettled state of the country
  caused them to be stationed in considerable numbers in most of the
  principal towns of the north, and several of them had made
  acquaintance with George Fox during his imprisonment, and were so much
  impressed in his favour, that it appears they were desirous, as the
  time of his release drew near, to engage him in the capacity of their
  captain.

After it was noised abroad that I was in Derby dungeon, my relations
came to see me again; and they were much troubled that I should be in
prison; for they looked upon it to be a great shame to them for me to be
imprisoned for religion; and some thought I was mad, because I advocated
purity, and righteousness, and perfection.

Among others that came to see, and discourse with me, was a person from
Nottingham, a soldier, that had been a Baptist (as I understood), and
with him came several others. In discourse he said to me, “Your faith
stands in a man that died at Jerusalem, and there was never any such
thing.” I was exceedingly grieved to hear him say so; and I said to him,
“How! did not Christ suffer without the gates of Jerusalem through the
professing Jews, and chief priests, and Pilate?” And he denied that ever
Christ suffered there outwardly. Then I asked him whether there were not
chief priests, and Jews, and Pilate there outwardly? and when he could
not deny that, then I told him, as certainly as there was a chief
priest, and Jews, and Pilate there outwardly, so certainly was Christ
persecuted by them, and did suffer there outwardly under them. Yet from
this man’s words was a slander raised upon us, that the Quakers denied
Christ that suffered and died at Jerusalem; which was all utterly false,
and the least thought of it never entered our hearts; but it was a mere
slander cast upon us, and occasioned by this person’s words. The same
person also said, that never any of the prophets, or apostles, or holy
men of God, suffered any thing outwardly; but all their sufferings were
inward. But I instanced to him how many of them suffered, and by whom
they suffered: and so was the power of the Lord brought over his wicked
imaginations.

There came also another company to me, that pretended they were triers
of spirits; I asked them what was the first step to peace, and what it
was by which a man might see his salvation? and they were presently up
in the airy mind, and said I was mad. Thus they came to try spirits, who
did not know themselves, nor their own spirits.

In this time of my imprisonment, I was exceedingly exercised about the
proceedings of the judges and magistrates in their courts of judicature.
I was moved to write to the judges concerning their putting men to death
for cattle, and money, and small matters; and to show them how contrary
it was to the law of God in old time; for I was under great suffering in
my spirit because of it, and under the very sense of death; but standing
in the will of God, a heavenly breathing arose in my soul to the Lord.
Then did I see the heavens opened, and I rejoiced, and gave glory to
God. So I wrote to the judges as follows:—

  “I am moved to write unto you to take heed of putting men to death for
  stealing cattle or money &c.; for thieves in the old time were to make
  restitution; and if they had not wherewith, they were to be sold for
  their theft. Mind the laws of God in the Scriptures, and the Spirit
  that gave them forth; let them be your rule in executing judgment; and
  show mercy, that you may receive mercy from God, the judge of all.
  Take heed of gifts and rewards, and of pride; for God doth forbid
  them; they blind the eyes of the wise. I do not write to give liberty
  to sin; God hath forbidden it; but that you should judge according to
  his laws, and show mercy: for he delighteth in true judgment and in
  mercy. I beseech you to mind these things, and prize your time, now
  you have it: fear God, and serve him; for he is a consuming fire.”

Besides this, I wrote another letter to the judges, to this effect:—

  “I am moved to write unto you that ye do true justice to every man;
  and see that none be oppressed, or wronged, or any oaths imposed; for
  the land mourneth because of oaths, and adulteries, and sorceries, and
  drunkenness, and profaneness. O consider, ye that are men set in
  authority: be moderate, and in lowliness consider these things. Show
  mercy to the fatherless, to the widows, and to the poor; and take heed
  of rewards or gifts, for they blind the eyes of the wise; the Lord
  doth loathe all such. Love mercy and true judgment, justice, and
  righteousness, for the Lord delighteth therein. Consider these things
  in time, and take heed how ye spend your time. Now ye have time, prize
  it, and show mercy, that ye may receive mercy from the Lord; for he is
  coming to try all things, and will plead with all flesh, as by fire.”

Moreover I laid before the judges what a hurtful thing it was, that
prisoners should lie so long in jail; showing how they learned
wickedness one of another in talking of their bad deeds: and therefore
speedy justice should be done. For I was a tender youth, and dwelt in
the fear of God, and being grieved to hear their bad language, I was
often made to reprove them for their wicked words, and evil conduct
towards each other. People admired that I was so preserved and kept; for
they could never catch a word or action from me, to make any thing of
against me, all the time I was there; for the Lord’s infinite power
upheld and preserved me all that time; to him be praises and glory for
ever!

While I was here in prison, there was a young woman in the jail for
robbing her master of some money. When she was to be tried for her life,
I wrote to the judge and to the jury about her, showing them how it was
contrary to the law of God in old time to put people to death for
stealing, and moving them to show mercy. Yet she was condemned to die,
and a grave was made for her; and at the time appointed she was carried
forth to execution. Then I wrote a few words, warning all people to
beware of greediness or covetousness, for it leads from God; and
exhorting all to fear the Lord, to avoid all earthly lusts, and to prize
their time while they have it: this I gave to be read at the gallows.
And though they had her upon the ladder, with a cloth bound over her
face, ready to be turned off, yet they did not put her to death, but
brought her back again to prison: and in the prison she afterwards came
to be convinced of God’s everlasting truth.

There was also in the jail, while I was there, a prisoner, a wicked,
ungodly man, who was a reputed conjuror. He threatened how he would talk
with me, and what he would do to me; but he never had power to open his
mouth to me. And once the jailer and he falling out, he threatened that
he would raise the Devil, and break his house down, so that he made the
jailer afraid. Then I was moved of the Lord to go in his power, and
rebuke him, and say unto him, “Come let us see what thou canst do; do
Thy worst;” and I told him the Devil was raised high enough in him
already, but the power of God chained him down: so he slunk away from
me.

Now the time of Worcester fight coming on, Justice Bennet sent the
constables to press me for a soldier, seeing I would not voluntarily
accept of a command. I told them that I was brought off from outward
wars. They came down again to give me press-money, but I would take
none. Then I was brought up to Sergeant Holes, kept there awhile, and
then taken down again. After a while the constables fetched me up again,
and brought me before the commissioners, who said I should go for a
soldier; but I told them that I was dead to it. They said I was alive. I
told them, where envy and hatred are, there is confusion. They offered
me money twice, but I would not take it: then they were angry, and
committed me close prisoner, without bail or mainprize. Whereupon I
wrote to them again, directing my letter to Colonel Barton (who was a
preacher), and the rest that were concerned in my commitment. I wrote
thus:—

  “You who are without Christ, and yet use the words which he and his
  saints have spoken; consider, neither he nor His apostles did ever
  imprison any; but my Saviour is merciful even to the unmerciful and
  rebellious. He brings out of prison and bondage; but men, while the
  carnal mind rules, oppress and imprison. My Saviour saith, ‘Love your
  enemies, and do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
  despitefully use you and persecute you;’ for the love of God doth not
  persecute any, but loveth all where it dwelleth. ‘He that hateth his
  brother is a murderer.’ You profess to be Christians, and one of you a
  minister of Jesus Christ; yet you have imprisoned me, who am a servant
  of Jesus Christ. The apostles never imprisoned any, but were
  imprisoned themselves. Take heed of speaking of Christ in words, and
  denying him in life and power. O friends, the imprisoning of my body
  is to satisfy your wills; but take heed of giving way to your wills,
  for that will hurt you. If the love of God had broken your hearts, ye
  would not have imprisoned me; but my love is to you, as to all my
  fellow-creatures; and that you may weigh yourselves, and see how you
  stand, is this written.”

About this time I was moved to give forth the following, to go amongst
the convinced and tender people, to manifest the deceits of the world,
and how the priests have deceived the people:—

_To all you that love the Lord Jesus Christ with a pure and naked heart,
and the generation of the righteous._

  “Christ was ever hated; and the righteous for his sake. Mind who they
  were that did ever hate them: he that was born after the flesh did
  persecute him that was born after the Spirit; and so it is now. Mind
  who were the chiefest against Christ; even the great, learned men, the
  heads of the people, rulers and teachers, that professed the law and
  the prophets, and looked for Christ. They looked for an outwardly
  glorious Christ, to hold up their outward glory; but Christ spoke
  against the works of the world, and against the priests, and scribes,
  and Pharisees, and their hypocritical profession. He that is a
  stranger to Christ, is a hireling; but the servants of Jesus Christ
  are free men. The false teachers always laid burdens upon the people;
  and the true servants of the Lord spoke against them. Jeremiah spoke
  against hirelings, and said, It was a horrible thing; What will ye do
  in the end? for the people and priests were given to covetousness.
  Paul spoke against such as made gain upon the people; and exhorted the
  saints to turn away from such as were covetous men and proud, such as
  loved pleasures more than God—such as had a form of godliness, but
  denied the power thereof; ‘for of this sort,’ said he, ‘are they that
  creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, who are ever
  learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; men of
  corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith; and as Jannes and
  Jambres withstood Moses, so,’ said he, ‘do these resist the truth; but
  they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest
  unto all men.’ Moses forsook honours and pleasures which he might have
  enjoyed. The apostle in his time saw this corruption entering, which
  now is spread over the world, of having a form of godliness, but
  denying the power. Ask any of your teachers whether you may ever
  overcome your corruptions or sins? None of them believe that; but, ‘as
  long as man is here, he must,’ they say, ‘carry about with him the
  body of sin.’ Thus pride is kept up, and that honour and mastership,
  which Christ denied, and all unrighteousness; yet multitudes of
  teachers! heaps of teachers! the golden cup full of abominations! Paul
  did not preach for wages, but laboured with his hands, that he might
  be an example to all them that follow him. O people, see who follow
  Paul! The prophet Jeremiah said, ‘The prophets prophesy falsely, and
  the priests bear rule by their means;’ but now the priests bear rule
  by the means they get from the people: take away their means, and they
  will bear rule over you no longer. They are such as, the apostle said,
  ‘intruded into those things which they never saw, being vainly puffed
  up with a fleshly mind;’ and as the Scriptures declare of some of old,
  ‘They go in the way of Cain, who was a murderer, and in the way of
  Balaam, who coveted the wages of unrighteousness.’ The prophet Micah
  also cried against the judges that judged for reward, and the priests
  that taught for hire, and the prophets that prophesied for money; and
  yet leaned on the Lord, saying, ‘Is not the Lord amongst us? Gifts
  blind the eyes of the wise.’ The gift of God was never purchased with
  money. All the holy servants of God did ever cry against deceit; and
  where the Lord hath manifested his love, they do loathe it, and that
  nature which holdeth it up.”

Again a concern came upon me to write to the magistrates of Derby; which
I did as follows:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “I desire you to consider in time whom ye do imprison; for the
  magistrate is set for the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise
  of them that do well. But when the Lord doth send his messengers unto
  you, to warn you of the woes that will come upon you, except you
  repent, then you persecute them, and put them in prison; and say, ‘We
  have a law, and by our law we may do it.’ For you indeed justify
  yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts. He will not be
  worshipped with your forms and professions, and shows of religion.
  Therefore consider, ye that talk of God, how ye are subject to him;
  for they are his children that do his will. What doth the Lord require
  of you but to do justice, to love and show mercy, to walk humbly with
  him, and to help the widows and fatherless to their right? But instead
  thereof ye oppress the poor. Do not your judges judge for rewards, and
  your priests teach for hire? The time is coming, that he who seeth all
  things, will discover all your secrets: and know this assuredly, the
  Lord will deliver his servants out of your hands, and he will
  recompense all your unjust dealings towards his people. I desire you
  to consider of these things; search the Scriptures, and see whether
  any of the people of God did ever imprison any for religion. They were
  themselves imprisoned. I desire you to consider, that it is written,
  ‘When the church is met together, ye may all prophesy one by one, that
  all may learn, and all may be comforted;’ and then, ‘if anything be
  revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.’
  Thus it was in the true church; and thus it ought to be now. But it is
  not so in your assemblies; he that teaches for hire may speak, and
  none may contradict him. Again, consider the liberty that was given to
  the apostles, even among the unbelieving Jews; when after the reading
  of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue said unto
  them, ‘Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the
  people, say on.’ I desire you to consider in stillness, and strive not
  against the Lord; for he is stronger than you. Though ye hold his
  people fast for a time, yet when he cometh, he will make known who are
  his; for his coming is like the refiner’s fire and like fuller’s soap.
  Then the stone that is set at nought by you builders, shall be the
  headstone of the corner. O friends, lay these things to heart, and let
  them not seem light things to you. I write to you in love, to mind the
  laws of God and your own souls, and to do as the holy men of God did.”

Great was my exercise and travail in spirit, during my imprisonment
here, because of the wickedness that was in this town; for though some
were convinced, yet the generality were a hardened people; and I saw the
visitation of God’s love pass away from them. I mourned over them; and
it came upon me to give forth the following lamentation for them:—

  “O Derby! as the waters run away when the flood-gates are up, so doth
  the visitation of God’s love pass away from thee, O Derby! Therefore
  look where thou art, and how thou art grounded; and consider, before
  thou art utterly forsaken. The Lord moved me twice, before I came to
  cry against the deceits and vanities that are in thee, and to warn all
  to look at the Lord, and not at man. The woe is against the crown of
  pride; the woe is against drunkenness and vain pleasures, and against
  them that make a profession of religion in words, yet are high and
  lofty in mind, and live in oppression and envy. O Derby! thy
  profession and preaching stink before the Lord. Ye profess a Sabbath
  in words, and meet together, dressing yourselves in fine apparel; you
  uphold pride. Thy women go with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes,
  &c., which the true prophet of old cried against. Your assemblies are
  odious, and an abomination to the Lord: pride is set up, and bowed
  down to; covetousness abounds; and he that doeth wickedly is honoured:
  so deceit bears with deceit; and yet they profess Christ in words. O
  the deceit that is within thee! it doth even break my heart to see how
  God is dishonoured in thee, O Derby!”

After I had seen the visitation of God’s love pass away from this place,
I knew that my imprisonment here would not continue long; but I saw that
when the Lord should bring me forth, it would be as the letting of a
lion out of a den amongst the wild beasts of the forest. For all
professions stood in a beastly spirit and nature, pleading for sin, and
for the body of sin and imperfection, as long as they lived. They all
raged, and ran against the life and Spirit which gave forth the
Scriptures, which they professed in words. And so it was, as will appear
hereafter.

There was a great judgment upon the town, and the magistrates were
uneasy about me; but they could not agree what to do with me. One while
they would have me sent up to the parliament; another while they would
have banished me to Ireland. At first they called me a deceiver, and a
seducer, and a blasphemer; afterwards, when God had brought his plagues
upon them, they said I was an honest, virtuous man. But their good
report or bad report, their well speaking or ill speaking, was nothing
to me; for the one did not lift me up, nor the other cast me down:
praised be the Lord! At length they were made to turn me out of jail,
about the beginning of Winter, in the year 1651, after I had been a
prisoner in Derby almost a year, six months in the House of Correction,
and the rest of the time in the common jail and dungeon.

Thus being set at liberty again, I went on, as before, in the work of
the Lord, passing through the country, first, into my own country of
LEICESTERSHIRE, and had meetings as I went; and the Lord’s Spirit and
power accompanied me. Afterwards I went near to BURTON-ON-TRENT, where
some were convinced; and so to BUSHEL-HOUSE, where I had a meeting. I
went up into the country, where there were friendly people; yet an
outrageous wicked professor had an intent to do me a mischief, but the
Lord prevented him. Blessed be the Lord!

As I was walking along with several Friends, I lifted up my head and saw
three steeple-house spires, and they struck at my life. I asked them
what place that was? and they said, LICHFIELD. Immediately the word of
the Lord came to me that I must go thither. Being come to the house we
were going to, I wished the Friends that were with me, to walk into the
house, saying nothing to them whither I was to go. As soon as they were
gone, I stepped away, and went by my eye over hedge and ditch, till I
came within a mile of Lichfield; where, in a great field, there were
shepherds keeping their sheep. Then I was commanded by the Lord to pull
off my shoes. I stood still, for it was Winter; and the word of the Lord
was like a fire in me. So I put off my shoes, and left them with the
shepherds; and the poor shepherds trembled and were astonished. Then I
walked on about a mile, and as soon as I was within the city, the word
of the Lord came to me again, saying, “Cry, Woe unto the bloody city of
Lichfield.” So I went up and down the streets, crying with a loud voice,
“WOE TO THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD!” It being market-day, I went into
the market-place, and to and fro in the several parts of it, and made
stands, crying as before, “WOE TO THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD!” And no
one laid hands on me; but as I went thus crying through the streets,
there seemed to me to be a channel of blood running down the streets,
and the market-place appeared like a pool of blood. When I had declared
what was upon me, and felt myself clear, I went out of the town in
peace; and returning to the shepherds, gave them some money, and took my
shoes of them again. But the fire of the Lord was so in my feet, and all
over me, that I did not matter to put on my shoes any more, and was at a
stand whether I should or not, till I felt freedom from the Lord so to
do; and then, after I had washed my feet, I put on my shoes again. After
this a deep consideration came upon me, why, or for what reason, I
should be sent to cry against that city, and call it THE BLOODY CITY.
For though the parliament had the minster one while, and the king
another, and much blood had been shed in the town, during the wars
between them, yet that was no more than had befallen many other places.
But afterwards I came to understand, that in the Emperor Dioclesian’s
time, a thousand Christians were martyred in Lichfield. So I was to go,
without my shoes, through the channel of their blood, and into the pool
of their blood in the market-place, that I might raise up the memorial
of the blood of those martyrs which had been shed above a thousand years
before, and lay cold in their streets. So the sense of this blood was
upon me, and I obeyed the word of the Lord. Ancient records testify how
many of the Christian Britons suffered there. Much I could write of the
sense I had of the blood of the martyrs that hath been shed in this
nation for the name of Christ, both under the ten persecutions and
since; but I leave it to the Lord, and to His book, out of which all
shall be judged; for His book is a most certain record, and His Spirit a
true recorder.

Then I passed up and down through the countries, having meetings amongst
friendly people in many places; but my relations were offended at me.
After some time I returned into Nottinghamshire, to MANSFIELD, and went
into Derbyshire, visiting Friends. Then passing into Yorkshire, I
preached repentance through DONCASTER, and several other places; and
after came to BALBY, where Richard Farnsworth[10] and some others were
convinced. So travelling through several places, preaching repentance,
and the word of life to the people, I came into the parts about
WAKEFIELD, where James Naylor lived; he and Thomas Goodyear came to me,
and were both convinced, and received the truth. William Dewsbury[11]
also and his wife, with many more, came to me, who were convinced, and
received the truth.

Footnote 10:

  Richard Farnsworth became an eminent minister, and many were turned to
  God by him. He was mighty in discourses with priests and professors,
  and laboured much in the gospel. He was twelve months imprisoned at
  Banbury in 1655, and after great sufferings and persecutions, he
  finished his testimony in London, in 1666. A short time before his
  death, sitting up in bed, he spoke in as much power and strength of
  spirit as he had done at any time in his health, testifying that he
  was filled with the love of God more than he was able to express. He
  published many small works in defence of truth.

Footnote 11:

  William Dewsbury, often mentioned in this Journal, became a valiant
  minister of the gospel, travelling extensively in its advocacy.
  Whiting says, “he was an extraordinary man many ways, and I thought as
  exact a pattern of a perfect man as ever I knew.” His health became
  impaired through the sharp persecutions he passed through, consisting
  of many long imprisonments, beatings, and bruisings. In 1688, going up
  to London to visit the brethren, he was taken ill of a distemper
  contracted in prison. Returning home, he died shortly after, leaving a
  heavenly testimony behind him, expressed about a week before he died.
  This, with other information, is recorded in _Piety Promoted_, vol.
  i., pp. 163-168, and further particulars in Whiting’s _Memoirs_, p.
  25, and at pp. 376-387. His works were published in 1 vol. quarto, in
  1689.

From thence I passed through the country towards Captain Pursloe’s house
by SELBY, and visited John Leek, who had been to visit me in Derby
prison, and was convinced. I had a horse, but was fain to leave him, not
knowing what to do with him; for I was moved to go to many great houses,
to admonish and exhort the people to turn to the Lord. Thus passing on,
I was moved of the Lord to go to BEVERLEY steeple-house, which was then
a place of high profession; and being very wet with rain, I went first
to an inn, and as soon as I came to the door, a young woman of the house
came to the door, and said, “What, is it you? come in,” as if she had
known me before; for the Lord’s power bowed their hearts. So I refreshed
myself and went to bed; and in the morning, my clothes being still wet,
I got ready, and having paid for what I had had in the inn, I went up to
the steeple-house, where was a man preaching. When he had done, I was
moved to speak to him, and to the people, in the mighty power of God,
and turned them to their teacher, Christ Jesus. The power of the Lord
was so strong, that it struck a mighty dread amongst the people. The
mayor came and spoke a few words to me; but none of them had any power
to meddle with me. So I passed away out of the town, and in the
afternoon went to another steeple-house about two miles off. When the
priest had done, I was moved to speak to him, and to the people very
largely, showing them the way of life and truth, and the ground of
election and reprobation. The priest said, he was but a child, and could
not dispute with me; I told him I did not come to dispute, but to hold
forth the word of life and truth unto them, that they might all know the
one Seed, which the promise of God was to, both in the male and in the
female. Here the people were very loving, and would have had me come
again on a week-day, and preach among them; but I directed them to their
teacher, Christ Jesus, and so passed away.

The next day I went to CRANSWICK, to Captain Pursloe’s, who accompanied
me to Justice Hotham’s. This Justice Hotham was a tender man, one that
had some experience of God’s workings in his heart. After some discourse
with him of the things of God, he took me into his closet; where,
sitting together, he told me he had known that principle these ten
years, and was glad that the Lord did now publish it abroad to the
people. After a while there came a priest to visit him, with whom also I
had some discourse concerning Truth. But his mouth was quickly stopped,
for he was nothing but a notionist, and not in possession of what he
talked of.

While I was here, there came a great woman of Beverley to speak to
Justice Hotham about some business; and in discourse she told him, that
the last Sabbath-day (as she called it) there came an angel or spirit
into the church at Beverley, and spoke the wonderful things of God, to
the astonishment of all that were there; and when it had done, it passed
away, and they did not know whence it came, nor whither it went; but it
astonished all, both priests, professors, and magistrates of the town.
This relation Justice Hotham gave me afterwards, and then I gave him an
account how I had been that day at Beverley steeple-house, and had
declared truth to the priest and the people there. There were in the
country thereabouts some noted priests and doctors, with whom Justice
Hotham was acquainted. He would fain have them speak with me, and
offered to send for them, under pretence of some business he had with
them, but I wished him not to do so.

When the First-day of the week was come, Justice Hotham walked out with
me into the field; and Captain Pursloe coming up after us, Justice
Hotham left us and returned home, but Captain Pursloe went with me into
the steeple-house. When the priest had done, I spoke both to priest and
people; declared to them the word of life and truth, and directed them
where they might find their teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. Some were
convinced, received the truth, and stand fast in it; and have a fine
meeting to this day.

In the afternoon I went to another steeple-house about three miles off,
where preached a great high-priest, called a doctor, one of them whom
Justice Hotham would have sent for to speak with me. I went into the
steeple-house, and stayed till the priest had done. The words which he
took for his text were these, “Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to
the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come,
buy wine and milk without money and without price.” Then was I moved of
the Lord to say unto him, “Come down, thou deceiver; dost thou bid
people come freely, and take of the water of life freely, and yet thou
takest three hundred pounds a-year of them, for preaching the Scriptures
to them. Mayest thou not blush for shame? Did the prophet Isaiah, and
Christ do so, who spoke the words, and gave them forth freely? Did not
Christ say to his ministers, whom he sent to preach, ‘Freely ye have
received, freely give?’” The priest, like a man amazed, hastened away.
After he had left his flock, I had as much time as I could desire to
speak to the people; and I directed them from the darkness to the light,
and to the grace of God, that would teach them, and bring them
salvation; to the Spirit of God in their inward parts, which would be a
free teacher unto them.

Having cleared myself amongst the people, I returned to Justice Hotham’s
house that night, who, when I came in, took me in his arms, and said his
house was my house, for he was exceedingly glad at the work of the Lord,
and that his power was revealed. Then he told me why he went not with me
to the steeple-house in the morning, and what reasonings he had in
himself about it; for he thought, if he had gone with me to the
steeple-house, the officers would have put me to him; and then he should
have been so put to it, that he should not have known what to do. But he
was glad, he said, when Captain Pursloe came up to go with me; yet
neither of them was dressed, nor had his band about his neck. It was a
strange thing then to see a man come into a steeple-house without a
band; yet Captain Pursloe went in with me without his band, the Lord’s
power and truth had so affected him that he minded it not.

From hence I passed on through the country, and came at night to an inn
where was a company of rude people. I bid the woman of the house, if she
had any meat, to bring me some; but because I said Thee and Thou to her
she looked strangely on me. Then I asked her if she had any milk; and
she said, No. I was sensible she spoke falsely, and being willing to try
her further, I asked her if she had any cream; she denied that she had
any. Now there stood a churn in the room, and a little boy playing about
it, put his hands into it, and pulled it down, and threw all the cream
on the floor before my eyes. Thus was the woman manifested to be a liar.
She was amazed, and blessed herself, and taking up the child, whipped it
sorely; but I reproved her for her lying and deceit. After the Lord had
thus discovered her deceit and perverseness, I walked out of the house,
and went away till I came to a stack of hay, and lay in the hay-stack
that night in rain and snow, it being but three days before the time
called Christmas.

The next day I came into YORK, where were several people that were very
tender. Upon the First-day of the week following, I was commanded of the
Lord to go to the great minster, and speak to the priest Bowles and his
hearers in their great cathedral. Accordingly I went: and when the
priest had done, I told them I had something from the Lord God to speak
to the priest and people. “Then say on quickly,” said a professor that
was among them, for it was frost and snow, and very cold weather. Then I
told them, This was the word of the Lord God unto them, that they lived
in words; but God Almighty looked for fruits amongst them. As soon as
the words were out of my mouth, they hurried me out, and threw me down
the steps; but I got up again without hurt, and went to my lodgings.
Several were convinced there: for the very groans that arose from the
weight and oppression that was upon the Spirit of God in me, would open
people, and strike them, and make them confess that the groans which
broke forth through me did reach them: for my life was burthened with
their profession without possession, and words without fruit. After I
had done my present service in York, and several were convinced there,
received the truth of God, and were turned to his teaching, I passed out
of York, and looking towards Cleveland, I saw there was a people that
had tasted of the power of God. I saw then there was a seed in that
country, and that God had an humble people there.

Passing onwards that night, a Papist overtook me, and talked to me of
his religion, and of their meetings; and I let him speak all that was in
his mind. That night I stayed at an ale-house. The next morning I was
moved of the Lord to speak the word of the Lord to this Papist. So I
went to his house, and declared against his religion, and all their
superstitious ways; and told him that God was come to teach his people
himself. This put the Papist into such a rage, that he could not then
endure to stay in his own house.

The next day I came to BURRABY, where a priest and several friendly
people met together. Many of the people were convinced, and have
continued faithful ever since; and there is a great meeting of Friends
in that town. The priest also was forced to confess to the truth, though
he came not into it.

The day following I went into CLEVELAND, amongst those people that had
tasted of the power of God. They had formerly had great meetings, but
were then all shattered to pieces, and the heads of them turned Ranters.
I told them that after they had had such meetings, they did not wait
upon God to feel His power, to gather their minds inward, that they
might feel His presence and power amongst them in their meetings, to sit
down therein, and wait upon Him; for they had spoken themselves dry;
they had spent their portions, and not living in that which they spoke
of, they were now become dry. They had some kind of meetings still; but
they took tobacco and drank ale in their meetings, and were grown light
and loose. But my message unto them from the Lord was, That they should
all come together again, and wait to feel the Lord’s power and Spirit in
themselves, to gather them to Christ, that they might be taught of Him
who says, “Learn of me.” For when they had declared that which the Lord
had opened to them, then the people were to receive it; and both the
speakers and hearers were to live in that themselves. But when these had
no more to declare, but went to seek forms without life, that made
themselves dry and barren, and the people also; and from thence came all
their loss: for the Lord renews His mercies and His strength to them
that wait upon Him. The heads of these people came to nothing: but most
of them came to be convinced, and received God’s everlasting truth, and
continue a meeting to this day, sitting under the teaching of the Lord
Jesus Christ their Saviour.

Upon the First-day of the next week, the word of the Lord came to me to
go to the steeple-house there, which I did. When the priest had done I
spoke the truth to him and the people, and directed them to their
teacher within, Christ Jesus, their free teacher, that had bought them.
The priest came to me, and I had a little discourse with him; but he was
soon stopped, and silent. Then being clear of the place, I passed away,
having had several meetings amongst those people.

Though at this time the snow was very deep, I kept travelling; and going
through the country, came to a market-town, where I met with many
professors, with whom I had much reasoning. I asked them many questions,
which they were not able to answer; saying, they had never had such deep
questions put to them in all their lives.

From them I went to STAITHES, where also I met with many professors, and
some Ranters. I had large meetings amongst them, and a great
convincement there was. Many received the truth; amongst whom, one was a
man of an hundred years of age; another was a chief constable; and a
third was a priest, whose name was Philip Scafe. Him the Lord, by his
free Spirit, did afterwards make a free minister of his free gospel.

The priest of this town was a lofty one, who much oppressed the people
for his tithes. If they went a-fishing many leagues off, he would make
them pay the tithe-money of what they made of their fish, though they
caught them at a great distance, and carried them as far as Yarmouth to
sell. I was moved to go to the steeple-house there, to declare the
truth, and expose the priest. When I had spoken to him, and laid his
oppression of the people before him, he fled away. The chief of the
parish were very light and vain; so after I had spoken the word of life
to them, I turned away from them, because they did not receive it, and
left them. But the word of the Lord, which I had declared amongst them,
remained with some of them; so that at night some of the heads of the
parish came to me, and most of them were convinced and satisfied, and
confessed to the truth. Thus the truth began to spread in that country,
and great meetings we had; at which the priest began to rage, and the
Ranters to be stirred; and they sent word that they would have a dispute
with me, both the oppressing priest, and the leader of the Ranters. A
day was fixed, and the Ranter came with his company; and another priest,
a Scotchman, came; but not the oppressing priest of Staithes. Philip
Scafe, who had been a priest, and was convinced, was with me; and a
great number of people met. When we were settled, the Ranter, whose name
was T. Bushel, told me he had had a vision of me; that I was sitting in
a great chair, and that he was to come and put off his hat, and bow down
to the ground before me; and he did so; and many other flattering words
he spoke. I told him it was his own figure, and said unto him, “Repent,
thou beast.” He said it was jealousy in me to say so. Then I asked him
the ground of jealousy, and how it came to be bred in man? and the
nature of a beast, what made it, and how it was bred in man? For I saw
him directly in the nature of the beast; and therefore I wished to know
of him how that nature came to be bred in him? I told him he should give
me an account of the things done in the body, before we came to
discourse of things done out of the body. So I stopped his mouth, and
all his fellow Ranters were silenced; for he was the head of them. Then
I called for the oppressing priest, but he came not; only the Scotch
priest came, whose mouth was soon stopped with a very few words; he
being out of the life of what he professed. Then I had a good
opportunity with the people. I laid open the Ranters, ranking them with
the old Ranters in Sodom. The priests I manifested to be of the same
stamp with their fellow-hirelings, the false prophets of old, and the
priests that then bore rule over the people by their means, seeking for
their gain from their quarter, divining for money, and teaching for
filthy lucre. I brought all the prophets, and Christ, and the apostles,
over the heads of the priests, showing how the prophets, Christ, and the
apostles had long since discovered them by their marks and fruits. Then
I directed the people to their inward teacher, Christ Jesus their
Saviour; and I preached up Christ in the hearts of His people, when all
these mountains were laid low. The people were all quiet, and the
gainsayers’ mouths were stopped; for though they broiled inwardly, yet
the power bound them down, that they could not break out.

After the meeting, this Scotch priest desired me to walk with him on the
top of the cliffs; whereupon I called a brother-in-law of his, who was
in some measure convinced, and desired him to go with me, telling him I
desired to have somebody by to hear what was said, lest the priest, when
I was gone, should report anything of me which I did not say. We went
together; and as we walked, the priest asked me many things concerning
the light, and concerning the soul; to all which I answered him fully.
When he had done questioning, we parted, and he went his way; and
meeting with Philip Scafe, he broke his cane against the ground in
madness, and said, if ever he met with me again, he would have my life,
or I should have his; adding that he would give his head, if I was not
knocked down within a month. By this, Friends suspected that his intent
was, in desiring me to walk with him alone, either to thrust me down
from off the cliff, or to do me some other mischief; and that when he
saw himself frustrated in that, by my having one with me, it made him
rage. I feared neither his prophecies nor his threats; for I feared God
Almighty. But some Friends, through their affection for me, feared much
that this priest would do me some mischief, or set on others to do it.
Yet after some years this very Scotch priest, and his wife also, came to
be convinced of the truth; and about twelve years after this I was at
their house.

After this, there came another priest to a meeting where I was, one that
was in repute above all the priests in the country. As I was speaking in
the meeting, that the gospel was the power of God, and how it brought
life and immortality to light in men, and was turning people from
darkness to the light, this high-flown priest said the gospel was
mortal. I told him, the true minister said, the gospel was the power of
God, and would he make the power of God mortal? Upon that the other
priest, Philip Scafe, that was convinced, and had felt the immortal
power of God in himself, took him up and reproved him; so a great
dispute arose between them: the convinced priest holding that the gospel
was immortal, and the other priest that it was mortal. But the Lord’s
power was too hard for this opposing priest, and stopped his mouth; and
many people were convinced, seeing the darkness that was in the opposing
priest, and the light that was in the convinced priest.

Then another priest sent to have a dispute with me, and Friends went
with me to the house where he was; but when he understood we were come,
he slipped out of the house, and hid himself under a hedge. The people
went to seek him, and found him, but could not get him to come to us.
Then I went to a steeple-house hard by, where the priest and people were
in a great rage: this priest had threatened Friends what he would do;
but when I came he fled; for the Lord’s power came over him and them.
Yea, the Lord’s everlasting power was over the world, and reached to the
hearts of people, and made both priests and professors tremble. It shook
the earthly and airy spirit, in which they held their profession of
religion and worship, so that it was a dreadful thing unto them, when it
was told them, “The man in leather breeches is come.”[12] At the hearing
thereof the priests, in many places would get out of the way; they were
so struck with the dread of the eternal power of God; and fear surprised
the hypocrites.

Footnote 12:

  The leathern garments worn by George Fox were chosen by him for their
  simplicity and durability; and though they often subjected their
  wearer to ridicule and abuse, he had no motive beyond the
  above-mentioned for choosing such a garb. Many persons have been
  amused, if not offended at him for having worn such a dress when he
  was a young man. In those days leathern garments were not so singular
  as some suppose. It was a well authenticated fact, that an eminent
  merchant of the city of London, about 150 years ago, travelled on foot
  from Newcastle, in search of a livelihood, clad in a _coat of
  leather_. He opened a warehouse in London for the sale of heavy
  articles of iron, which were manufactured in the neighbourhood of
  Newcastle. In a few years he became prosperous, accumulated a large
  fortune, and ranked with the magnates of the city, sharing in all the
  civic honours of the corporation. The firm which he established still
  continues to conduct a flourishing business, at a warehouse in Thames
  Street, which is familiarly known in the trade by “The Leathern
  Doublet;” a representation of the founder’s original dress being fixed
  as a sign in front of the building.

From this place we passed to WHITBY and SCARBOROUGH, where we had some
services for the Lord; there are large meetings settled there since.
From thence I passed over the WOLDS to MALTON, where we had great
meetings; as we had also at the towns thereabouts. At one town a priest
sent me a challenge to dispute with me; but when I came, he would not
come forth; so I had a good opportunity with the people, and the Lord’s
power came over them. One, who had been a wild, drunken man, was so
reached therewith, that he came to me as lowly as a lamb; though he and
his companions had before sent for drink, to make the rude people drunk,
on purpose that they might abuse us. When I found the priest would not
come forth, I was moved to go to the steeple-house; the priest was
confounded, and the Lord’s power came over all.

On the First-day following, came one of the highest Independent
professors, a woman, who had let in such a prejudice against me, that
she said before she came, she could willingly go to see me hanged: but
when she came, she was convinced, and remains a Friend.

Then I turned to MALTON again, and very great meetings there were; to
which more people would have come, but durst not for fear of their
relations; for it was thought a strange thing then to preach in houses,
and not go to the church, as they called it; so that I was much desired
to go and speak in the steeple-houses. One of the priests wrote to me,
and invited me to preach in the steeple-house, calling me his brother.
Another priest, a noted man, kept a lecture there. Now the Lord had
showed me, while I was in Derby prison, that I should speak in
steeple-houses, to gather people from thence; and a concern sometimes
would come upon my mind about the pulpits that the priests lolled in.
For the steeple-houses and pulpits were offensive to my mind, because
both priests and people called them the house of God, and idolized them;
reckoning that God dwelt there in the outward house. Whereas they should
have looked for God and Christ to dwell in their hearts, and their
bodies to be made the temples of God; for the apostle said, “God
dwelleth not in temples made with hands:” but by reason of the people’s
idolizing those places, it was counted a heinous thing to declare
against them. When I came into the steeple-house, there were not above
eleven hearers, and the priest was preaching to them. But after it was
known in the town that I was in the steeple-house, it was soon filled
with people. When the priest that preached that day had done, he sent
the other priest that had invited me thither, to bring me up into the
pulpit; but I sent word to him, that I needed not to go into the pulpit.
Then he sent to me again, desiring me to go up into it; for, he said, it
was a better place, and there I might be seen of the people. I sent him
word again, I could be seen and heard well enough where I was; and that
I came not there to hold up such places, nor their maintenance and
trade. Upon my saying so, they began to be angry, and said, “these false
prophets were to come in the last times.” Their saying so grieved many
of the people; and some began to murmur at it. Whereupon I stood up, and
desired all to be quiet; and stepping upon a high seat, I declared unto
them the marks of the false prophets, and showed that they were already
come; and set the true prophets, and Christ, and His apostles over them;
and manifested these to be out of the steps of the true prophets, and of
Christ and His apostles. I directed the people to their inward teacher,
Christ Jesus, who would turn them from darkness to the light. And having
opened divers Scriptures to them, I directed them to the Spirit of God
in themselves, by which they might come to Him, and by which they might
also come to know who the false prophets were. So having had a large
opportunity among them, I departed in peace.

After some time, I came to PICKERING, where in the steeple-house the
justices held their sessions, Justice Robinson being chairman. I had a
meeting in the school-house at the same time; and abundance of priests
and professors came to it, asking questions, which were answered to
their satisfaction. It being sessions-time, four chief constables and
many other people were convinced that day; and word was carried to
Justice Robinson that his priest was overthrown and convinced, whom he
had a love to, more than to all the priests besides. After the meeting,
we went to an inn. Justice Robinson’s priest was very lowly and loving,
and would have paid for my dinner, but I would by no means suffer it.
Then he offered that I should have his steeple-house to preach in, but I
refused it, and told him and the people, that I came to bring them off
from such things to Christ.

The next morning I went with the four chief constables, and others, to
visit Justice Robinson, who met me at his chamber door. I told him I
could not honour him with man’s honour. He said he did not look for it.
So I went into his chamber, and opened to him the state of the false
prophets, and of the true prophets; and set the true prophets, and
Christ, and the apostles over the other; and directed his mind to Christ
his teacher. I opened to him the parables, and how election and
reprobation stood; as that reprobation stood in the first birth, and
election stood in the second birth. I showed also what the promise of
God was to, and what the judgment of God was against, He confessed to it
all; and was so opened with the truth, that when another justice that
was present, made some little opposition, he informed him. At our
parting, he said it was very well that I exercised that gift, which God
had given me. He took the chief constables aside, and would have given
them some money for me, saying, he would not have me at any charge in
their country; but they told him that they could not persuade me to take
any; and so accepting his kindness, I refused his money.

From thence I passed up into the country, and the priest that called me
brother (in whose school-house I had the meeting at Pickering,) went
along with me. When we came into a town to bait, the bells rang. I asked
what they rang for: and they said, for me to preach in the
steeple-house. After some time I felt drawings that way; and as I walked
to the steeple-house, I saw the people were gathered together in the
yard. The old priest would have had me to go into the steeple-house; but
I said, it was no matter. It was something strange to the people, that I
would not go into that which they called the house of God. I stood up in
the steeple-house yard, and declared to the people, that I came not to
hold up their idol temples, nor their priests, nor their tithes, nor
their augmentations, nor their priests’ wages, nor their Jewish and
heathenish ceremonies and traditions (for I denied all these,) and told
them that that piece of ground was no more holy than another piece of
ground. I showed them that the apostles’ going into the Jews’ synagogues
and temples, which God had commanded, was to bring people off from that
temple, and those synagogues, and from the offerings, and tithes, and
covetous priests of that time; that such as came to be convinced of the
truth, and converted to it, and believed in Jesus Christ, whom the
apostles preached, met together afterwards in dwelling-houses; and that
all who preach Christ, the Word of life, ought to preach freely, as the
apostles did, and as He had commanded. So I was sent of the Lord God of
heaven and earth to preach freely, and to bring people off from these
outward temples made with hands, which God dwelleth not in; that they
might know their bodies to become the temples of God and of Christ: and
to draw people off from all their superstitious ceremonies, and Jewish
and heathenish customs, traditions, and doctrines of men; and from all
the world’s hireling teachers, that take tithes and great wages,
preaching for hire, and divining for money, whom God and Christ never
sent, as themselves confess, when they say they never heard God’s voice,
nor Christ’s voice. Therefore I exhorted the people to come off from all
these things, and directed them to the Spirit and grace of God in
themselves, and to the light of Jesus in their own hearts, that they
might come to know Christ, their free teacher, to bring them salvation,
and to open the Scriptures to them. Thus the Lord gave me a good
opportunity amongst them to open things largely unto them. All was
quiet, and many were convinced; blessed be the Lord!

I passed on to another town, where there was another great meeting, the
old priest before mentioned going along with me; and there came
professors of several sorts to it. I sat on a haystack, and spoke
nothing for some hours; for I was to famish them from words. The
professors would ever and anon be speaking to the old priest, and asking
him when I would begin, and when I would speak. He bade them wait; and
told them, that the people waited upon Christ a long while before he
spoke. At last I was moved of the Lord to speak; and they were struck by
the Lord’s power; the word of life reached to them, and there was a
general convincement amongst them.

From hence I passed on, the old priest being still with me, and several
others. As we went along, some people called to him, and said, “Mr.
Boyes, we owe you some money for tithes, pray come and take it.” But he
threw up his hands, and said he had enough, he would have none of it;
they might keep it; and he praised the Lord he had enough.

At length we came to this old priest’s steeple-house in the MOORS; and
when we were come into it, he went before me, and held open the pulpit
door; but I told him I should not go into it. This steeple-house was
very much painted. I told him and the people, that the painted beast had
a painted house. Then I opened to them the rise of all those houses, and
their superstitious ways; showing them, that as the end of the apostles’
going into the temple and synagogues, which God had commanded, was not
to hold them up, but to bring the people to Christ, the substance; so
the end of my coming there, was not to hold up these temples, priests,
and tithes, which God had never commanded, but to bring themselves off
from all these things, to Christ the substance. I showed them the true
worship, which Christ had set up; and distinguished Christ the true way
from all the false ways, opening the parables to them, and turning them
from darkness to the true light, that by it they might see themselves,
their sins, and Christ their Saviour; that believing in Him, they might
be saved from their sins.

After this we went to one Birdet’s house, where I had a great meeting,
and this old priest accompanied me still, leaving his steeple-house; for
he had been looked upon as a famous priest, above Common-Prayer-men, and
Presbyters, and Independents too. Before he was convinced, he went
sometimes into their steeple-houses and preached; for he had been a
zealous man in his way. And when they complained of him to Justice
Hotham, he bid them distrain his horse for travelling on the Lord’s day
(as he called it); but Hotham did that only to put them off, for he knew
the priest used no horse, but travelled on foot.

Now I came towards CRANSWICK, to Captain Pursloe’s and Justice Hotham’s,
who received me kindly, being glad that the Lord’s power had so
appeared; that truth was spread, and so many had received it; and that
Justice Robinson was so civil. Justice Hotham said, If God had not
raised up this principle of light and life, which I preached, the nation
had been overrun with Ranterism, and all the justices in the nation
could not have stopped it with all their laws; because (said he) they
would have said as we said, and done as we commanded, and yet have kept
their own principle still. But this principle of truth, said he,
overthrows their principle, and the root and ground thereof; and
therefore, he was glad the Lord had raised up this principle of life and
truth.

From thence I travelled up to HOLDERNESS, and came to a justice’s house,
whose name was Pearson, where there was a very tender woman, that
believed in the truth, and was so affected therewith, that she said she
could have left all and have followed me.

Thence I went to ORAM, to one George Hartis’s, where many of that town
were convinced. On the First-day I was moved to go into the
steeple-house, where the priest had got another to help him; and many
professors and contenders were assembled together. But the Lord’s power
was over all; the priests fled away, and much good service I had for the
Lord amongst the people. Some of those great professors were convinced,
and became honest, faithful Friends, being men of account in the place.

The next day, Friends and friendly people having left me, I travelled
alone, declaring the day of the Lord amongst people in the towns where I
came, and warning them to repent. One day, I came towards night into a
town called PATRINGTON; and as I walked along the town, I warned both
priest and people (for the priest was in the street) to repent and turn
to the Lord. It grew dark before I came to the end of the town; and a
multitude of people gathered about me, to whom I declared the word of
life. When I had cleared myself, I went to an inn, and desired them to
let me have a lodging; but they would not. Then I desired them to let me
have a little meat, or milk, and I would pay them for it; but they would
not. So I walked out of the town, and a company of fellows followed me,
and asked me, what news? I bid them repent, and fear the Lord. After I
had gone some distance, I came to another house, and desired the people
to let me have a little meat and drink, and lodging for my money; but
they denied me. Then I went to another house, and desired the same; but
they refused me also. By this time it was grown so dark, that I could
not see the highway; but I discerned a ditch, and got a little water and
refreshed myself. Then I got over the ditch, and being weary with
travelling, sat down among the furze-bushes till it was day. About break
of day I got up and passed over the fields. A man came after me with a
great pike-staff, and went along with me to a town; and he raised the
town upon me, with the constable and chief constable, before the sun was
up. I declared God’s everlasting truth amongst them, warning them of the
day of the Lord, that was coming upon all sin and wickedness; and
exhorted them to repent. But they seized me, and had me back to
Patrington, about three miles, guarding me with pikes, staves, and
halberds.

Now when I was come back to Patrington, all the town was in an uproar,
and the priest and people were consulting together; so I had another
opportunity to declare the word of life amongst them, and warn them to
repent. At last a professor, a tender man, called me into his house, and
there I took a little milk and bread, not having eaten for some days
before. Then they guarded me about nine miles to a justice. When I was
come near his house, a man came riding after us, and asked me whether I
was the man that was apprehended? I asked him wherefore he asked? He
said, for no hurt; and I told him I was; so he rode away to the justice
before us. The men that guarded me said, It was well if the justice was
not drunk, before we got to him; for he used to be drunk early. When I
was brought in before him, because I did not put off my hat, and said
Thou to him, he asked the man that rode thither before me, whether I was
not mazed or fond; but the man told him, no, it was my principle. Then I
warned him to repent, and come to the light, which Christ had
enlightened him with, that by it he might see all his evil words and
actions; and to return to Christ Jesus whilst he had time; and that
whilst he had time, he should prize it. “Ay, ay,” said he, “the light
that is spoken of in the third of John.” I desired him that he would
mind it and obey it. As I admonished him, I laid my hand upon him, and
he was brought down by the power of the Lord; and all the watchmen stood
amazed. Then he took me into a little parlour with the other man, and
desired to see what I had in my pockets, of letters or intelligence. I
plucked out my linen, and showed him that I had no letters. He said, He
is not a vagrant by his linen; and then he set me at liberty. I went
back to Patrington, with the man that had ridden before me to the
justice; for he lived at Patrington. When I came there, he would have
had me have a meeting at the Cross; but I said, it was no matter, his
house would serve. He desired me to go to bed, or lie down upon a bed;
which he did, that they might say, they had seen me in a bed, or upon a
bed; for a report had been raised that I would not lie on any bed,
because at that time I lay many times out of doors. Now when the
First-day of the week was come, I went to the steeple-house, and
declared the truth to the priest and people; and the people did not
molest me, for the power of God was come over them. Presently after I
had a great meeting at the man’s house where I lay, and many were
convinced of the Lord’s everlasting truth, who stand faithful witnesses
of it to this day. They were exceedingly grieved that they did not
receive me, nor give me lodging, when I was there before.

From hence I travelled through the country, even to the furthest part
thereof, warning people, in towns and villages, to repent, and directing
them to Christ Jesus, their teacher.

On the First-day of the week I came to one Colonel Overton’s house, and
had a great meeting of the prime of the people of that country; where
many things were opened out of the Scriptures, which they had never
heard before. Many were convinced, and received the word of life, and
were settled in the truth of God.

Then I returned to PATRINGTON again, and visited those Friends that were
convinced there; by whom I understood that a tailor, and some wild
blades in that town, had occasioned my being carried before the justice.
The tailor came to ask my forgiveness, fearing I would complain of him.
The constables also were afraid, lest I should trouble them. But I
forgave them all, and warned them to turn to the Lord, and to amend
their lives. Now that which made them the more afraid was this: when I
was in the steeple-house at Oram not long before, there came a
professor, who gave me a push on the breast in the steeple-house, and
bid me get out of the church. “Alas, poor man!” said I, “dost thou call
the steeple-house the church? The church is the people, whom God hath
purchased with His blood, and not the house.” It happened that Justice
Hotham came to hear of this man’s abuse, sent his warrant for him, and
bound him over to the sessions; so affected was he with the truth, and
so zealous to keep the peace. And indeed this Justice Hotham had asked
me before, whether any people had meddled with me, or abused me; but I
was not at liberty to tell him anything of that kind, but was to forgive
all.




                               CHAPTER V.

1652.—George Fox visits great men’s houses, warning them to repent—is
    accused of calling himself Christ—refutes the charge, and tells the
    accuser that Judas’s end would he his, which shortly came to pass;
    hence a slander is raised against Friends—is stoned at Doncaster—a
    scoffing priest made to tremble at the Lord’s power—a slandering
    priest cut off in his wickedness—a murderous man seeks George Fox,
    but misses him—he lays in a wood all night—the influence of one man
    or woman, who lives in the same spirit that the prophets and
    apostles were in, is to be felt within a circuit of ten miles—George
    Fox ascends Pendle Hill, whence he sees the place of a great
    gathering of people—on descending, refreshes himself at a spring of
    water, having taken little sustenance for several days—foresees a
    great people in white raiment about Wensleydale and Sedbergh—a
    wicked man designs to injure him, but is prevented—many are
    convinced in Dent, and a meeting is settled at Sedbergh, where he
    had seen a people in white raiment—preaches for several hours in the
    steeple-house yard there—preaches on a rock, near Firbank chapel, to
    1,000 people, for three hours—the family of Judge Fell convinced,
    and a meeting settled at his house, and continued for forty
    years—preaches through Lancaster streets—at a meeting of priests at
    Ulverstone he speaks in great power, so that one of them said, “the
    church shook”—disputes with priest Lampitt—Justice Sawrey is the
    first persecutor in the north—forty priests appear against George
    Fox at Lancaster Sessions for speaking blasphemy; they are
    confounded, and he is cleared of the charge—James Naylor’s account
    of George Fox’s trial at Lancaster Sessions—priest Jackus is
    reproved from the bench for his blasphemy—these priests are reproved
    by the populace—Col. West defends and protects George Fox against
    the machinations of the priests, and the design of Judge Windham, at
    the risk of losing his place.


From PATRINGTON I went to several great men’s houses, warning them to
repent. Some received me lovingly, and some slighted me. Thus I passed
on, and at night came to another town, where I desired lodging and meat,
and I would pay for it; but they would not lodge me, except I would go
to the constable, which was the custom (they said) of all lodgers at
inns, if strangers. I told them I should not go; for that custom was for
suspicious persons, but I was an innocent man. After I had warned them
to repent, declared unto them the day of their visitation, and directed
them to the light of Christ and Spirit of God, that they might come to
know salvation, I passed away; and the people were something tendered,
and troubled afterwards. When it grew dark, I spied a hay-stack, and
went and sat under it all night, till morning.

The next day I passed into HULL, admonishing and warning people, as I
went, to turn to Christ Jesus that they might receive salvation. That
night I got a lodging, but was very sore with travelling on foot so far.

Afterwards I came to BALBY, and visited Friends up and down in those
parts; and then passed into the edge of NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, visiting
Friends there; and so into LINCOLNSHIRE, and visited Friends there. And
on the First-day of the week I went to a steeple-house on this side of
Trent; and in the afternoon to one on the other side of the Trent,
declaring the word of life to the people, and directing them to their
teacher, Christ Jesus, who died for them that they might hear him, and
receive salvation by him. Then I went further into the country, and had
several meetings. To one meeting came a great man, and a priest and many
professors; but the Lord’s power came over them all, and they went their
ways peaceably. There came a man to that meeting, who had been at one
before, and raised a false accusation against me, and made a noise up
and down the country, reporting that I had said I was Christ; which was
utterly false.

And when I came to GAINSBOROUGH, where a Friend had been declaring truth
in the market, the town and market-people were all in an uproar. I went
into a friendly man’s house, and the people rushed in after me; so that
the house was filled with professors, disputers, and rude people. This
false accuser came in, and charged me openly before all the people, that
I had said, I was Christ, and he had got witnesses to prove it. This set
the people into such a rage, that they had much to do to keep their
hands off me. Then I was moved of the Lord God to stand up on the table,
and, in the eternal power of God, to tell the people “That Christ was
_in them_, except they were reprobates; and that it was Christ the
eternal power of God, that spoke in me at that time unto them; not that
I was Christ.” And the people were generally satisfied, except himself,
a professor, and his own false-witnesses. I called the accuser Judas,
and was moved to tell him, that Judas’s end would be his; and that that
was the word of the Lord and of Christ, through me, to him. So the
Lord’s power came over all, and quieted the minds of the people, and
they departed in peace. But this Judas went away, and shortly after
hanged himself, and a stake was driven into his grave. Afterwards the
wicked priests raised a scandal upon us, and reported that a Quaker had
hanged himself in Lincolnshire, and had a stake driven through him. This
falsehood they printed to the nation, adding sin to sin; which the truth
and we were clear of: for he was no more a Quaker than the priest that
printed it, but was one of their own people. But notwithstanding this
wicked slander, by which the adversary designed to defame us, and turn
people’s minds against the truth we held forth, many in Lincolnshire
received the gospel, being convinced of the Lord’s everlasting truth,
and sat down therein under the Lord’s heavenly teaching.

After this I passed, in the Lord’s power, into YORKSHIRE, came to
WARMSWORTH, and went to the steeple-house in the forenoon,[13] but they
shut the door against me; yet after a while they let in Thomas Aldam,
and then shut it again; and the priest fell upon him, asking him
questions. At last they opened the door, and I went in. As soon as I was
in the priest’s sight, he discontinued preaching, though I said nothing
to him, and asked me, “What have you to say!” and presently cried out,
“Come, come, I will prove them false prophets, in Matthew;” but he was
so confounded, he could not find the chapter. Then he fell on me, asking
me many questions, and I stood still all this while, not saying anything
amongst them. At last I said, “Seeing here are so many questions asked,
I may answer them.” But as soon as I began to speak, the people
violently rushed upon me, and thrust me out of the steeple-house again,
and locked the door on me. As soon as they had done their service, and
were come forth, the people ran upon me, and knocked me sorely with
their staves, threw clods and stones at me, and abused me much; the
priest also, being in a great rage, laid violent hands on me himself.
But I warned them and him of the terrible day of the Lord, and exhorted
them to repent, and turn to Christ. Being filled with the Lord’s
refreshing power, I was not sensible of much hurt I had received by
their blows. In the afternoon I went to another steeple-house, but the
priest had done before I got thither; so I preached repentance to the
people that were left, and directed them to their inward teacher, Jesus
Christ.

Footnote 13:

  The circumstance of Friends entering the public places of worship in
  the times of the Commonwealth, is one which has been much
  misunderstood, and greatly misrepresented. For these acts of
  dedication they have been calumniated as disturbers of religious
  congregations, and as outraging the peace and order of the churches.
  This estimate, doubtless, has been formed with reference to usages of
  more modern date; but to decide upon the conduct of Friends in this
  particular, from a consideration of present circumstances, would be
  exceedingly erroneous. In preaching in the national places of worship,
  they did but avail themselves of a common liberty, in a period of
  extraordinary excitement on religious things. There were numerous
  other religious meetings held in those times, but into none of these
  did Friends obtrude themselves. Some probably will argue, that the
  fact of their being so severely punished for persisting in this
  practice, may be adduced in support of its irregularity; but it may be
  answered, that the preaching of Friends almost everywhere, at that
  time, whether in steeple-houses or private houses, in-doors or out of
  doors, equally called down the rigour of ecclesiastical vengeance. It
  was not, in fact, because Friends preached in these places so much as
  for what they preached that they suffered. When George Fox was
  committed to Derby prison in 1650, after preaching in the
  steeple-house at “a great lecture,” the mittimus states his offence
  was, for “uttering and broaching of divers blasphemous opinions.” In
  1659, Gilbert Latey went to Dunstan’s steeple-house in the west, where
  the noted Dr. Manton preached. At the conclusion of the sermon,
  Gilbert Latey addressed the assembly relative to some errors in
  Manton’s sermon, for which he was seized by a constable and taken
  before a magistrate; who, however, gave G. Latey leave to speak for
  himself. The statement he made satisfied the justice, and he replied,
  that he had heard the people called Quakers, were a sort of mad,
  whimsical folks; “but,” said he, “for this man, he talks very
  rationally, and I think, for my part, you should not have brought him
  before me.” To which the constable replied, “Sir, I think so too.”
  This occurred eleven years after G. Fox first visited a steeple-house,
  and, during that time, Friends had suffered very much for speaking in
  them, yet now a magistrate declares, that speaking rationally after
  the preacher had finished in a steeple-house, is not an offence for
  which a man ought to be brought before him. But the ministry of
  Friends struck at the very foundation of all hierarchical systems, and
  the discovery of this circumstance prompted the priests to call in the
  aid of the civil power, to suppress the promulgation of views so
  opposed to ecclesiastical domination.

From hence I went to BALBY, and so to DONCASTER, where I had formerly
preached repentance on the market-day; which had made a noise and alarm
in the country. On the First-day I went to the steeple-house, and after
the priest had done, I spoke to him and the people what the Lord had
commanded me; and they were in a great rage, hurried me out, threw me
down, and haled me before the magistrates. A long examination they made
of me, and much work I had with them. They threatened my life if ever I
came there again; and that they would leave me to the mercy of the
people. Nevertheless, I declared truth amongst them, and directed them
to the light of Christ in them; testifying unto them that “God was come
to teach his people himself, whether they would hear or forbear.” After
a while they put us out (for some Friends were with me) among the rude
multitude, and they stoned us down the street. An innkeeper, that was a
bailiff, came and took us into his house; and they broke his head, that
the blood ran down his face, with the stones that they threw at us. We
stayed a while in his house, and showed the more sober people the
priest’s fruits. Then we went to Balby, about a mile off, and the rude
people laid wait for us, and stoned us down the lane; but, blessed be
the Lord, we did not receive much hurt.

The next First-day I went to TICKHILL, whither the Friends of that side
gathered together, and in the meeting a mighty brokenness by the power
of God was amongst the people. I went out of the meeting, being moved of
God to go to the steeple-house; and when I came there, I found the
priest and most of the chief of the parish together in the chancel. So I
went up to them, and began to speak; but they immediately fell upon me;
and the clerk took up his Bible, as I was speaking, and struck me on the
face with it, so that it gushed out with blood, and I bled exceedingly
in the steeple-house. Then the people cried, “Let us have him out of the
church;” and when they had got me out, they beat me exceedingly, and
threw me down, and over a hedge; and afterwards they dragged me through
a house into the street, stoning and beating me as they drew me along,
so that I was besmeared all over with blood and dirt. They got my hat
from me, which I never obtained again. Yet when I was got upon my legs
again, I declared to them the word of life, and showed them the fruits
of their teacher, and how they dishonoured Christianity. After a while I
got into the meeting again amongst Friends; and the priest and people
coming by the house, I went forth with Friends into the yard, and there
I spoke to the priest and people. The priest scoffed at us, and called
us Quakers. But the Lord’s power was so over them, and the word of life
was declared in such authority and dread to them, that the priest began
trembling himself; and one of the people said, “Look how the priest
trembles and shakes, he is turned a Quaker also.” When the meeting was
over, Friends departed; and I went without my hat to BALBY, about seven
or eight miles. Friends were much abused that day by the priest and his
people; insomuch that some moderate justices hearing of it, two or three
of them came, and sat at the town, to hear and examine the business. And
he that had shed my blood was afraid of having his hand cut off, for
striking me in the church (as they called it;) but I forgave him, and
would not appear against him.

In the beginning of this year 1652 great rage got up in priests and
people, and in some of the magistrates of the West-Riding of Yorkshire,
against the truth and Friends; insomuch that the priest of WARMSWORTH
procured a warrant from the justices against me and Thomas Aldam, to be
executed in any part of the West-Riding of Yorkshire. At the same time I
had a vision of a bear and two great mastiff dogs; that I should pass by
them, and they should do me no hurt; and it proved so: for the constable
took Thomas Aldam and carried him to York. I went with Thomas Aldam
twenty miles towards York: and the constable had the warrant for me
also, and said, “he saw me, but he was loath to trouble men that were
strangers; but Thomas Aldam was his neighbour.” So the Lord’s power
restrained him, that he had not power to meddle with me. We came to
Lieutenant Roper’s, where we had a great meeting of many considerable
men; and the truth was powerfully declared amongst them, and the
Scriptures wonderfully opened, and the parables and sayings of Christ
were expounded, and the state of the church in the apostles’ days was
plainly set forth, and the apostacy since from that state discovered.
The truth had great dominion that day, so that those great men that were
present did generally confess to it, saying, “they believed that this
principle must go over the whole world.” There were at this meeting
James Naylor, Thomas Goodyear,[14] and William Dewsbury, who had been
convinced the year before; and Richard Farnsworth also. And the
constable stayed with Thomas Aldam till the meeting was over, and then
went towards York prison; but did not meddle with me.

Footnote 14:

  Thomas Goodyear became a faithful minister, and suffered much
  persecution and imprisonment. When in Oxford jail (for refusing to
  swear), the jailer put irons on his legs, which being too small hurt
  him, and besides other abuse, would not let him and other Friends have
  straw to lie on. The jailer also told the other prisoners if they
  wanted coats, they might take those of the Friends off their backs;
  but one of the prisoners answered he would go naked first.

  Thomas Goodyear was the author of “_A Plain Testimony to the Ancient
  Truth and Work of God_.” He died at Selby, in 1693.

From hence I went to WAKEFIELD; and on the First-day after, I went to a
steeple-house, where James Naylor had been a member of an Independent
church; but upon his receiving truth, he was excommunicated. When I came
in, and the priest had done, the people called upon me to come up to the
priest, which I did; but when I began to declare the word of life to
them, and to lay open the deceit of the priest, they rushed upon me
suddenly, thrust me out at the other door, punching and beating me, and
cried, “Let us have him to the stocks.” But the Lord’s power restrained
them, that they were not suffered to put me in. So I passed away to the
meeting, where were a great many professors and friendly people
gathered, and a great convincement there was that day; for the people
were mightily satisfied that they were directed to the Lord’s teaching
_in themselves_. Here we got some lodging; for four of us had lain under
a hedge the night before, there being then few Friends in that place.

The same day Richard Farnsworth went to another great steeple-house,
belonging to a high priest, and declared the word of truth unto the
people; and a great service he had amongst them; for the Lord’s dread
and power was mightily over all.

The priest of that church which James Naylor had been a member of, whose
name was Marshall, raised many wicked slanders about me, as, “that I
carried bottles with me, and made people drink of them, which made them
follow me;” and, “that I rode upon a great black horse, and was seen in
one country upon it in one hour, and at the same hour in another country
threescore miles off;” and that I would give a fellow money to follow
me, when I was on my black horse. With these lies he fed his people, to
make them think evil of the truth which I had declared amongst them. But
by these lies he preached many of his hearers away from him; for I was
then travelling on foot, and had no horse at that time; which the people
generally knew. The Lord soon after cut off this envious priest in his
wickedness.

After this I came to HIGH-TOWN, where dwelt a woman who had been
convinced a little before. We went to her house, and had a meeting; and
the people gathered together, and we declared the truth to them, and had
some service for the Lord amongst them; they passed away again
peaceably. But there was a widow woman, named Green, who, being filled
with envy, went to one that was called a gentleman in the town, (who was
reported to have killed two men and one woman,) and informed him against
us, though he was no officer. The next morning we drew up some queries
to be sent to the priest. When we had done, and were just going away,
some of the friendly people of the town came running up to the house
where we were, and told us that this murdering man had sharpened a pike
to stab us, and was coming up with his sword by his side. We were just
passing away, and so missed him. But we were no sooner gone, than he
came to the house where we had been; and the people generally concluded
if we had not been gone, he would have murdered some of us. That night
we lay in a wood, and were very wet, for it rained exceedingly. In the
morning I was moved to return to the town, when they gave us a full
relation of this wicked man.

From hence we passed to BRADFORD, where we met with Richard Farnsworth
again, from whom we had parted a little before. When we came in, they
set meat before us; but as I was going to eat, the word of the Lord came
to me, saying, “Eat not the bread of such as have an evil eye.”
Immediately I arose from the table, and ate nothing. The woman of the
house was a Baptist. After I had exhorted the family to turn to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and hearken to his teachings in their own hearts, we
departed thence.

As we travelled through the country, preaching repentance to the people,
we came into a town on the market-day. There was a lecture there that
day; and I went into the steeple-house, where were many priests,
professors, and people. The priest that preached, took for his text
those words of Jeremiah, chap. v., ver. 31: “My people love to have it
so,” leaving out the foregoing words, viz., “The prophets prophesy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means.” So I showed the
people his deceit, and directed them to Christ, the _true Teacher
within_; declaring, “that God was come to teach his people himself, and
to bring them off from all the world’s teachers and hirelings, that they
might come to receive freely from him.” Then warning them of the day of
the Lord, that was coming upon all flesh, I passed from thence without
much opposition.

At night we came to a country place, where there was no public-house
near. The people desired us to stay all night; which we did, and had
good service for the Lord, declaring his truth amongst them.

The next day we passed on; for the Lord had said unto me, “If but one
man or woman were raised up by His power, to stand and live in the same
Spirit that the prophets and apostles were in, who gave forth the
Scriptures, that man or woman should shake all the country in their
profession for ten miles round.” For people had the Scriptures, but not
in that same light, and power, and Spirit, which they were in that gave
forth the Scriptures; and so they neither knew God, nor Christ, nor the
Scriptures aright; nor had they unity one with another, being out of the
power and Spirit of God. Therefore as we passed along we warned all
people, wherever we met them, of the day of the Lord that was coming
upon them.

As we travelled we came near a very great hill, called PENDLE-HILL, and
I was moved of the Lord to go up to the top of it; which I did with
difficulty, it was so very steep and high. When I was come to the top, I
saw the sea bordering upon Lancashire. From the top of this hill the
Lord let me see in what places he had a great people to be gathered. As
I went down I found a spring of water in the side of the hill, with
which I refreshed myself, having eaten or drunk but little for several
days before.[15]

Footnote 15:

  The spring here alluded to is called George Fox’s Well to this day.

At night we came to an inn, and declared truth to the man of the house,
and wrote a paper to the priests and professors, declaring “the day of
the Lord, and that Christ was come to teach people himself, by his power
and Spirit in their hearts, and to bring people off from all the world’s
ways and teachers, to his own free teaching, who had bought them, and
was the Saviour of all them that believed in Him.” The man of the house
spread the paper abroad, and was mightily affected with the truth. Here
the Lord opened unto me, and let me see a great people in white raiment
by a river side, coming to the Lord; and the place that I saw them in
was about WENSLEYDALE and SEDBERGH.

The next day we travelled on, and at night got a little fern or brackens
to put under us, and lay upon a common. Next morning we reached a town,
where Richard Farnsworth parted from me; and then I travelled alone
again. I came up Wensleydale, and at the market-town in that Dale, there
was a lecture on the market-day. I went into the steeple-house; and
after the priest had done, I “proclaimed the day of the Lord to the
priest and people, warning them to turn from darkness to the light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they might come to know God and
Christ aright, and to receive his teaching, who teacheth freely.”
Largely and freely did I declare the word of life unto them, and had not
much persecution there. Afterwards I passed up the Dales, warning people
to fear God, and preaching the everlasting gospel to them.

In my way I came to a great house, where was a schoolmaster; and they
got me into the house. I asked them questions about their religion and
worship; and afterwards I declared the truth to them. They had me into a
parlour, and locked me in, pretending that I was a young man that was
mad, and had run away from my relations: and that they would keep me
till they could send to them. But I soon convinced them of their
mistake, and they let me forth, and would have had me to stay; but I was
not to stay there. Then having exhorted them to repentance, and directed
them to the light of Christ Jesus, that through it they might come unto
him and be saved, I passed from them, and came in the night to a little
ale-house on a common, where there was a company of rude fellows
drinking. Because I would not drink with them, they struck me with their
clubs; but I reproved them, and brought them to be somewhat cooler; and
then I walked out of the house upon the common in the night. After some
time one of these drunken fellows came out, and would have come close up
to me, pretending to whisper to me; but I perceived he had a knife; and
therefore I kept off him, and bid him repent, and fear God. So the Lord
by His power preserved me from this wicked man; and he went into the
house again. The next morning I went on through other Dales, warning and
exhorting people everywhere as I passed, to repent and turn to the Lord:
and several were convinced. At one house that I came to, the man of the
house (whom I afterwards found to be a kinsman of John Blakelin’s,)
would have given me money, but I would not receive it.

As I travelled through the Dales, I came to a man’s house, whose name
was Tennant. I was moved to speak to the family, and declare God’s
everlasting truth to them; and as I was turning away from them, I was
moved to turn again, and speak to the man himself; and he was convinced,
and his family, and lived and died in the truth. Thence I came to Major
Bousfield’s, who received me, as did also several others; and some that
were then convinced have stood faithful ever since. I went also through
GRISDALE, and several others of those Dales, in which some were
convinced. And I went into DENT, where many were convinced also. From
Major Bousfield’s I came to Richard Robinson’s, and declared the
everlasting truth to him.

The next day I went to a meeting at Justice Benson’s, where I met a
people that were separated from the public worship. This was the place I
had seen, where a people came forth in white raiment. A large meeting it
was, and the people were generally convinced, and continue a large
meeting still of Friends near Sedbergh; which was then first gathered
through my ministry in the name of Jesus.

In the same week there was a great fair, at which servants used to be
hired; and I declared the day of the Lord through the fair. After I had
done so, I went into the steeple-house yard, and many of the people of
the fair came thither to me, and abundance of priests and professors.
There “I declared the everlasting truth of the Lord, and the word of
life for several hours, showing that the Lord was come to teach his
people himself, and to bring them off from all the world’s ways and
teachers, to Christ the true teacher, and the true way to God. I laid
open their teachers, showing that they were like them that were of old
condemned by the prophets, and by Christ, and by the apostles. I
exhorted the people to come off from the temples made with hands; and
wait to receive the Spirit of the Lord, that they might know themselves
to be the temples of God.” Not one of the priests had power to open his
mouth against what I declared: but at last a captain said, “Why will you
not go into the church? this is not a fit place to preach in.” I told
him, I denied their church. Then stood up one Francis Howgill, who was a
preacher to a congregation: he had not seen me before, yet he undertook
to answer that captain, and soon put him to silence. Then said Francis
Howgill of me, “This man speaks with authority, and not as the scribes.”
After this I opened to the people, that that ground and house was no
holier than another place; and that that house was not the church, but
the people, whom Christ is the head of. After a while the priests came
up to me, and I warned them to repent. One of them said I was mad, and
so they turned away. But many people were convinced there that day, and
were glad to hear the truth declared, and received it with joy. Amongst
these was one Captain Ward, who received the truth in the love of it,
and lived and died in it.

The next First-day I came to FIRBANK CHAPEL, in Westmoreland, where
Francis Howgill, before named, and John Audland,[16] had been preaching
in the morning. The chapel was full of people, so that many could not
get in. Francis Howgill said, he thought I looked into the chapel, and
his spirit was ready to fail, the Lord’s power did so surprise him; but
I did not look in. They made haste, and had quickly done, and they and
some of the people went to dinner, but abundance stayed till they came
again. Now John Blakelin and others came to me, and desired me not to
reprove them publicly; for they were not parish teachers, but pretty
tender men. I could not tell them whether I should or not (though I had
not at that time any drawings to declare publicly against them), but I
said they must leave me to the Lord’s movings. While the others were
gone to dinner, I went to a brook and got a little water; and then came
and sat down on the top of a rock hard by the chapel. In the afternoon
the people gathered about me, with several of their preachers. It was
judged there were above a thousand people; “amongst whom I declared
God’s everlasting truth and word of life freely and largely, for about
the space of three hours, directing all to the Spirit of God _in
themselves_, that they might be turned from darkness to the light, and
believe in it, that they might become the children of it; and might be
turned from the power of Satan, which they had been under, unto God; and
by the Spirit of truth might be led into all truth, and sensibly
understand the words of the prophets, and of Christ, and of the
apostles; and might all come to know Christ to be their teacher, to
instruct them, their counsellor to direct them, their shepherd to feed
them, their bishop to oversee them, and their prophet to open divine
mysteries to them; and might know their bodies to be prepared,
sanctified, and made fit temples for God and Christ to dwell in.” In the
openings of heavenly life, I explained unto them the prophets, and the
figures, and shadows, and directed them to Christ, the substance. Then I
opened the parables and sayings of Christ, and things that had been long
hid, showing the intent and scope of the apostles’ writings, and that
their epistles were written to the elect. When I had opened that state,
I showed also the state of the apostacy since the apostles’ days; that
the priests have got the Scriptures, but are not in that Spirit which
gave them forth, and have put them into chapter and verse, to make a
trade of holy men’s words; and that the teachers and priests now are
found in the steps of the false prophets, chief priests, scribes, and
Pharisees of old, and are such, as the true prophets, Christ, and his
apostles cried out against, and so are judged and condemned by the
Spirit of the true prophets, and of Christ, and of his apostles; and
that none, who are in that Spirit, and guided by it now, can own them.

Footnote 16:

  Francis Howgill and John Audland were both religiously inclined, and
  were convinced during the present year. They became eminent ministers,
  travelling in the gospel, and suffering fines and imprisonments for
  its sake, turning many to God. Howgill, for refusing to swear, was
  sent to Appleby jail, the following sentence being passed against
  him:—“You are put out of the king’s protection and the benefit of the
  law: your lands are confiscated to the king during your life, and your
  goods and chattels for ever; and you to be a prisoner during your
  life.” He praised God for the many sweet enjoyments and refreshments
  he received on his prison bed, whereon he lay, freely forgiving all.
  His end was in great peace, in 1668. See _Piety Promoted_, i. 64-67.

  John Audland also laboured much in the gospel, for which he suffered
  persecution and imprisonments. In his last sickness he was exceedingly
  filled with high praises to God, being overcome with a sense of His
  love and joy. When he grew weaker he was helped on his knees, and upon
  his bed fervently supplicated the Lord on behalf of all His people
  that “they might be preserved in the truth, out of the evil of the
  world.” See _Piety Promoted_, i., 41-44; and _Memoirs of F. Howgill_,
  by James Backhouse.

Now there were many old people, who went into the chapel and looked out
at the windows, thinking it a strange thing to see a man preach on a
hill, and not in their church, as they called it; whereupon “I was moved
to open to the people, that the steeple-house, and the ground whereon it
stood, were no more holy than that mountain; and that those temples,
which they called the dreadful houses of God, were not set up by the
command of God and of Christ; nor their priests called, as Aaron’s
priesthood was; nor their tithes appointed by God, as those amongst the
Jews were; but that Christ was come, who ended both the temple and its
worship, and the priests and their tithes; and that all should now
hearken unto him; for he said, “Learn of me;” and God said of him, “This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.” I declared
unto them that the Lord God had sent me to preach the everlasting gospel
and word of life amongst them, and to bring them off from all these
temples, tithes, priests, and rudiments of the world, which had been
instituted since the apostles’ days, and had been set up by such as had
erred from the Spirit and power the apostles were in.” Very largely was
I opened at this meeting, and the Lord’s convincing power accompanied my
ministry, and reached the hearts of the people, whereby many were
convinced; and all the teachers of that congregation (who were many,)
were convinced of God’s everlasting truth.

After the meeting was over I went to John Audland’s, and from thence to
PRESTON-PATRICK chapel, where a great meeting was appointed; to which I
went, and had a large opportunity amongst the people to preach the
everlasting gospel, opening to them (as to others on the like occasion),
that the end of my coming into that place was, not to hold it up, no
more than the apostles’ going into the Jewish synagogues and temple was,
to uphold those; but to bring them off from all such things, as the
apostles brought the saints of old from off the Jewish temple and
Aaron’s priesthood, that they might come to witness their bodies to be
the temples of God, and Christ in them to be their teacher.

From this place I went to KENDAL, where a meeting was appointed in the
town-hall; in which I declared the word of life amongst the people,
showing them “how they might come to the saving knowledge of Christ, and
have a right understanding of the Holy Scriptures, opening to them what
it was that would lead them into the way of reconciliation with God, and
what would be their condemnation.” After the meeting I stayed a while in
the town; several were convinced there, and many appeared loving. One,
whose name was Cock, met me in the street, and would have given me a
roll of tobacco, for people then were much given to smoking: I accepted
his love, but did not receive the tobacco.

From thence I went to UNDERBARROW, to one Miles Bateman’s; and several
people going along with me, great reasonings I had with them, especially
with Edward Burrough.[17] At night the priest and many professors came
to the house, and much disputing I had with them. Supper being provided
for the priest and the rest of the company, I had not freedom to eat
with them, but told them, if they would appoint a meeting for the next
day at the steeple-house, and acquaint the people with it, I might meet
them. They had a great deal of reasoning about it; some being for it,
and some against it. In the morning I went out, after I had spoken again
to them concerning the meeting; and as I walked upon a bank by the
house, there were several poor people, travellers, asking relief, who I
saw were in necessity; and they gave them nothing, but said they were
cheats. It grieved me to see such hard-heartedness amongst professors;
so, when they were gone in to their breakfast, I ran after the poor
people about a quarter of a mile, and gave them some money. Meanwhile
some of them that were in the house, coming out again, and seeing me a
quarter of a mile off, said I could not have gone so far in such an
instant, if I had not had wings. Hereupon the meeting was like to have
been put by; for they were filled with such strange thoughts concerning
me, that many of them were against having a meeting with me. I told them
I ran after those poor people to give them some money, being grieved at
their hard-heartedness, who gave them nothing. Then came Miles and
Stephen Hubbersty, who being more simple-hearted men, would have the
meeting held. So to the chapel I went, and the priest came. A great
meeting there was, and the way of life and salvation was opened; and
after a while the priest fled away. Many of Crook and Underbarrow were
convinced that day, received the word of life, and stood fast in it
under the teaching of Christ Jesus. After I had declared the truth to
them for some hours, and the meeting was ended, the chief-constable, and
some other professors fell to reasoning with me in the chapel-yard;
whereupon I took a Bible, and opened to them the Scriptures, and dealt
tenderly with them, as one would do with a child. They that were in the
light of Christ, and Spirit of God, knew when I spoke Scripture, though
I did not mention chapter and verse, after the priest’s form unto them.

Footnote 17:

  Edward Burrough was a religious and promising young man, had left the
  Episcopal church, for which he had been educated as a minister, and
  joined the Presbyterians, with whom he was a preacher of great
  account. After several discussions with George Fox, he became fully
  convinced, and joined Friends, to the great displeasure of his parents
  and relatives. He became a most active and zealous gospel labourer,
  being both a great writer and a powerful and awakening preacher. In
  1662, he was taken from a meeting in London, and for “testifying to
  the name of the Lord Jesus,” was committed to prison, where he lay
  with above 100 of his friends imprisoned on the same account, being
  shut up among felons in nasty places, so that, for want of room, many
  of them sickened and died. Amongst these was Edward Burrough, whose
  sickness increased daily. He was heard often in prayer, day and night,
  not forgetting to intercede for his persecutors. The morning before he
  died, he said, “Now my soul and spirit is entered into its own being
  with God, and this form of person must return from whence it was
  taken.” His works were collected and printed in 1672, and parts of
  them have recently been re-published.

From hence I went along with an aged man, whose heart the Lord had
opened, and he invited me to his house; his name was James Dickinson; he
was convinced that day, received the truth, and lived and died in it.

I came the next day to James Taylor’s, of NEWTON in CARTMEL, in
LANCASHIRE. And on the First-day of the week I went to the chapel, where
one priest Camelford used to preach; and after he had done I began to
speak the word of life to the people. But this priest was in such a
rage, and was so peevish, that he had no patience to hear; but stirred
up the rude multitude, who haled me out, struck and punched me, and
threw me headlong over a stone wall; yet, blessed be the Lord, his power
preserved me. He that did this violence to me was a wicked man, one John
Knipe, whom afterwards the Lord cut off. There was a youth in the
chapel, writing after the priest; I was moved to speak to him, and he
came to be convinced, and received a part of the ministry of the gospel;
his name was John Braithwaite.

Then I went up to an ale-house, to which many people resorted between
the time of their morning and afternoon preaching. I had much reasoning
with the people there, declaring to them, that “God was come to teach
his people Himself, and to bring them off from all false teachers, such
as the prophets, Christ, and the apostles cried against.” Many received
the word of life at that time, and abode in it.

In the afternoon I went about two or three miles to another
steeple-house or chapel, called LYNDAL. When the priest had done, I
spoke to him and the people what the Lord commanded me; and there were
great opposers; but afterwards they came to be convinced. After this I
went to one Captain Sands, who with his wife seemed somewhat affected
with truth; and if they could have held the world and truth together
they would have received it; but they were hypocrites, and he a very
chaffy light man. Wherefore I reproved him for his lightness, and for
his jesting, telling him it was not seemly in a great professor, as he
was. He told me he had a son, who upon his death-bed had also reproved
him for it, and warned him of it. But he neither regarded the admonition
of his dying son, nor the reproofs of God’s Spirit in himself.

From hence I went to ULVERSTONE, and so to SWARTHMORE to Judge Fell’s;
whither came up one Lampitt, a priest, who was a high notionist. With
him I had much reasoning; for he talked of high notions and perfection,
and thereby deceived the people. He would have owned me, but I could not
own nor join with him, he was so full of filth. He said, he was above
John; and made as though he knew all things. But I told him, “Death
reigned from Adam to Moses, that he was under death, and knew not Moses,
for Moses saw the paradise of God; but he knew neither Moses nor the
prophets, nor John.” For that crooked and rough nature stood in him, and
the mountain of sin and corruption; and the way was not prepared in him
for the Lord. He confessed he had been under a cross in things; but now
he could sing psalms, and do anything: I told him, “now he could see a
thief, and join hand in hand with him, but he could not preach Moses,
nor the prophets, nor John, nor Christ, except he were in the same
spirit that they were in.” Margaret Fell had been absent in the
day-time; and at night her children told her, that priest Lampitt and I
had disagreed; which somewhat troubled her, because she was in
profession with him; but he hid his dirty actions from them. At night we
had much reasoning, and I declared the truth to her and her family.

The next day Lampitt came again, and I had much discourse with him
before Margaret Fell, who then clearly discerned the priest. A
convincement of the Lord’s truth came upon her and her family. Soon
after a day was to be observed for a humiliation, and Margaret Fell
asked me to go with her to the steeple-house at Ulverstone, for she was
not wholly come off from them; I replied, “I must do as I am ordered by
the Lord.” So I left her, and walked into the fields; and the word of
the Lord came to me, saying, “Go to the steeple-house after them.” When
I came, Lampitt was singing with his people; but his spirit was so foul,
and the matter they sung so unsuitable to their states, that after they
had done singing, I was moved of the Lord to speak to him and the
people. The word of the Lord to them was, “He is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, but he is a Jew that is one inwardly, whose praise is not of
man, but of God.” Then, as the Lord opened further, I showed them, “that
God was come to teach His people by His Spirit, and to bring them off
from all their old ways, religions, churches, and worships; for all
their religions, worships, and ways, were but talking with other men’s
words; but they were out of the life and Spirit which they were in who
gave them forth.” Then cried out one, called Justice Sawrey, “Take him
away;” but Judge Fell’s wife said to the officers, “Let him alone, why
may not he speak as well as any other?” Lampitt also, the priest, in
deceit said, “Let him speak.” So at length, when I had declared some
time, Justice Sawrey caused the constable to put me out; and then I
spoke to the people in the grave-yard.

The First-day after, I was moved to go to ALDINGHAM steeple-house; and
when the priest had done, I spoke to him; but he got away. Then I
declared the word of life to the people, and warned them to turn to the
Lord.

From thence I passed to RAMPSIDE, where was a chapel, in which Thomas
Lawson used to preach, who was an eminent priest. He very lovingly
acquainted his people in the morning of my coming in the afternoon; by
which means very many people were gathered together. When I came, I saw
there was no place so convenient as the chapel; so I went into it, and
all was quiet. Thomas Lawson went not up into his pulpit, but left all
the time to me. The everlasting day of the eternal God was proclaimed
that day, and the everlasting truth was largely declared, which reached
and entered into the hearts of people, and many received the truth in
the love of it. This priest came to be convinced, left his chapel, threw
off his preaching for hire, and came to preach the Lord Jesus and his
kingdom freely. After that some rude people cast scandals upon him, and
thought to have done him a mischief; but he was preserved over all, grew
in the wisdom of God mightily, and proved very serviceable in his place.

I returned to Swarthmore again, and on the next First-day went to DALTON
steeple-house; where, after the priest had done, I declared the word of
life to the people, that they might be turned from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan to God, and might come off from their
superstitious ways, and from their teachers made by man, to Christ, the
true and living way, to be taught of him.

From thence I went into the island of WALNEY; and after the priest had
done, I spoke to him, but he got away. Then I declared the truth to the
people, but they were rude. I went to speak with the priest at his
house, but he would not be seen. The people said he went to hide himself
in the haymow; and they went to look for him there, but could not find
him. Then they said he was gone to hide himself in the standing corn,
but they could not find him there either. So I went to James
Lancaster’s, who was convinced in the island; and thence I returned to
SWARTHMORE, where the Lord’s power came upon Margaret Fell and her
daughter Sarah, and several others.

Then I went to BAYCLIFF, where Leonard Fell was convinced, and became a
minister of the everlasting gospel. Several others were convinced there,
and came into obedience to the truth. Here the people said, they could
not dispute, and would fain have put some other to converse with me; but
I bid them “fear the Lord, and not in a light way talk of the Lord’s
words, but put the things in practice.” I directed them to the divine
light of Christ and his Spirit in their hearts, which would discover to
them all the evil thoughts, words and actions, they had thought, spoken,
and acted; by which light they might see their sin, and also their
Saviour, Christ Jesus, to save them from their sins. This, I told them,
“was their first step to peace, even to stand still in the light that
showed them their sins and transgressions; by which they might come to
see how they were in the fall of old Adam, in darkness and death,
strangers to the covenant of promise, and without God in the world; and
by the same light they might see Christ, that died for them, to be their
Redeemer and Saviour, and their way to God.”

After this I went to a chapel beyond GLEASTON, which was built, but no
priest had ever preached in it. Thither the country people came, and a
quiet, peaceable meeting it was, in which the word of life was declared,
and many were convinced of the truth about Gleaston.

From thence I returned to SWARTHMORE. After I had stayed a few days, and
most of the family were convinced, I went again into Westmorland, where
priest Lampitt had been amongst the professors on Kendal side, and had
mightily incensed them against me; telling them I held many strange
things; I met with those he had so incensed, and sat up all night with
them at James Dickinson’s, and answered all their objections. They were
both thoroughly satisfied with the truth that I had declared, and
dissatisfied with him and his lies, so that he clearly lost the best of
his hearers and followers, who thus came to see his deceit, and forsook
him.

I passed on to John Audland’s and Gervase Benson’s, and had great
meetings amongst those people that had been convinced before; then to
John Blakelin’s[18] and Richard Robinson’s, and had mighty meetings
there; and so up towards GRISDALE.

Footnote 18:

  John Blakelin, mentioned elsewhere in this Journal, became a faithful
  minister of the gospel, travelling much on truth’s account, for which
  he also suffered imprisonments, and great loss of goods. He died
  without sigh or groan, in 1705, aged about 80. He expressed, in his
  old age, “the comfort he had in the Lord’s peace and presence with
  him, that his day’s work was nigh done, and his reward and rest with
  God sure.” See _Piety Promoted_, ii., 42-46.

Soon after, Judge Fell being come home, Margaret Fell his wife sent to
me, desiring me to return thither; and, feeling freedom from the Lord so
to do, I went back to SWARTHMORE. I found the priests and professors,
and that envious Justice Sawrey, had much incensed Judge Fell and
Captain Sands against the truth by their lies; but when I came to speak
with him, I answered all his objections; and so thoroughly satisfied him
by the Scriptures, that he was convinced in his judgment. He asked me if
I was that George Fox, whom Justice Robinson spoke so much in
commendation of amongst many of the parliament men. I told him, I had
been with Justice Robinson, and with Justice Hotham in Yorkshire, who
were very civil and loving to me, and that they were convinced in their
judgment by the Spirit of God, that the principle which I bore testimony
to, was the truth, and they saw over and beyond the priests of the
nation; so that they, and many others, were now come to be wiser than
their teachers. After we had discoursed some time together, Judge Fell
himself was satisfied also, and came to see, by the openings of the
Spirit of God in his heart, over all the priests and teachers of the
world, and did not go to hear them for some years before he died; for he
knew it was the truth that I declared, and that Christ was the teacher
of his people, and their Saviour. He sometimes wished that I were a
while with Judge Bradshaw to discourse with him. There came to Judge
Fell’s, Captain Sands before-mentioned, endeavouring to incense the
judge against me; for he was an evil-minded man, and full of envy
against me; and yet he could speak high things, and use the Scripture
words, and say, “Behold, I make all things new.” But I told him, then he
must have a new God, for his God was his belly. Besides him, came also
that envious justice, John Sawrey. I told him “his heart was rotten, and
he was full of hypocrisy to the brim.” Several other people also came,
whose states the Lord gave me a discerning of; and I spoke to their
conditions. While I was in those parts, Richard Farnsworth and James
Naylor came to see me and the family; and Judge Fell, being satisfied
that it was the way of truth, notwithstanding all their opposition,
suffered the meeting to be kept at his house; and a great meeting was
settled there in the Lord’s power, which continued near forty years,
until the year 1690, that a new meeting-house was erected near it.

After I had stayed a while, and the meeting there was well settled, I
went to UNDERBARROW, where I had a great meeting. From thence to KELLET,
and had a great meeting at Robert Widders’s, to which several came from
Lancaster, and some from York; and many were convinced there. On the
market-day I went to LANCASTER, and spoke through the market in the
dreadful power of God, declaring the day of the Lord to the people, and
crying out against all their deceitful merchandise. I preached
righteousness and truth unto them, which they should all follow after,
and walk and live in; directing them how and where they might find and
receive the Spirit of God to guide them thereinto. After I had cleared
myself in the market, I went to my lodging, whither several people came,
and many were convinced, who have stood faithful to the truth.

On the First-day following, in the forenoon, I had a great meeting in
the street at Lancaster, amongst the soldiers and people, unto whom I
declared the word of life, and the everlasting truth. I opened unto
them, “that all the traditions they had lived in, and all their worships
and religions, and the profession they made of the Scriptures, were good
for nothing, while they lived out of the life and power which they were
in who gave forth the Scriptures. I directed them to the light of
Christ, the heavenly Man, and to the Spirit of God in their own hearts,
that they might come to be acquainted with God and with Christ, receive
him for their teacher, and know his kingdom set up in them.”

In the afternoon I went to the steeple-house at Lancaster, and declared
the truth both to the priest and people; laying open before them the
deceits they lived in, and directing them to the power and Spirit of
God, which they wanted. But they haled me out, and stoned me along the
street, till I came to John Lawson’s house.

Another First-day I went to a steeple-house by the water side, where one
Whitehead was priest, to whom, and to the people, I declared the truth
in the dreadful power of God. There came to me a doctor, who was so full
of envy, that he said he could find in his heart to run me through with
his rapier, though he should be hung for it the next day; yet this man
came afterwards to be convinced of the truth, so far as to be loving to
Friends. Some people were convinced thereabouts, who willingly sat down
under the ministry of Christ their teacher: and a meeting was settled
there in the power of God, which has continued to this day.

After this I returned into Westmorland, and spoke through KENDAL, on a
market-day. So dreadful was the power of God upon me, that people flew
like chaff before me into their houses. I warned them of the mighty day
of the Lord, and exhorted them to hearken to the voice of God in their
own hearts, who was now come to teach his people Himself. When some
opposed, many others took my part, insomuch that at last some of the
people fell to fighting about me; but I went and spoke to them, and they
parted again. Several were convinced.

On the First-day after, I had a very large meeting in UNDERBARROW, at
Miles Bateman’s house, where I was moved to declare, “that all people in
the fall were gone from the image of God, righteousness, and holiness,
and were become as wells without the water of life, as clouds without
the heavenly rain, as trees without the heavenly fruit, and were
degenerated into the nature of beasts, and of serpents, and of tall
cedars, and of oaks, and of bulls, and of heifers: so that they might
read the natures of these creatures within, as the prophet described
them to the people of old that were out of truth. I opened to them how
some were in the nature of dogs and swine, biting and rending; some in
the nature of briars, thistles, and thorns; some like the owls and
dragons in the night; some like wild asses and horses, snuffing up the
wind; and some like mountains and rocks, and crooked and rough ways.
Wherefore I exhorted them to read these things within, in their own
natures, as well as without; and that, when they read without of the
wandering stars, they should look within, and see how they wandered from
the bright and morning star. And they should consider, that as the
fallow ground in their fields must be ploughed up, before it would bear
seed to them, so must the fallow ground of their hearts be ploughed up,
before they could bear seed to God. Now all these names and things I
showed them, were spoken of, and to man and woman, since they fell from
the image of God; but as they come to be renewed again into the image of
God, they come out of the natures of these things, and so out of the
names thereof.” Many more such things were declared to them, and they
were turned to the light of Christ, by which they might come to know
Christ, to receive him, and to witness him to be their substance and
their way, their salvation and true teacher. Many were convinced at that
time.

After I had travelled up and down in those countries, and had had great
meetings, I came to SWARTHMORE again. And when I had visited Friends in
those parts, I heard of a great meeting the priests were to have at
ULVERSTONE, on a lecture-day. I went to it, and into the steeple-house
in the dread and power of the Lord. When the priest had done, I spoke
among them the word of the Lord, which was as a hammer, and as a fire
amongst them. And though Lampitt, the priest of the place, had been at
variance with most of the priests before, yet against the truth they all
joined together. But the mighty power of the Lord was over all; and so
wonderful was the appearance thereof, that priest Bennett said “the
church shook,” insomuch that he was afraid and trembled. And when he had
spoken a few confused words, he hastened out, for fear it should fall on
his head. Many priests got together there; but they had no power as yet
to persecute.

When I had cleared my conscience towards them, I went up to SWARTHMORE
again, whither came four or five of the priests. Coming to discourse, I
asked them, “whether any one of them could say he ever had the word of
the Lord to go and speak to such or such a people?” None of them durst
say he had; but one of them burst out into a passion, and said, “he
could speak his experiences as well as I.” I told him experience was one
thing; but to receive and go with a message, and to have a word from the
Lord, as the prophets and apostles had and did, and as I had done to
them, this was another thing. And therefore I put it to them again,
“could any of them say he had ever had a command or word from the Lord
immediately at any time?” but none of them could say so. Then I told
them, the false prophets, the false apostles, and antichrists, could use
the words of the true prophets, the true apostles, and of Christ, and
would speak of other men’s experiences, though they themselves never
knew or heard the voice of God or Christ; and such as they might obtain
the good words and experiences of others; this puzzled them much, and
laid them open. At another time, when I was discoursing with several
priests at Judge Fell’s house, and he was by, I asked them the same
question, “whether any of them ever heard the voice of God or Christ, to
bid him go to such and such a people, to declare his word or message
unto them?” for any one, I told them, that could but read, might declare
the experiences of the prophets and apostles, which were recorded in the
Scriptures. Hereupon Thomas Taylor,[19] an ancient priest, did
ingenuously confess before Judge Fell, “that he had never heard the
voice of God, nor of Christ, to send him to any people, but he spoke his
experiences, and the experiences of the saints in former ages, and that
he preached.” This very much confirmed Judge Fell in the persuasion he
had, “that the priests were wrong;” for he had thought formerly, as the
generality of people then did, “that they were sent from God.”

Footnote 19:

  Thomas Taylor, born in 1616, was educated at Oxford University, and
  became a preacher among the Puritans, at or near Skipton, and also at
  Richmond. He discontinued preaching for hire, and joined Friends,
  becoming a valiant minister of Christ. He also wrote much in support
  of the truth. He suffered many imprisonments, but the Lord was with
  him, and upheld him by his mighty power, in the hardships and
  opposition he met with for truth’s sake. He died in peace at Stafford,
  in 1681.

Thomas Taylor was convinced at this time, and travelled with me into
Westmorland. Coining to CROSSLAND steeple-house, we found the people
gathered together; and the Lord opened Thomas Taylor’s mouth (though he
was convinced but a day before), so that he declared amongst them, “how
he had been before he was convinced;” and like the good scribe that was
converted to the kingdom, he brought forth things new and old to the
people, and showed them how “the priests were out of the way;” which
tormented the priest. Some little discourse I had with them, but they
fled away; and a precious meeting there was, wherein the Lord’s power
was over all; and the people were directed to the Spirit of God, by
which they might come to know God and Christ, and to understand the
Scriptures aright. After this I passed on, visiting Friends, and had
very large meetings in Westmorland.

Now began the priests to rage more and more, and as much as they could,
to stir up persecution. James Naylor and Francis Howgill were cast into
prison in Appleby jail, at the instigation of the malicious priests;
some of whom prophesied “that within a month we should be all scattered
again, and come to nothing.” But, blessed for ever be the worthy name of
the Lord, the work of the Lord went on and prospered. For about this
time John Audland, Francis Howgill, John Camm,[20] Edward Burrough,
Richard Hubberthorn,[21] Miles Hubbersty, and Miles Halhead,[22] with
several others, being endued with power from on high, came forth in the
work of the ministry, and approved themselves faithful labourers
therein, travelling up and down, and preaching the gospel freely; by
means whereof multitudes were convinced, and many effectually turned to
the Lord. Amongst these, Christopher Taylor[23] was one, brother to
Thomas Taylor before-mentioned; and who had been a preacher to a people
as well as his brother; but after they had received a knowledge of the
truth, they soon came into obedience thereunto, and left their preaching
for hire or rewards. And having received a part of the ministry of the
gospel, they preached Christ freely; being often sent by the Lord to
declare his word in steeple-houses and in markets; and great sufferers
they were.

Footnote 20:

  John Camm, after joining Friends, became an eminent minister,
  travelling in the service of truth. He was a man of weak constitution,
  but richly furnished with the gifts of the Holy Spirit, clear in
  judgment, and a sharp reprover of wickedness. His ministry was deep
  and weighty. Having an estate of his own, he suffered the spoiling of
  his goods joyfully. He often called his children together, and
  exhorted them to fear the Lord, and would wonderfully praise God for
  his goodness, counting his bodily weakness a happiness, saying, “How
  great a benefit do I enjoy beyond many, I have such a large time of
  preparation for death, being daily dying, that I may live for ever
  with my God, in that kingdom that is unspeakably full of glory. My
  outward man daily wastes and moulders down, and draws towards its
  place and centre; but my inward man revives and mounts upwards,
  towards its place and habitation in the heavens.” See _Piety
  Promoted_, i., 3-6.

Footnote 21:

  Richard Hubberthorn, who is frequently mentioned in this _Journal_,
  and whose name often occurs in the early part of the history of
  Friends, became an able gospel minister, and patient sufferer for the
  truth. He was a native of Lancashire, the only son of a yeoman of good
  repute. In his youth he obtained a post in the Parliamentary army,
  which, on his embracing the truth, he quitted, and testified publicly
  against it; becoming a valiant soldier under the banner of the Prince
  of peace. After passing through many inward probations, he became
  qualified to direct others in their way to the kingdom of heaven, and
  was one of the first of our Society who travelled in the work of the
  ministry.

  Richard Hubberthorn was a man of much meekness, humility, patience,
  and brotherly kindness, clear in judgment, and quick of understanding;
  and, although he was of low stature, and had an infirm constitution
  and weak voice, he was a powerful and successful minister, and great
  numbers were convinced by him, and brought over to the faith and
  practice which he preached. He travelled in the exercise of his gift
  nine years, and shared at different times in the sufferings to which
  the early Friends were exposed. In 1662, he was violently haled from a
  meeting in London, and taken before that implacable persecutor,
  Alderman Brown, who, after abusing him with his own hands, committed
  him to Newgate. Here the throng was so great, and the air so impure,
  that he soon fell sick. His disorder increased upon him, and, within
  two months from the time of his commitment, with an unclouded prospect
  of a resting place “where the wicked cease from troubling,” he was
  released by death. He wrote many treatises, which were collected and
  published in 1 vol. quarto, in 1663.

Footnote 22:

  This is the only mention of Miles Halhead in this Journal. His name
  occurs frequently in Sewell’s _History_, from which it appears he
  travelled largely and suffered much on Truth’s account, being the
  first of the Quakers imprisoned at Kendal.

Footnote 23:

  Christopher Taylor, after writing and preaching much on Truth’s
  account, removed to America about the year 1683, and died at
  Philadelphia in 1686. See account of him in Whiting’s _Memoirs_, pp.
  352-55.

After I had visited Friends in WESTMORLAND, I returned into LANCASHIRE,
and went to ULVERSTONE, where W. Lampitt was priest; who, though he had
preached of a people that should own the teachings of God, and had said,
“that men and women should come to declare the gospel;” yet afterwards,
when it came to be fulfilled, he persecuted both it and them. To this
priest’s house I went, where abundance of priests and professors were
got together after their lecture, with whom I had great disputings
concerning Christ and the Scriptures; for they were loath to let their
trade go down, which they made of preaching Christ’s, and the apostles’
and prophets’ words. But the Lord’s power went over the heads of them
all, and his word of life was held forth amongst them; though many of
them were exceedingly envious and devilish. Yet after this many priests
and professors came to me from far and near; of whom, they that were
innocent and simple-minded were satisfied, and went away refreshed; but
the fat and full were fed with judgment, and sent empty away: for that
was the word of the Lord to be divided to them.

Now when meetings were set up, and we met in private houses, Lampitt the
priest began to rage; and he said, “we forsook the temple, and went to
Jeroboam’s calves’ houses;” so that many professors began to see how he
had declined from that which he had formerly held and preached. Hereupon
the case of Jeroboam’s calves was opened to the professors, priests, and
people; and it was manifested unto them, “that their houses (which they
called churches) were more like Jeroboam’s calves’ houses, even the old
mass-houses which were set up in the darkness of Popery; and which they,
who called themselves Protestants, and professed to be more enlightened
than the Papists, did still hold up; although God had never commanded
them: whereas that temple, which God had commanded at Jerusalem, Christ
came to end the service of; and they that received and believed in him,
their bodies came to be the temples of God, and of Christ, and of the
Holy Ghost, to dwell in them, and to walk in them. And all such were
gathered into the name of Jesus, whose name is above every name, and
there is no salvation by any other name under the whole heaven, but by
the name of Jesus. And they that were thus gathered met together in
several dwelling-houses, which were not called the temple, nor the
church; but their bodies were the temples of God, and the believers were
the church, which Christ was the head of. So that Christ was not called
the head of an old house, which was made by men’s hands, neither did he
come to purchase and sanctify, and redeem with his blood, an old house,
which they called their church, but the people of whom he is the head.”
Much work I had in those days with priests and people, concerning their
old mass-houses, which they called their churches; for the priests had
persuaded the people that it was the house of God; whereas the apostle
says, “whose house we are,” &c., Heb. iii. 6. So the people are God’s
house, in whom he dwells. And the apostle saith, “Christ purchased his
church with his own blood;” and Christ calls his church his spouse, his
bride, and the Lamb’s wife; so that this title, church and spouse, was
not given to an old house, but to his people, the true believers.

After this, on a lecture-day, I was moved to go to the steeple-house at
ULVERSTONE, where were abundance of professors, priests, and people. I
went up near to priest Lampitt, who was blustering on in his preaching;
and after the Lord had opened my mouth to speak, John Sawrey the justice
came to me and said, “if I would speak according to the Scriptures, I
should speak.” I wondered at his speaking so to me, for I did speak
according to the Scriptures, and I told him, “I should speak according
to the Scriptures, and bring the Scriptures to prove what I had to say;
for I had something to speak to Lampitt and to them.” Then he said, I
should not speak, contradicting himself who had said just before, “I
should speak, if I would speak according to the Scriptures.” The people
were quiet, and heard me gladly, until this Justice Sawrey (who was the
first stirrer up of cruel persecution in the North) incensed them
against me, and set them on to hale, beat, and bruise me. Suddenly the
people were in a rage, and fell upon me in the steeple-house before his
face; knocked me down, kicked me, and trampled upon me; and so great was
the uproar, that some tumbled over their seats for fear. At last he came
and took me from the people, led me out of the steeple-house, and put me
into the hands of the constables and other officers, bidding them whip
me and put me out of the town. They led me about a quarter of a mile,
some taking hold of my collar, and some by my arms and shoulders, and
shook and dragged me along. Many friendly people being come to the
market, and some of them to the steeple house to hear me, divers of
these they knocked down also, and broke their heads, so that the blood
ran down from several of them; and Judge Fell’s son running after, to
see what they would do with me, they threw him into a ditch of water,
some of them crying, “knock the teeth out of his head.”

Now when they had haled me to the common moss-side, a multitude of
people following, the constables and other officers gave me some blows
over my back with their willow-rods, and so thrust me among the rude
multitude, who, having furnished themselves, some with staves, some with
hedge-stakes, and others with holm or holly-bushes, fell upon me, and
beat me on my head, arms, and shoulders, till they had deprived me of
sense; so that I fell down upon the wet common. When I recovered again,
and saw myself lying in a watery common, and the people standing about
me, I lay still a little while; and the power of the Lord sprang through
me, and the Eternal Refreshings refreshed me, so that I stood up again
in the strengthening power of the Eternal God; and stretching out my
arms amongst them, I said with a loud voice, “Strike again; here are my
arms, my head, and my cheeks.” There was in the company a mason, a
professor, but a rude fellow; he with his walking rule-staff gave me a
blow with all his might, just over the back of my hand, as it was
stretched out; with which blow my hand was so bruised, and my arm so
benumbed, that I could not draw it unto me again; so that some of the
people cried out, “he hath spoiled his hand for ever having the use of
it any more.” But I looked at it in the love of God (for I was in the
love of God to them all, that had persecuted me), and after a while the
Lord’s power sprang through me again, and through my hand and arm, so
that in a moment I recovered strength in my hand and arm, in the sight
of them all. Then they began to fall out among themselves, and some of
them came to me, and said, if I would give them money, they would secure
me from the rest. But I was moved of the Lord to declare to them the
word of life, and showed them their false Christianity, and the fruits
of their priest’s ministry; telling them they were more like heathens
and Jews, than true Christians.

Then was I moved of the Lord to come up again through the midst of the
people, and go into ULVERSTONE market. As I went, there met me a
soldier, with his sword by his side; “Sir,” said he to me, “I see you
are a man, and I am ashamed and grieved that you should be thus abused;”
and he offered to assist me in what he could. But I told him the Lord’s
power was over all; so I walked through the people in the market, and
none of them had power to touch me then. But some of the market-people
abusing some Friends in the market, I turned me about and saw this
soldier among them with his naked rapier, whereupon I ran in amongst
them, and catching hold of his hand that his rapier was in, I bid him
put up his sword again, if he would go along with me; for I was willing
to draw him out from the company, lest some mischief should be done. A
few days after seven men fell upon this soldier, and beat him cruelly,
because he had taken part with Friends and me; for it was the manner of
the persecutors of that country, for twenty or forty people to run upon
one man. And they fell so upon Friends in many places, that they could
hardly pass the highways, stoning, beating, and breaking their heads.
When I came to SWARTHMORE, I found the friends there dressing the heads
and hands of Friends and friendly people, which had been broken or hurt
that day by the professors and hearers of Lampitt, the priest. My body
and arms were yellow, black, and blue, with the blows and bruises I
received amongst them that day. Now began the priests to prophesy again,
that within half a year we should be all put down and gone.[24]

Footnote 24:

  The priests reckoned wrong in this, for, as Sewell justly observed, it
  fared with the early Friends as with trees, which grow best when most
  lopped. “Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus, per damna, per cædes, ab
  ipso, ducit opes animumque ferre.”

           “As by the lopping axe, the sturdy oak
           Improves her shade, and thrives beneath the stroke:
           Tho’ present loss and wounds severe she feel,
           She draws fresh vigour from the invading steel.”

About two weeks after this I went into WALNEY island, and James Naylor
went with me. We stayed one night at a little town on this side, called
COCKAN, and had a meeting there, where one was convinced. After a while
there came a man with a pistol, whereupon the people ran out of doors.
He called for me; and when I came out to him, he snapped his pistol at
me, but it would not go off. This caused the people to make a great
bustle about him; and some of them took hold of him, to prevent his
doing mischief; but I was moved in the Lord’s power to speak to him; and
he was so struck by the power of the Lord, that he trembled for fear,
and went and hid himself. Thus the Lord’s power came over them all,
though there was a great rage in the country.

Next morning I went over in a boat to James Lancaster’s. As soon as I
came to land, there rushed out about forty men with staves, clubs, and
fishing poles, who fell upon me, beating and punching me, and
endeavouring to thrust me backward into the sea. When they had thrust me
almost into the sea, and I saw they would have knocked me down in it, I
went up into the midst of them; but they laid at me again, and knocked
me down, and stunned me. When I came to myself, I looked up and saw
James Lancaster’s wife throwing stones at my face, and her husband,
James Lancaster, was lying over me, to keep the blows and the stones off
me. For the people had persuaded James Lancaster’s wife that I had
bewitched her husband; and had promised her, that if she would let them
know when I came hither, they would be my death. And having got
knowledge of my coming, many of the town rose up in this manner with
clubs and staves to kill me; but the Lord’s power preserved me, that
they could not take away my life. At length I got up on my feet, but
they beat me down again into the boat; which James Lancaster observing,
he presently came into it, and set me over the water from them; but
while we were on the water within their reach, they struck at us with
long poles and threw stones after us. By the time we were come to the
other side, we saw them beating James Naylor; for whilst they had been
beating me, he walked up into a field, and they never minded him till I
was gone; then they fell upon him, and all their cry was, “Kill him,
kill him.”

When I was come over to the town again, on the other side of the water,
the townsmen rose up with pitchforks, flails, and staves, to keep me out
of the town, crying, “Kill him, knock him on the head, bring the cart,
and carry him away to the churchyard.” So after they had abused me, they
drove me some distance out of the town, and there left me. Then went
James Lancaster back to look after James Naylor; and I being now left
alone, went to a ditch of water, and having washed myself (for they had
besmeared my face, hands, and clothes, with miry dirt), I walked about
three miles to Thomas Hutton’s house, where lodged Thomas Lawson, the
priest that was convinced. When I came in, I could hardly speak to them,
I was so bruised; only I told them where I left James Naylor; so they
took each of them a horse, and went and brought him thither that night.
The next day Margaret Fell hearing of it, sent a horse for me; but so
sore I was with bruises, I was not able to bear the shaking of the horse
without much pain. When I was come to SWARTHMORE, Justice Sawrey, and
one Justice Thompson of Lancaster, granted a warrant against me; but
Judge Fell coming home it was not served upon me; for he was out of the
country all this time, that I was thus cruelly abused. When he came
home, he sent forth warrants into the isle of Walney, to apprehend all
those riotous persons; whereupon some of them fled the country. James
Lancaster’s wife was afterwards convinced of the truth, and repented of
the evils she had done me; and so did others of those bitter persecutors
also; but the judgments of God fell upon some of them, and destruction
is come upon many of them since. Judge Fell asked me to give him a
relation of my persecution; but I told him they could do no otherwise in
the spirit wherein they were, and that they manifested the fruits of
their priest’s ministry, and their profession and religion to be wrong.
So he told his wife I made light of it, and that I spoke of it as a man
that had not been concerned; for, indeed, the Lord’s power healed me
again.

After I was recovered, I went to YEALAND, where there was a great
meeting. In the evening there came a priest to the house, with a pistol
in his hand, under pretence to light a pipe of tobacco. The maid of the
house seeing the pistol told her master; who, clapping his hands on the
door-posts, told him he should not come in there. While he stood there,
keeping the door-way, he looked up, and spied over the wall a company of
men coming, some armed with staves, and one with a musket. But the Lord
God prevented their bloody design; so that seeing themselves discovered,
they went their way, and did no harm.

The time for the sessions at LANCASTER being come, I went thither with
Judge Fell; who on the way told me, he had never had such a matter
brought before him before, and he could not well tell what to do in the
business. I told him, when Paul was brought before the rulers, and the
Jews and priests came down to accuse him, and laid many false things to
his charge, Paul stood still all that while. And when they had done,
Festus, the governor, and king Agrippa, beckoned to him to speak for
himself; which Paul did, and cleared himself of all those false
accusations; so he might do with me. Being come to LANCASTER, Justice
Sawrey and Justice Thompson having granted a warrant to apprehend me,
though I was not apprehended by it, yet hearing of it, I appeared at the
sessions; where there appeared against me about forty priests. These had
chosen one Marshall, priest of Lancaster, to be their orator; and had
provided one young priest, and two priests’ sons, to bear witness
against me, who had sworn beforehand that I had spoken blasphemy. When
the justices were sat, they heard all that the priests and their
witnesses could say and charge against me; their orator Marshall,
sitting by, and explaining their sayings for them; but the witnesses
were so confounded, that they discovered themselves to be false
witnesses; for when the court had examined one of them upon oath, and
then began to examine another, he was at such loss he could not answer
directly, but said the other could say it. Which made the justices say
to him, “have you sworn it, and given it in already upon your oath, and
now say that he can say it? It seems you did not hear those words spoken
yourself, though you have sworn it.”

There were then in court several people who had been at that meeting,
wherein the witnesses swore I spoke those blasphemous words, which the
priests accused me of; and these being men of integrity and reputation
in the country, declared and affirmed in court, that the oath, which the
witnesses had taken against me, was altogether false; and that no such
words as they had sworn against me, were spoken by me at that meeting.
Indeed, most of the serious men of that part of the country, that were
then at the sessions, had been at that meeting, and had heard me both at
that and other meetings also. This was taken notice of by Colonel West,
who, being a justice of the peace, was then upon the bench; and having
long been weak in body, blessed the Lord, and said, “the Lord had healed
him that day;” adding, that he never saw so many sober people and good
faces together in all his life. And then, turning himself to me, he said
in the open sessions, “George, if thou hast anything to say to the
people, thou mayst freely declare it.” I was moved of the Lord to speak;
and as soon as I began, priest Marshall, the orator for the rest of the
priests, went away. That which I was moved to declare was this: “that
the Holy Scriptures were given forth by the Spirit of God, and all
people must first come to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they
might know God and Christ, of whom the prophets and the apostles learnt;
and by the same Spirit know the Holy Scriptures; for as the Spirit of
God was in them that gave forth the Scriptures, so the same Spirit of
God must be in all them that come to understand the Scriptures; by which
Spirit they might have fellowship with the Son, and with the Father, and
with the Scriptures, and with one another; and without this Spirit they
can know neither God nor Christ, nor the Scriptures, nor have right
fellowship one with another.” I had no sooner spoken these words, than
about half a dozen priests that stood behind me, burst out into a
passion; and one of them, named Jackus, amongst other things that he
spoke against the truth, said, that the Spirit and the letter were
inseparable. I replied, “then every one that hath the letter hath the
Spirit; and they might buy the Spirit with the letter of the
Scriptures.” This plain discovery of darkness in the priest, moved Judge
Fell and Colonel West to reprove them openly, and tell them, that
according to that position they might carry the Spirit in their pockets,
as they did the Scriptures. Upon this the priests being confounded and
put to silence, rushed out in a rage against the justices, because they
could not have their bloody ends upon me. The justices, seeing the
witnesses did not agree, and perceiving that they were brought to answer
the priests’ envy, and finding that all their evidences were not
sufficient in law to make good their charge against me, discharged me.
And after Judge Fell had spoken to Justice Sawrey and Justice Thompson
concerning the warrant they had given forth against me, and showed them
the errors thereof, he and Colonel West granted a supersedeas to stop
the execution of it.

Thus was I cleared in open sessions of all those lying accusations which
the malicious priests had laid to my charge; and multitudes of people
praised God that day, for it was a joyful day to many. Justice
Benson[25] of WESTMORLAND, was convinced; and Major Ripan, mayor of
LANCASTER, also. It was a day of everlasting salvation to hundreds of
people; for the Lord Jesus Christ, the way to the Father, and the free
teacher, was exalted and set up, and his everlasting gospel was preached
and the word of eternal life was declared over the heads of the priests,
and all such money-preachers. For the Lord opened many mouths that day
to speak his word to the priests, and several friendly people and
professors reproved the priests in their inns, and in the streets; so
that they fell, like an old rotten house; and the cry was among the
people, that the Quakers had got the day, and the priests were fallen.
Many people were convinced that day, amongst whom was Thomas Briggs, who
before had been averse to Friends and truth, insomuch that discoursing
with John Lawson, a Friend, concerning perfection, Thomas Briggs said to
him, “dost thou hold perfection?” at the same time lifting up his hand
to give the Friend a box on the ear. But this Thomas Briggs, being
convinced of the truth that day, declared against his own priest,
Jackus; and afterwards became a faithful minister of the gospel, and
stood so to the end of his days.[26]

Footnote 25:

  Gervase Benson, once a colonel in the army, and, at this date, a
  Justice of the peace, appears, from the burial register of Friends, to
  have been resident at Kendal. He died in 1679. In _Barclay’s Letters,
  &c., of Early Friends_, is a letter from him to George Fox and James
  Naylor. It is dated at London, 11th Month, 29th, 1653. He appears to
  have gone up to that city under a sense of duty. “Pray to the Lord for
  me,” he writes, “that I may be kept in all faithfulness, with boldness
  to bear witness to the truth, against all deceits as they are made
  manifest in me, to the praise of his free grace and love to me, which
  I find daily flowing into my soul, to the refreshing thereof.”

Footnote 26:

  Thomas Briggs, from being a persecutor and an opposer, became an
  eminent minister amongst Friends, and his name occurs frequently in
  Sewell’s _History_, and in Whiting’s _Memoirs_, to which the reader is
  referred for some account of his labours. He was very instrumental in
  turning men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
  God. Not only did he suffer personally, by imprisonment and violence,
  but was fined five times, for having meetings in his house, to the
  extent of £50. He travelled much in Wales, and other places, often
  accompanying George Fox. He went with him to the West Indies in 1671.
  A short time before his death, he wrote to George Fox, in which he
  signified his perseverance in godliness. He bore “a large testimony
  the First-day before his decease,” being aged about seventy-five; a
  minister thirty-two years.

When the sessions were over, James Naylor, who was present, gave a brief
account of the proceedings in a letter, which soon after he wrote to
Friends; and which is here added for the reader’s further satisfaction
in this matter:—

  “Dear friends and brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear love unto
  you all, desiring you may be kept steadfast in the Lord Jesus Christ,
  and in the power of his love, boldly to witness forth the truth, as it
  is revealed in you by the mighty working of the Father: to whom alone
  be everlasting praise and honour for evermore! Dear friends, the Lord
  doth much manifest his love and power in these parts. On the
  Second-day of last week, my brother George and I were at Lancaster;
  there were abundance of Friends from all parts: and a high sort, who
  sided with the priests, giving out, they now hoped to see a stop put
  to that great work which had gone on so fast, and with such power that
  their kingdom is much shaken. We were called before Judge Fell,
  Colonel West, Justice Sawrey, &c., to answer what was charged against
  George. There were three witnesses to eight particulars, but they were
  much confused in themselves; which gave much light to the truth;
  whereby the justices did plainly see that it was envy; and they many
  times told them so. One of the witnesses was a young priest, who
  confessed he should not have meddled, had not another priest sent for
  him, and set him to work. The other witnesses were two priests’ sons:
  it was proved there by many that heard one of them say, ‘if he had
  power he would make George deny his profession, and that he would take
  away his life.’ This was a single witness to one of the greatest
  untruths that was charged against George; and the justices told him,
  that they saw, because he could not take away his life, he went about
  to take away his liberty. There was one priest chosen out of the whole
  number, as an orator to plead against us; who spared no pains to show
  forth his envy against the truth; and when he could not prevail, he
  went down in a rage; and there came up a number of them into the room,
  among whom was one Jackus. George was then speaking in the room, one
  of the justices having desired him, if he had anything to say, he
  would speak, at which priest Jackus was in such a rage, that he broke
  forth into many high expressions against the truth spoken by my dear
  brother George; amongst which this was one that the letter and the
  Spirit were inseparable. Hereupon the justices stood up, and bid him
  prove that, before he went any further. Then seeing himself caught, he
  would have denied it; and when he could not get off so, the rest of
  the priests would have helped him to a meaning for his words; but the
  justices would admit no other meaning than the plain sense of the
  words, and told him he had laid down a position, and it was fit he
  should prove it; pressing the matter close upon him. Whereupon the
  priests, being put to silence, went down in a greater rage than
  before; and some of them, after they were gone down, being asked what
  they had done, lied and said, they could not get into the room;
  thereby to hide their shame, and keep the people in blindness. The
  justices, Judge Fell and Colonel West, were much convinced of the
  truth, and set up justice and equity; and have much silenced the rage
  of the people. Many bitter spirits were at Lancaster to see the event,
  but went home and cried the priests had lost the day: everlasting
  praises be to him who fought the battle for us, who is our King for
  ever! There were others called, whom the witnesses confessed were in
  the room when the things charged on George were said to have been
  spoken; but they all, as one man, denied that any such words were
  spoken; which gave much light to the justices, and they durst rely on
  what they witnessed; for they said they knew many of them to be honest
  men.

  “There was a warrant granted against us at Appleby; but Justice Benson
  told them it was not according to law, and so it ceased. I hear he is
  a faithful man in the truth. The priests began to preach against the
  justices, and said, they were not to meddle in these things, but to
  end controversy between neighbour and neighbour. They are not pleased
  with the law, because it is not in the statute to imprison us, as the
  priest that pleaded against us said. The justices bid him put it into
  the statute, if he could; he said, it should want no will of his. They
  are much afraid that they shall lose all; they are much discontented
  in these parts; and some of them cry, all ‘is gone.’ Dear Friends,
  dwell in patience, and wait upon the Lord, who will do his own work.
  Look not at man, in the work; nor at man who opposeth the work; but
  rest in the will of the Lord, that so ye may be furnished with
  patience both to do and to suffer what ye shall be called unto; that
  your end in all things may be his praise. Take up his cross freely,
  which keeps low the fleshly man; that Christ may be set up and
  honoured in all things, the light advanced in you and the judgment set
  up, which must give sentence against all that opposeth the truth;—that
  the captivity may be led captive, and the prisoner set free to seek
  the Lord;—that righteousness may rule in you, and peace and joy may
  dwell in you, wherein consisteth the kingdom of the Father; to whom be
  all praise for ever! Dear friends meet often together, and take heed
  of what exalteth itself above its brother; but keep low, and serve one
  another in love for the Lord’s sake. Let all Friends know how it is
  with us, that God may have the praise of all.”

                                                               J. N.

  Written from Kellet, the 30th
     of the 8th Month, 1652.

At this time I was in a fast, and was not to eat until this work of God,
which then lay weighty upon me, was accomplished. But the Lord’s power
was wonderfully exalted, and gave truth and Friends dominion therein
over all, to his glory. His gospel was freely preached that day, over
the heads of about forty hireling priests. I stayed two or three days
afterwards in Lancaster, and had some meetings there; and the rude and
baser sort of people plotted together to draw me out of the house, and
to throw me over LANCASTER bridge, but the Lord prevented them. Then
they invented another mischief, which was this: after a meeting at
Lancaster they brought down a distracted man, and another with him with
bundles of birchen rods bound together like besoms, with which they
would have whipped me: but I was moved to speak to them in the Lord’s
mighty power, which chained down the distracted man, and the other also,
and made them calm and quiet. Then I bid him throw his rods into the
fire, and burn them; and he did so. Thus the Lord’s power being over
them, they departed quietly.

But the priests, fretting to see themselves overthrown at the sessions
at LANCASTER, got some of the envious justices to join with them; and,
at the following assize at LANCASTER, informed Judge Windham against me.
Whereupon the judge made a speech against me in open court; and
commanded Colonel West, who was clerk of the assize, to issue forth a
warrant for the apprehending of me: but Colonel West told the judge of
my innocency, and spoke boldly in my defence. Yet the judge commanded
him again, either to write a warrant, or go off from his seat: then he
told the judge plainly that he would not do it; but that he would offer
up all his estate, and his body also, for me. Thus he stopped the judge;
and the Lord’s power came over all; so that the priests and justices
could not get their envy executed. That same night I came into
LANCASTER, it being the assize time, and hearing of a warrant to be
given out against me, I judged it better to show myself openly, than for
my adversaries to seek me. So I went to Judge Fell’s and Colonel West’s
chambers. As soon as I came in they smiled on me; and Colonel West said,
“What! are you come into the dragon’s mouth?” I stayed in town till the
judge went out of town; and I walked up and down the town, but no one
meddled with me, or questioned me. Thus the Lord’s blessed power, which
is over all, carried me through and over this exercise, gave dominion
over his enemies, and enabled me to go on in his glorious work and
service for his great name’s sake. For though the beast maketh war
against the saints, yet the Lamb hath got, and will get, the victory.




                              CHAPTER VI.

1652-1653.—George Fox is branded by the priests as a witch—writes to
    Justice Sawrey, prophesying of the judgments impending over
    him—warning to priest Lampitt—exhortation to the people of
    Ulverstone—to the followers of Lampitt, against a hireling ministry,
    &c.—a rebuke to Adam Sands for his wickedness—to priest Tatham,
    against his hireling ministry and his suing for tithes—foretells the
    dissolution of the Long Parliament—fasts ten days—James Milner and
    Richard Myer create a schism, which is soon healed—the latter is
    miraculously healed of his lameness, but afterwards disobeys the
    Lord, and dies not long after—Anthony Pearson, an opposer, is
    convinced—the priests are shown to be antichrist—George Fox preaches
    at John Wilkinson’s steeple-house three hours—admonishes a professor
    _for praising him_—reproves Wilkinson for speaking against his
    conscience—many hundreds are convinced—discerns an unclean spirit in
    a woman, and speaks sharply to her—the like of some other
    women—speaks sharply to an envious Baptist—preaches in the
    steeple-house at Carlisle, where the Lord’s power was such that the
    people trembled—committed to Carlisle prison as a blasphemer,
    heretic, and seducer—the priests who come to see him are exceedingly
    rude—Anthony Pearson’s remonstrance to the Judges of assize against
    the unjust imprisonment and detention of George Fox—he is put in the
    dungeon, a filthy place, where a woman is found eaten to death with
    vermin—here James Parnell visits him—a challenge to professors to
    declare their objections to George Fox’s ministry—it being reported
    that George Fox was to die for religion, the Little Parliament write
    to the sheriff respecting him—he himself expostulates with Justices
    Craston and Studholm on their imprisoning him—A. Pearson and the
    governor visit the prison, blame the magistrates, require sureties
    of the jailer, and put the under-jailer in the dungeon for his
    cruelty to George Fox, who is soon after liberated—George Fox has
    great meetings, and _thousands_ are convinced—visits Gilsland, a
    noted country for thieving—has a glorious meeting of many thousands,
    near Langlands, on the top of a hill—great convincement in the six
    northern counties.


From LANCASTER I returned to Robert Widders’s, and from thence I went to
Thomas Leper’s to a meeting in the evening; and a very blessed meeting
we had there: after which I walked in the evening to Robert Widders’s
again. No sooner was I gone, than there came a company of disguised men
to Thomas Leper’s, with swords and pistols; who, suddenly entering the
house, put out the candles, and swung their swords about amongst the
people of the house, who held up the chairs before them to save
themselves from being cut and wounded. At length they drove all the
people out of the house, and then searched it for me; who, it seems, was
the only person they looked for: for they had laid wait before on the
highway, by which I should have gone had I rode to Robert Widders’s. And
not meeting with me on the way, they thought to find me in the house,
but the Lord prevented them. Soon after I was come to Robert Widders’s,
some Friends came from the town where Thomas Leper lived, and gave us a
relation of this wicked attempt: and they were afraid lest they should
come and search Robert Widders’s house also for me, and do me a
mischief; but the Lord restrained them that they came not. Though these
men were in disguise, the Friends perceived some of them to be
Frenchmen, and supposed them to be servants belonging to one called Sir
Robert Bindlas; for some of them had said, that in their nation they
used to tie the Protestants to trees, and whip and destroy them. His
servants used often to abuse Friends, both in their meetings, and going
to and from them. They once took Richard Hubberthorn and several others
out of one, and carried them a good way off into the fields; and there
bound them, and left them bound in the Winter season. At another time,
one of his servants came to Francis Fleming’s house, and thrust his
naked rapier in at the door and windows; but there being at the house a
kinsman of Francis Fleming’s, one who was not a Friend, he came with a
cudgel in his hand, and bid the serving-man put up his rapier; which,
when the other would not, but vapoured at him with it, and was rude, he
knocked him down with his cudgel, and took his rapier from him; and had
it not been for Friends, he would have run him through with it. So the
Friends preserved the life of him that would have destroyed theirs.

From Robert Widders’s I went to visit Justice West, Richard Hubberthorn
accompanying me. Not knowing the way, or the danger of the sands, we
rode where, as we were afterwards told, no man ever rode before,
swimming our horses over a very dangerous place. When we were come in,
Justice West asked us if we did not see two men riding over the sands:
“I shall have their clothes anon,” said he, “for they cannot escape
drowning, and I am the coroner.” But when we told him that we were the
men, he was astonished, and wondered how we escaped drowning. Upon this
the envious priests and professors raised a slanderous report concerning
me, that neither water could drown me, nor could they draw blood of me;
and that therefore surely I was a witch; indeed, sometimes when they
beat me with great staves, they did not much draw my blood, though they
bruised my body oftimes very sorely. But all these slanders were nothing
to me with respect to myself, though I was concerned on the truth’s
behalf, which I saw, they endeavoured by these means to prejudice people
against; for I considered that their forefathers, the apostate Jews,
called the master of the house Beelzebub; and these apostate Christians
from the life and power of God, could do no less to his seed. But the
Lord’s power carried me over their slanderous tongues, and their bloody
murderous spirits; who had the ground of witchcraft in themselves, which
kept them from coming to God, and to Christ.

Having visited Justice West, I went to SWARTHMORE, visiting Friends; and
the Lord’s power was over all the persecutors there. I was moved to
write several letters to the magistrates, priests, and professors,
thereabouts, who had raised persecution before; that which I sent to
Justice Sawrey was after this manner:—

  “FRIEND,

  “Thou wast the first beginner of all the persecution in the North;
  thou wast the beginner and the maker of the people tumultuous. Thou
  wast the first stirrer of them up against the righteous seed, and
  against the truth of God; the first strengthener of the hands of
  evil-doers against the innocent and harmless; and thou shalt not
  prosper. Thou wast the first stirrer up of strikers, stoners,
  persecutors, stockers, mockers, and imprisoners in the North, and of
  revilers, slanderers, railers, and false accusers. This was thy work,
  and this thou stirredst up! so thy fruits declare thy spirit. Instead
  of stirring up the pure mind in people, thou hast stirred up the
  wicked, malicious, and envious, and taken hand with the wicked. Thou
  hast made the people’s minds envious up and down the country; this was
  thy work. But God hath shortened thy days, and limited thee; hath set
  thy bounds, and broken thy jaws; discovered thy religion to the simple
  and babes, and brought thy deeds to light. How is thy habitation
  fallen, and become the habitation of devils! How is thy beauty lost,
  and thy glory withered! How hast thou showed thy end that thou hast
  served God but with thy lips, thy heart being far from him, and thou
  in hypocrisy! How hath the form of thy teaching declared itself to be
  the mark of the false prophets, whose fruit declares itself! for by
  their fruits they are known. How are the wise men turned backward!
  View thy ways, and take notice with whom thou hast taken part. That of
  God in thy conscience will tell thee; the Ancient of days will reprove
  thee. How hath thy zeal appeared to be the blind zeal of a persecutor,
  which Christ and his apostles forbade Christians to follow! How hast
  thou strengthened the hands of evil-doers, and been a praise to them,
  and not to them that do well! How like a madman and blind man, didst
  thou turn thy sword backward against the saints, against whom there is
  no law! How wilt thou be gnawed and burned one day, when thou shalt
  feel the flame and have the plagues of God poured upon thee, and thou
  begin to gnaw thy tongue for pain, because of the plagues! Thou shalt
  have thy reward according to thy works. Thou canst not escape; the
  Lord’s righteous judgment will find thee out, and the witness of God
  in thy conscience shall answer it. How hast thou caused the heathen to
  blaspheme, gone on with the multitude to do evil, and joined hand and
  hand with the wicked! How is thy latter end worse than thy beginning,
  who art come with the dog to bite, and art turned as a wolf, to devour
  the lambs! How hast thou discovered thyself to be a man more fit to be
  kept in a place to be nurtured, than to be set in a place to nurture!
  How wast thou exalted and puffed up with pride! and now art thou
  fallen down with shame, that thou comest to be covered with that which
  thou stirredst up and broughtest forth. Let not John Sawrey take the
  words of God into his mouth till he be reformed; let him not take his
  name into his mouth till he depart from iniquity; let not him and his
  teacher make a profession of the saints’ words, except they intend to
  proclaim themselves hypocrites, whose lives are so contrary to the
  lives of the saints; whose church hath made itself manifest to be a
  cage of unclean birds. You, having a form of godliness, but not the
  power, have made them that are in the power your derision, your
  by-word, and talk at your feasts. Thy ill savour, John Sawrey, the
  country about have smelled, and of thy unchristian carriage all that
  fear God have been ashamed; and to them thou hast been a grief; in the
  day of account thou shalt know it, even in the day of thy
  condemnation. Thou wast mounted up, and hadst set thy nest on high,
  but never gottest higher than the fowls of the air. Now thou art run
  amongst the beast of prey, and art fallen into the earth; so that
  earthliness and covetousness have swallowed thee up. Thy conceitedness
  would not carry thee through, in whom was found the selfish principle,
  which hath blinded thy eye. Thy back must be bowed down always; for
  thy table is already become thy snare.”

                                                               G. F.

This Justice Sawrey, who was the first persecutor in that country, was
afterwards drowned.

I wrote also to William Lampitt, the priest of ULVERSTONE, thus:—

  “The word of the Lord to thee, O Lampitt! who art a deceiver,
  surfeited and drunk with the earthly spirit, rambling up and down in
  the Scriptures, and blending thy spirit amongst the saints’
  conditions; who hadst a prophecy, as thy father Balaam had, but art
  erred from it, as thy father did; one whose fruit hath withered (of
  which I am a witness,) and many who have known thy fruit, have seen
  the end of it, that it is withered, and do see where thou art in the
  blind world, a blind leader of the blind; as a beast wallowing and
  tumbling in the earth, and in the lust; one that is erred from the
  Spirit of the Lord, of old ordained for condemnation. Thou art in the
  seat of the Pharisees, art called of men master, standest praying in
  the synagogues, and hast the chief seat in the assemblies; a right
  hypocrite in the steps of the Pharisees, and in the way of thy
  fathers, the hypocrites, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe
  against. Such with the light thou art seen to be, and by the light art
  comprehended; which is thy condemnation, who hatest it, and will be so
  eternally, except thou repent. To thee this is the word of God; for in
  Christ’s way thou art not, but in the Pharisees’, as thou mayest read,
  Matt, xxiii., and all that own Christ’s words may see thee there.
  Christ, who died at Jerusalem, cried woe against such as thou art; and
  Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. The woe remains
  upon thee, and from under it thou canst never come, but through
  judgment, condemnation, and true repentance. To thee this is the word
  of God; to that of God in thy conscience do I speak, which will
  witness the truth of what I write, and will condemn thee. And when
  thou art in thy torment (though now thou swellest in thy vanity, and
  livest in wickedness,) remember thou wast warned in thy lifetime. When
  the eternal condemnation is stretched over thee, thou shalt witness
  this to be the word of the Lord God unto thee; and if ever thy eye
  shall see repentance, thou wilt witness me to have been a friend of
  thy soul.”

                                                               G. F.

Having thus cleared my conscience to the justice, and to the priest of
ULVERSTONE, who had raised the first persecution in that country, it was
upon me to send this warning in writing to the people of ULVERSTONE in
general.

  “Consider, O people! who are within the parish of ULVERSTONE; I was
  moved of the Lord to come into your public places to speak among you,
  being sent of God to direct your minds to him, that you might know
  where you might find your teacher; that your minds might be staid
  alone upon God, and you might not gad abroad without you for a
  teacher; for the Lord God alone will teach his people; and he is
  coming to teach them, and to gather them from idols’ temples, and from
  the customary worships, which all the world is trained up in. God hath
  given to every one of you a measure of his Spirit, according to your
  capacity; liars, drunkards, whoremongers, and thieves, and who follow
  filthy pleasures, you all have this measure in you. This is the
  measure of the Spirit of God, that shows you sin, and evil, and
  deceit; which lets you see that lying is sin; and theft, drunkenness,
  and uncleanness, all to be the works of darkness. Therefore mind your
  measure (for nothing that is unclean shall enter into the kingdom of
  God), and prize your time while you have it, lest the time come that
  you say with sorrow, we had time, but it is past. O! why will ye die?
  why will ye choose your own ways? why will ye follow the course of the
  world? and why will ye follow envy, malice, drunkenness, and foolish
  pleasures? know ye not in your consciences that all these are evil and
  sin? and that they who act such things, shall never enter into the
  kingdom of God? O! that ye would consider, and see how you have spent
  your time, and mind how ye do spend it, and observe whom you serve;
  for ‘the wages of sin is death.’ Do not ye know, that whatsoever is
  more than yea and nay, cometh of evil? O! ye drunkards, who live in
  drunkenness, do ye think to escape the fire and the judgment of God?
  Though ye swell in venom, and live in lust for a while, yet God will
  find you out, and bring you to judgment.

  “Therefore love the light, which Christ hath enlightened you withal,
  who saith, ‘I am the light of the world,’ and who doth enlighten every
  one that cometh into the world. One loves the light, and brings his
  works to the light and there is no occasion at all of stumbling; the
  other hates the light, because his deeds are evil, and the light will
  reprove him. Thou that hatest this light, thou hast it; thou knowest
  that lying, drunkenness, swearing, whoredom, theft, all ungodliness,
  and all unrighteousness, are evil. Christ Jesus hath given thee light
  enough to let thee see these are evil. This light, if thou lovest it,
  will teach thee holiness and righteousness, without which none shall
  see God; but if thou hatest this light, it is thy condemnation. Thus
  are Christ’s words found to be true, and fulfilled among you; you that
  hate this light, set up hirelings, and idols’ temples, and such
  priests as bear rule by their means; such shepherds as hold up such
  things; who are called of men masters, and have the chiefest place in
  the assemblies, whom Christ cried woe against, Matt, xxiii.; such as
  go in the way of Cain in envy, and after the error of Balaam for
  wages, gifts, and rewards; these have been your teachers; and these
  you have held up. But they who love the light, are taught of God; and
  the Lord is coming to teach his people himself, and to gather his own
  from the hirelings, and from such as seek for their gain from their
  quarter, and from such as bear rule by their means. The Lord is
  opening the eyes of people, that they may see such as bear rule over
  them. But all, whose are shut, are such as the prophet spoke of, that
  ‘have eyes and see not,’ but are foolish, upholding such things.
  Therefore, poor people, as ye love your own souls, consider the love
  of God to your souls, while ye have time, and do not turn the grace of
  God into wantonness. That which shows you ungodliness and worldly
  lusts, should and would be your teacher, if ye would hearken to it;
  for the saints of old witnessed the grace of God to be their teacher,
  which taught them to live soberly and godly in this present world. Ye
  that are not sober, this grace of God hath appeared unto you, but you
  turn it into wantonness, and so set up teachers, who are not sober,
  not holy, not godly. Here you are left without excuse, when the
  righteous judgment of God shall be revealed upon all who live ungodly.
  Therefore to the light in you I speak; and when the book of conscience
  shall come to be opened, then shall you witness what I say to be true,
  and you all shall be judged out of it. God Almighty direct your minds
  (such of you especially who love honesty and sincerity,) that you may
  receive mercy in the time of need. Your teacher is _within you_; look
  not forth; it will teach you both lying in bed, and going abroad, to
  shun all occasion of sin and evil.”

                                                               G. F.

As the foregoing was directed to all the inhabitants of ULVERSTONE in
general, so it was upon me to write also to those more particularly,
that most constantly followed W. Lampitt, the priest. To these I wrote
thus:—

  “The word of the Lord God to all the people that follow priest
  Lampitt, who is a blind guide. Ye are such as are turned from the
  light of Christ within, which he hath enlightened you withal; ye are
  such as follow that which Christ cried woe against, that go not in
  Christ’s way, but in the Pharisees’ way, as ye may read, Matt. xxiii.,
  which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against. He is the same
  yesterday, to-day, and for ever; but him ye own not, while ye follow
  such as he cried woe against; though under a colour ye make a
  profession, and Lampitt, your priest, makes a trade of Christ’s and
  the saints’ words, as his fathers, the Pharisees, made a profession of
  the prophets’ and of Moses’s words. Woe was unto them who had not the
  life, so woe is unto you who have not the life that gave forth the
  Scriptures, as your fruits have made manifest. For when the Lord hath
  moved some to come amongst you to preach the truth freely, you have
  knocked them down, beat, and punched, and haled them out of your
  assemblies. Such a people serve thee, O Lampitt, to make a prey upon,
  and these are thy fruits. O! let shame, shame, strike thee and you all
  in the faces, who make a profession of Christ’s words, and yet are
  stoners, and strikers, and mockers, and scoffers. Let all see, if this
  be not a cage of unclean birds, spoken of in the Scriptures, by those
  who had the life of the Scriptures. Such a company of people thou
  deceivest, and feedest them with thy fancies; thou makest a trade of
  the Scriptures, and takest them for thy cloak. But thou art manifest
  to all the children of light; for that cloak will not cover thee; thy
  skirts are seen, and thy nakedness appears. The Lord made one to go
  naked among you, a figure of thy nakedness, and of your nakedness, and
  as a sign amongst you, before your destruction cometh; that you might
  see that you were naked, and not covered with the truth. To the light
  in all your consciences I speak, which Christ Jesus doth enlighten you
  withal. It will show you the time you have spent, and all the evil
  deeds you have done in that time; who follow such a teacher, that acts
  contrary to this light, and leads you into the ditch. When you are in
  the ditch together, both teacher and people, remember ye were warned
  in your lifetime. If ever your eyes come to see repentance, and you
  obey the light of Jesus Christ in you, you will witness me to have
  been a friend of your souls, and that I have sought your eternal good,
  and written this in dear love to you. Then will you own your
  condemnation; which you must all own, before you can come into that
  blessed life, of which there is no end. But ye, who hate the light,
  because your deeds are evil, this light is your condemnation. O! that
  ye would love this light, and hearken to it! It would teach you, both
  in your daily occupations, and as you lie upon your beds, and would
  never let you speak a vain word. In loving it, you love Christ; in
  hating it, you bring condemnation thereof upon yourselves. To you this
  is the word of God, from under which you can never pass, nor ever
  escape the terror of the Lord, in the state you are in, who hate the
  light.”

                                                               G. F.

Amongst the chief hearers and followers of this priest Lampitt of
ULVERSTONE, was one Adam Sands, who was a very wicked, false man, and
would have destroyed truth and its followers if he could. To him I was
moved to write thus:—

  “ADAM SANDS,

  “To the light in thy conscience I appeal, thou child of the Devil,
  thou enemy of righteousness; the Lord will strike thee down, though
  now for a while in thy wickedness thou mayest reign. The plagues of
  God are due to thee, who hardenest thyself in thy wickedness against
  the pure truth of God. With the pure truth of God, which thou hast
  resisted and persecuted, thou art to be thrashed down, which is
  eternal, and doth comprehend thee; and with the light, which thou
  despisest, thou art seen; and it is thy condemnation. Thou as one
  brutish, and thy wife as an hypocrite, and you both as murderers of
  the just, in that which is eternal, are seen and comprehended; and
  your hearts searched, and tried, and condemned by the light. The light
  in thy conscience will witness the truth of what I write to thee; and
  will let thee see that thou art not born of God, but art from the
  truth, in the beastly nature. If ever thy eye see repentance, thou
  wilt witness me a friend of thy soul, and a seeker of thy eternal
  good.”

                                                               G. F.

This Adam Sands afterwards died miserably.

I was moved also to write to priest Tatham.

  “The word of the Lord to thee, priest Tatham, who art found out of the
  doctrine of Christ; having the chiefest place in the assembly, being
  called of men, master, and standing praying in the synagogue in the
  steps of the Pharisees, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against.
  In his way thou art not, but in the way of the scribes and Pharisees,
  as thou mayest read, Matt. xxiii. There Christ’s words judge thee, and
  the Scriptures of truth condemn thee. For thou art such a one as sues
  men at the law for tithes, and yet professest thyself to be a minister
  of Christ; which Christ never empowered his to do; neither did any of
  his apostles or ministers ever do so. Here I charge thee in the
  presence of the living God, to be out of their doctrine; and that as
  one of those evil beasts the Scripture speaks of, thou mindest earthly
  things, which the life of the Scriptures is against. Thou art for
  destruction in the state wherein thou standest; and it will be thy
  portion eternally, if thou dost not repent. To that of God in thy
  conscience I speak, which will witness the truth of what I say. Thou
  goest in Cain’s way, in envy, an enemy to God, and from the command of
  God. Thou goest in Balaam’s way, from the Spirit of God, for gifts and
  rewards, the wages of unrighteousness. Thou son of Balaam, thou art
  worse than thy father, for though he loved the wages of
  unrighteousness, yet he durst not take them; but thou not only takest
  them, but suest men at the law if they will not give them thee, which
  no true minister of Jesus Christ ever did; therefore stop thy mouth
  for ever, and never make mention of them, or profess thyself one of
  them. With the light thou art seen and comprehended, who art light and
  vain, and speakest a divination of thy own brain, and deceivest the
  people. That in thy conscience will witness what I say, and will
  condemn thee, who art one of those that bear rule by their means,
  which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against, Jer. v.; and so thou
  holdest up ‘the horrible and filthy thing that is committed in the
  land.’ They that do not tremble at the word of the Lord, are the
  foolish people that hold thee up; they are sottish children, and have
  no understanding; they are wise to do evil, but not to do good, who
  are deceived by thee. Thou art one of those that seek their gain from
  their quarter; a greedy dumb dog, that never hath enough, as thy
  practice makes manifest, which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry against,
  Isa. lvi. 11, 12. And thou art such a one as the Lord sent Ezekiel to
  cry against, who feedest of the fat, and clothest with the wool, and
  makest a prey of the people. But the Lord is gathering his sheep from
  thy mouth, that to thee they shall be a prey no longer. Thou enemy of
  God, here this prophecy is fulfilled upon thee, Ezek. xxxiv., and thou
  art one of them; I charge it upon thee in the presence of the living
  God; a hireling thou art, and they that put not into thy mouth, thou
  preparest war against them. Thou hatest the good, and lovest the evil,
  which the Lord sent Micah to cry against, Mic. iii. Cover thy lips,
  and stop thy mouth for ever, thou child of darkness; for with the
  light thou art comprehended, and seen to be among them which the holy
  men of God cried woe against; and by the Spirit of the Living God thou
  art judged. In the light, which is thy condemnation, thou art
  comprehended; thy race is seen, and thy compass known, who art out of
  the commands of Christ, and out of the doctrine and life of the
  apostles. Thou art proved and tried: to thee this is the word of the
  Lord, to thee it shall be as a hammer, a fire, and a sword, and from
  under it thou shalt never come, unless thou repent; who art with the
  light to be condemned in that state wherein thou standest: and if ever
  thy eye see repentance, this thy condemnation thou must own.”

                                                               G. F.

I wrote also to —— Burton, priest of SEDBERGH, much to the same purpose,
he being in the same evil ground, nature, and practice. Many other
epistles also and papers, which are too many and large to be inserted in
this place, I wrote about that time, as the Lord moved me thereunto,
which I sent among the priests, professors, and people of all sorts, for
the laying their evil ways open before them, that they might see and
forsake them; and opening the way of truth unto them, that they might
come to walk therein.

After I had cleared my conscience at that time to the priests and people
near SWARTHMORE, I went again into WESTMORLAND. A company of men with
pikes and staves laid wait for me at a bridge in the way, and they met
with some Friends, but missed me. Afterwards they came to the meeting
with their pikes and staves: but Justice Benson being there, and many
considerable people besides, they were prevented from doing the mischief
they intended. So they went away in a great rage, without hurting any
one.

I went from the meeting to GRAYRIGG, and had a meeting there at
Alexander Dixon’s house, to which the priest (who was a Baptist, and a
chapel priest,) came to oppose; but the Lord confounded him by his
power. Some of the priest’s people tumbled down some milk-pails which
stood upon the side of the house, which was much crowded; whereupon the
priest, after he and his company were gone away, raised a slander, “that
the Devil frightened him, and took away a side of the house while he was
in the meeting.” And though this was a known falsehood, yet it served
the priests and professors to feed on for a while; and so shameless they
were, that they printed and published it.

Another time this priest came to a meeting, and fell to jangling. First
he said, “the Scriptures were the word of God.” I told him they were the
words of God, but were not Christ, who is the Word; and bid him prove by
Scripture what he said. Then he said it was not the Scripture that was
the Word; and, setting his foot upon the Bible, he said it was but
copies bound up together. Many unsavoury words came from him, but after
he was gone we had a blessed meeting, and the Lord’s power and presence
was preciously manifested and felt amongst us. Soon after he sent me a
challenge to meet me at KENDAL. I sent him word he need not go so far as
KENDAL, for I would meet him in his own parish. The hour being fixed, we
met, and abundance of rude people gathered together, besides the
baptized people who were his own Members; and they had intended to do
mischief, but God prevented them. When we were met, I declared the day
of the Lord to them, and directed them to Christ Jesus. Then the priest
out with his Bible, and said it was the word of God. I told him it was
the words of God, but not God, the Word. His answer was, he would prove
the Scriptures to be the word before all the people. I let him go on,
having a man there that could take down in writing both what he said,
and what I said. When he could not prove it (for I kept him to Scripture
proof, chapter and verse for it,) the people gnashed their teeth for
anger, and said he would have me anon; but in going about to prove that
one error, he ran into many. And when at length he saw he could not
prove it, then he said he would prove it to be a God: so he toiled
himself afresh, till he perspired again, but could not prove what he had
affirmed. And he and his company were full of wrath; for I kept his
assertions on the head of him and them all, and told them I owned what
the Scriptures said of themselves, namely, that they were the words of
God, but Christ was the Word. So the Lord’s power came over all, and
they being confounded went away. The Lord disappointed their mischievous
intentions against me, and Friends were established in Christ; and many
of the priest’s followers saw the folly of their teacher.

After this, priest Bennet, of CARTMEL, sent a challenge to dispute with
me. Hereupon I came to his steeple-house on a First-day, and found him
preaching. When he had done, I spoke to him and his people; but the
priest would not stand the trial, but went his way. After he was gone, I
had much discourse with the people; and when I was come out into the
steeple-house yard, and was discoursing further with the professors, and
declaring truth unto them, one of them set his foot behind me, and two
of them ran against my breast, and threw me down backwards against a
grave-stone, wickedly and maliciously seeking to hurt me; but I got up
again, and was moved of the Lord to speak to them. Then I went up to the
priest’s house, and desired him to come forth that I might discourse
with him, seeing he had challenged me; but he would not be seen. So the
Lord’s power came over them all, which was greatly manifested at that
time. Amongst the priest’s hearers was one Richard Roper, one of the
bitterest professors the priest had: he was very fierce and hot in his
contention; but afterwards he came to be convinced of God’s eternal
truth, became a minister thereof, and continued faithful to his death.

It was now about the beginning of the year 1653, when I returned to
SWARTHMORE; and going to a meeting at GLEASTON, a professor challenged a
dispute with me. I went to the house where he was, and called him to
come forth; but the Lord’s power was over him, so that he durst not
meddle. Then I departed thence, and visited the meetings of Friends in
LANCASHIRE, and came back to SWARTHMORE. Great openings I had from the
Lord, not only of divine and spiritual matters, but also of outward
things, relating to the civil government. For being one day in
Swarthmore-hall, when Judge Fell and Justice Benson were talking of the
news, and of the parliament then sitting, which was called the Long
Parliament, I was moved to tell them, that before that day two weeks the
Parliament should be broken up, and the speaker plucked out of his
chair. And that day two weeks Justice Benson coming thither again, told
Judge Fell, that now he saw George was a true prophet; for Oliver had
broken up the parliament.

About this time I was in a fast for about ten days, my spirit being
greatly exercised on truth’s account; for James Milner and Richard Myer
went out into imaginations, and a company followed them. This James
Milner and some of his company, had true openings at first; but getting
into pride and exaltation of spirit, they ran out from truth. I was sent
for to them, and was moved of the Lord to go, and show them their
outgoings: and they were brought to see their folly, and condemned it,
and came into the way of truth again. After some time I went to a
meeting at ARNSIDE, where Richard Myer was, who had been long lame of
one of his arms. I was moved of the Lord to say unto him, amongst all
the people, “Stand up on thy legs” (for he was sitting down): and he
stood up, and stretched out his arm that had been lame a long time, and
said, “Be it known unto you, all people, that this day I am healed.” Yet
his parents could hardly believe it; but after the meeting was done,
they had him aside, took off his doublet, and then saw it was true. He
came soon after to Swarthmore meeting, and then declared how that the
Lord had healed him. Yet after this the Lord commanded him to go to York
with a message from him, but he disobeyed the Lord; and the Lord struck
him again, so that he died about three-quarters of a year after.

Now were great threatenings given forth in CUMBERLAND, that if ever I
came there again, they would take away my life. When I heard it I was
drawn to go into CUMBERLAND, and went to Miles Wennington’s, in the same
parish from which those threatenings came; but they had not power to
touch me.

About this time Anthony Pearson was convinced, who had been an opposer
of Friends.[27] He came over to SWARTHMORE; and I being then at Colonel
West’s, they sent for me. Colonel West said, “Go, George, for it may be
great service to the man.” So I went, and the Lord’s power reached him.

Footnote 27:

  Justice Pearson, who “was convinced as he sat on the bench,” became
  the author of an approved work, _The Great Case of Tithes_. A striking
  letter from him, dated in 1653, respecting his religious state, is
  inserted in _Letters of Early Friends_, pages 10-12.

About this time also the Lord opened several mouths to declare the truth
to priests and people, so that many were cast into prison. I went again
into CUMBERLAND, and Anthony Pearson and his wife, and several Friends,
went with me to BOOTLE, where Anthony Pearson left me, and went to
Carlisle sessions; for he was a Justice of the peace in three counties.
On a First-day I went into the steeple-house at BOOTLE; and when the
priest had done, I began to speak. But the people were exceeding rude,
and struck and beat me in the yard: one gave me a very great blow over
my wrist, so that the people thought he had broken my hand to pieces.
The constable was very desirous to keep the peace, and would have set
some of them by the heels that struck me, if I would have given way to
it. After my service amongst them was over, I went to Joseph Nicholson’s
house,[28] and the constable went a little way with us, to keep off the
rude multitude. In the afternoon I went again; and then the priest had
got another priest, that came from LONDON, and was highly accounted of,
to help him. Before I went in to the steeple-house, I sat a little upon
the Cross, and Friends with me; but the Friends were moved to go into
the steeple-house, and I went in after them. The London priest was
preaching; who gathered up all the Scriptures he could think of, that
spoke of false prophets, and antichrists, and deceivers, and threw them
upon us; but when he had done I recollected all those Scriptures, and
brought them back upon himself. Then the people fell upon me in a rude
manner; but the constable charged them to keep the peace, and so made
them quiet again.

Footnote 28:

  Joseph Nicholson was one of those who, with his wife, suffered in the
  New England persecution, being imprisoned there and laid in irons. He
  was also immured within the walls of Dover Castle in 1661. See
  Bowden’s _History of Friends in America_, vol. i., pp. 203-206, and
  268, &c.

Then the priest began to rage, and said I must not speak there, I told
him he had his hour-glass, by which he had preached, and he having done,
the time was free for me, as well as for him, for he was but a stranger
there himself. So I opened the Scriptures to them, and let them see
“that those Scriptures, that spoke of the false prophets, and
antichrists, and deceivers, described them and their generation, and
belonged to them who were found walking in their steps, and bringing
forth their fruits; and not unto us, who were not guilty of such
things.” I manifested to them, that they were out of the steps of the
true prophets and apostles; and showed them clearly, by the fruits and
marks, that it was they of whom those Scriptures spoke, and not we. And
I declared the truth, and the word of life to the people, and directed
them to Christ their Teacher. All was quiet while I was speaking; but
when I had done, and was come out, the priests were both of them in such
a rage, that they foamed at the mouth for anger against me. The priest
of the place made an oration to the people in the steeple-house yard,
and said, “This man hath gotten all the honest men and women in
LANCASHIRE to him; and now,” said he, “he comes here to do the same.”
Then said I unto him, “What wilt thou have left? and what have the
priests left them, but such as themselves? For if it be the honest that
receive the truth, and are turned to Christ, then it must be the
dishonest that follow thee, and such as thou art.” Some also of the
priest’s people began to plead for their priest, and for tithes; but I
told them it were better for them to plead for Christ, who had ended the
tithing-priesthood and tithes, and had sent forth his ministers to give
freely, as they had received freely. So the Lord’s power came over them
all, put them to silence, and restrained the rude people, that they
could not do the mischief they intended. When I came down again to
Joseph Nicholson’s house, I saw a great hole in my coat, which was cut
with a knife, but it was not cut through my doubtlet, for the Lord had
prevented their mischief. And the next day a rude wicked man would have
done violence to a Friend, but the Lord’s power stopped him.

Now was I moved to send James Lancaster to appoint a meeting at John
Wilkinson’s steeple-house near COCKERMOUTH, who was a preacher in great
repute, and had three parishes under him; wherefore I stayed at
MILLOM-IN-BOOTLE till he came back again. In the meantime some of those
called the gentry of the country had formed a plot against me, and had
given a little boy a rapier, to do me mischief with it. They came with
the boy to Joseph Nicholson’s house to seek me; but the Lord had so
ordered it, that I was gone into the fields. They met with James
Lancaster, but did not much abuse him; and not finding me in the house,
after a while they went away again. So I walked up and down in the
fields that night, and did not go to bed, as very often I used to do.

The next day we came to the steeple-house, where James Lancaster had
appointed the meeting. There were at this meeting twelve soldiers and
their wives, who were come thither from CARLISLE; and the country people
came in, as if it had been to a fair. I lay at a house a short distance
from the place, so that many Friends were there before me. When I came,
I found James Lancaster speaking under a yew tree; which was so full of
people that I feared they would break it down. I looked about for a
place to stand upon, to speak to the people; for they lay all up and
down like people at a leaguer. After I was discovered, a professor came
to me, and asked, if I would go into the church; seeing no place
convenient to speak to the people from, I told him, “Yes;” whereupon the
people rushed in; so that when I came in, the house and even the pulpit
was so full of people, that I had much ado to get in; and they that
could not get in, stood about the walls. When the people were settled, I
stood up on a seat; and the Lord opened my mouth “to declare his
everlasting truth, and his everlasting day; and to lay open all their
teachers, their rudiments, traditions, and inventions, that they had
been in, in the night of apostacy since the apostles’ days. I turned
them to Christ the true teacher, and to the true spiritual worship;
directing them where to find the Spirit and truth, that they might
worship God therein. I opened Christ’s parables unto them, and directed
them to the Spirit of God in themselves, that would open the Scriptures
unto them. And I showed them, how all might come to know their Saviour,
and sit under his teaching;—might come to be heirs of the kingdom of
God, and know both the voice of God and of Christ, by which they might
discover all the false shepherds and teachers they had been under; and
be gathered to the true shepherd, priest, bishop, and prophet, Christ
Jesus, whom God commanded all to hear.” So when I had largely declared
the word of life unto them, for about three hours, I walked from amongst
the people, and they passed away very well satisfied.

Among the rest a professor followed me, praising and commending me; but
his words were like a thistle to me. At last I turned about, and bid him
“fear the Lord:” whereupon priest Larkham, of COCKERMOUTH (for several
priests were got together on the way who came after the meeting was
over,) said to me, “Sir, why do you judge so; you must not judge.” But I
turned to him and said, “Friend, dost not thou discern an exhortation
from a judgment? I admonished him to fear God; and dost thou say I judge
him?” So this priest and I falling into discourse, I manifested him to
be amongst the false prophets and covetous hirelings. And several people
being moved to speak to him, he and two others of the priests soon got
away. When they were gone, John Wilkinson, who was preacher of that
parish, and of two other parishes in CUMBERLAND, began to dispute
against his own conscience for several hours, till the people generally
turned against him; for he thought to have tired me out, but the Lord’s
power tired him out, and the Lord’s truth came over him and them all.
Many hundreds were convinced that day, and received the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his free teaching, with gladness; of whom some have died in
the truth, and many stand faithful witnesses thereof. The soldiers also
were convinced, and their wives, and continued with me till First-day.

On First-day I went to the steeple-house at COCKERMOUTH, where priest
Larkham lived. When he had done, I began to speak, and the people began
to be rude; but the soldiers told them we had broken no law, and they
became quiet. Then I turned to the priest, and laid him open among the
false prophets and hirelings; at which word the priest went his way, and
said, “He calls me hireling;” which was true enough, and all the people
knew it. Then some of the great men of the town came to me, and said,
“Sir, we have no learned men to dispute with you.” I told them I came
not to dispute, but to show the way of salvation to them, the way of
everlasting life. I declared largely the way of life and truth, and
directed them to Christ their Teacher, who had died for them, and bought
them with his blood.

When I had done, I went about two miles to another great steeple-house
of John Wilkinson’s, called BRIGHAM; where the people, having been at
the other meeting, were mightily affected, and would have put my horse
into the steeple-house yard; but I said, “No, the priest claims that;
take him to an inn.” When I came into the steeple-house yard, I saw the
people coming in great companies, as to a fair; and abundance were
already gathered in the lanes, and about the steeple-house. I was very
thirsty, and walked about a quarter of a mile to a brook, where I got
some water, and refreshed myself. As I came up again, I met Wilkinson,
who as I passed by him said, “Sir, will you preach to-day? If you will,”
said he, “I will not oppose you in word or thought.” I replied, “Oppose
if thou wilt; I have something to speak to the people.” “And,” said I,
“thou carriedst thyself foolishly the other day, and spoke against thy
conscience and reason; insomuch that thy hearers cried out against
thee.” So I left him, and went on; for he saw it was in vain to oppose,
the people were so affected with the Lord’s truth. When I came into the
steeple-house yard, a professor came to me, and asked if I would not go
into the church as he called it. And I seeing no convenient place to
stand to speak to the people from, went in, and stood up on a seat after
they were settled. The priest came in also, but did not go up to his
pulpit.

The Lord opened my mouth, and I declared his everlasting truth, and word
of life to the people; “directing them to the spirit of God in
themselves, by which they might know God and Christ, and the Scriptures,
and come to have heavenly fellowship in the Spirit. I declared to them,
that every one that cometh into the world, was enlightened by Christ the
life; by which light they might see their sins, and Christ, who was come
to save them from their sins, and died for them. And, if they came to
walk in this light, they might therein see Christ to be the author of
their faith, and the finisher thereof; their Shepherd to feed them,
their Priest to teach them, and their great Prophet to open divine
mysteries unto them, and to be always present with them. I explained
also unto them, in the openings of the Lord, the first covenant,
explaining to them the types, and the substance of those figures; and so
bringing them on to Christ, the new covenant. I also manifested unto
them, that there had been a night of apostacy since the apostles’ days;
but that now the everlasting gospel was preached again, which brought
life and immortality to light; and the day of the Lord was come, and
Christ was come to teach his people himself by his light, grace, power,
and Spirit.” A fine opportunity the Lord gave me to preach truth among
the people that day for about three hours; and all was quiet. Many
hundreds were convinced; and some of them praised God and said, “Now we
know the first step to peace.” The preacher also said privately to some
of his hearers, that I had broken them and overthrown them.

After this I went to a village, and many people accompanied me. As I was
sitting in a house full of people, declaring the word of life unto them,
I cast mine eye upon a woman, and discerned an unclean spirit in her.
And I was moved of the Lord to speak sharply to her, and told her she
was a witch [under the influence of an unclean spirit]; whereupon she
went out of the room. Now, I being a stranger there, and knowing nothing
of the woman outwardly, the people wondered at it, and told me
afterwards that I had discovered a great thing; for all the country
looked upon her to be a witch. The Lord had given me a spirit of
discerning, by which I many times saw the states and conditions of
people, and could try their spirits. For not long before, as I was going
to a meeting, I saw some women in a field, and I discerned them to be
witches; and I was moved to go out of my way into the field to them, and
declare unto them their conditions. At another time there came such an
one into Swarthmore-hall in the meeting time; and I was moved to speak
sharply to her, and told her she was a witch [under the power of an evil
spirit]; and the people said afterwards she was generally accounted so.
There came also at another time another woman, and stood at a distance
from me, and I cast mine eye upon her, and said, “thou hast been a
harlot;” for I perfectly saw the condition and life of the woman. The
woman answered and said, many could tell her of her outward sins, but
none could tell her of her inward. Then I told her her heart was not
right before the Lord, and that from the inward came the outward. This
woman came afterwards to be convinced of God’s truth, and became a
Friend.

From the aforesaid village we came up to Thomas Bewley’s, near CALDBECK;
and from thence, having had some service for the Lord there, I passed to
a town, where I had a meeting at the Cross; and all was pretty quiet.
When I had declared the truth unto them, and directed them to Christ
their teacher, some received the truth. We had another meeting upon the
borders, in a steeple-house yard, to which many professors and
contenders came; but the Lord’s power was over all; and when the word of
life had been declared amongst them, some received the truth there also.

From thence we came to CARLISLE, and the pastor of the Baptists, with
most of his hearers, came to me to the abbey, where I had a meeting, and
declared the word of life amongst them; and many of the Baptists, and of
the soldiers, were convinced. After the meeting, the pastor of the
Baptists, a high notionist, and a flashy man, came to me, and asked me,
“what must be damned;” I was moved immediately to tell him, “that which
spoke in him was to be damned.” This stopped his mouth; and the witness
of God was raised up in him. I opened to him the states of election and
reprobation, so that he said he never heard the like in his life. He
also came afterwards to be convinced.

Then I went up to the castle among the soldiers, who beat a drum, and
called the garrison together. I preached the truth amongst them,
“directing them to the Lord Jesus Christ to be their teacher, and to the
measure of his Spirit in themselves, by which they might be turned from
the darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan unto God. I
warned them all, that they should do no violence to any man, but should
show forth a Christian life; telling them, that he who was to be their
teacher, would be their condemner, if they were disobedient to him.” So
I left them, having no opposition from any of them except the sergeants,
who afterwards came to be convinced.

On the market-day I went up into the market, to the market-cross. Now
the magistrates had both threatened and sent their serjeants; and the
magistrates’ wives had said that if I came there, they would pluck the
hair off my head; and that the serjeants should take me up.
Nevertheless, I obeyed the Lord God, and went upon the Cross, and there
declared unto them, that the day of the Lord was coming upon all their
deceitful ways and doings, and deceitful merchandize; and that they
should put away all cozening and cheating, and keep to yea and nay, and
speak the truth one to another; so the truth and the power of God was
set over them. After I had declared the word of life to the people, the
throng became so great that the serjeants could not get to me, nor the
magistrates’ wives come at me, I passed away quietly. Many people and
soldiers came to me, and some Baptists, that were bitter contenders;
amongst whom one of their deacons, being an envious man, and finding the
Lord’s power was over them, cried out for very anger. Whereupon I set my
eyes upon him, and spoke sharply to him in the power of the Lord; and he
cried, “Do not pierce me so with thy eyes; keep thy eyes off me.”

On the First-day following I went into the steeple-house; and after the
priest had done, I preached the truth to the people, and declared the
word of life amongst them. The priest got away, and the magistrates
desired me to go out of the steeple-house. But I still declared the way
of the Lord unto them, and told them, “I came to speak the word of life
and salvation from the Lord amongst them.” The power of the Lord was
dreadful amongst them in the steeple-house, so that the people trembled
and shook, and they thought the steeple-house shook: and some of them
feared it would fall down on their heads. The magistrates’ wives were in
a rage, and strove mightily to be at me: but the soldiers and friendly
people stood thick about me. At length the rude people of the city rose,
and came with staves and stones into the steeple-house, crying, “Down
with these round-headed rogues;” and they threw stones. Whereupon the
governor sent a file or two of musketeers into the steeple-house, to
appease the tumult, and commanded all the other soldiers out. So those
soldiers took me by the hand in a friendly manner, and said they would
have me along with them. When we came forth into the street, the city
was in an uproar, and the governor came down; and some of those soldiers
were put in prison for standing by me, and for me, against the
town’s-people. A lieutenant, that had been convinced, came, and brought
me to his house, where there was a Baptists’ meeting, and thither came
Friends also, and we had a very quiet meeting; they heard the word of
life gladly, and many received it.

The next day, the justices and magistrates of the town being gathered in
the townhall, they granted a warrant against me, and sent for me to come
before them. I was then gone to a Baptist’s house; but hearing of it, I
went up to the hall to them, where many rude people were; some of whom
had sworn strange, false things against me. I had much discourse with
the magistrates, wherein I laid open the fruits of their priests’
preaching, and showed them how void they were of Christianity; and that,
though they were such great professors (for they were Independents and
Presbyterians,) they were without the possession of that which they
professed. After a large examination they committed me to prison as a
blasphemer, a heretic, and a seducer; though they could not justly
charge any such thing against me. The jail at CARLISLE had two jailers,
an upper and an under, who looked like two great bear-wards. Now when I
was brought in, the upper jailer had me up into a great chamber, and
told me, I should have what I would in that room. But I told him, he
should not expect any money from me, for I would neither lie in any of
his beds, nor eat any of his victuals. Then he put me into another room;
where after a while, I got something to lie upon. There I lay till the
assizes came; and then all the talk was, that I was to be hanged. The
high sheriff, whose name was Wilfred Lawson, stirred them much up to
take away my life; and said, he would guard me to my execution himself.
They were in a great rage, and set three musketeers for a guard upon me;
one at my chamber door, another at the stairs’ foot, and a third at the
street door; and they would let none come at me, except one sometimes,
to bring me some necessary things. At night they would bring up priests
to me, sometimes as late as the tenth hour; who were exceedingly rude
and devilish. There was a company of bitter Scotch priests,
Presbyterians, made up of envy and malice, who were not fit to speak of
the things of God, they were so foul-mouthed; but the Lord, by his
power, gave me dominion over them all, and I let them see both their
fruits and their spirits. Great ladies also (as they were called) came
to see the man that they said was to die. Now, while both the judge,
justices, and sheriff, were contriving together how they might put me to
death, the Lord disappointed their design by an unexpected way; for the
judge’s clerk (as I was informed,) started a question among them, which
confounded all their counsels; so that after that they had not power to
call me before the judge.

Anthony Pearson being then in Carlisle, and perceiving that they did not
intend to bring me, as was expected, upon my trial, wrote a letter to
the judges, directed as follows:—

    TO THE JUDGES OF ASSIZE AND JAIL-DELIVERY FOR THE NORTHERN PARTS,
                           SITTING AT CARLISLE.

  “You are raised up to do righteousness and justice, and sent forth to
  punish him that doth evil, and to encourage him that doth well, and to
  set the oppressed free. I am therefore moved to lay before you the
  condition of George Fox, whom the magistrates of this city have cast
  into prison, for words that he is accused to have spoken, which they
  call blasphemy. He was sent to the jail, till he should be delivered
  by due course of law; and it was expected he should have been
  proceeded against in the common-law court at this assizes. The
  informations against him were delivered into court; and the act allows
  and appoints that way of trial. How hardly and unchristianly he hath
  been hitherto dealt with, I shall not now mention; but you may
  consider, that nothing he is accused of is nice and difficult. And, to
  my knowledge, he utterly abhors and detests every particular, which by
  the act against blasphemous opinions, is appointed to be punished; and
  differs as much from those people against whom the law was made, as
  light from darkness. Though he is committed, judgment is not given
  against him; nor have his accusers been face to face, to affirm before
  him what they have informed against him; nor was he heard as to the
  particulars of their accusations; nor doth it appear, that any word
  they charge against him, is within the act. But, indeed, I could not
  yet so much as see the information, no, not in court, though I desired
  it, both of the clerk of the assizes and of the magistrates’ clerk;
  nor hath he had a copy of them. This is very hard; and that he should
  be so closely restrained, that his friends may not speak with him, I
  know no law nor reason for. I do therefore claim for him a due and
  lawful hearing, and that he may have a copy of his charge, and freedom
  to answer for himself; and that rather before you, than to be left to
  the rulers of this town, who are not competent judges of blasphemy, as
  by their mittimus appears; who have committed him upon an act of
  parliament, and mention words as spoken by him at his examination,
  which are not within the act, and which he utterly denies. The words
  mentioned in the mittimus he denies to have spoken; and hath neither
  professed nor avowed them.”

                                                    ANTHONY PEARSON.

Notwithstanding this letter, the judges were resolved not to suffer me
to be brought before them; but reviling and scoffing at me behind my
back, left me to the magistrates of the town; giving them what
encouragement they could to exercise their cruelty upon me. Whereupon
(though I had been kept up so close in the jailer’s house that Friends
were not suffered to visit me, and Colonel Benson and Justice Pearson
were denied to see me,) the next day, after the judges were gone out of
town, an order was sent to the jailer to put me down into the dungeon
among the moss-troopers,[29] thieves, and murderers, which accordingly
he did. A filthy nasty place it was, where men and women were put
together in a very uncivil manner, and not even a house of convenience
to it; and the prisoners so lousy that one woman was almost eaten to
death with lice. Yet, as bad as the place was, the prisoners were all
made very loving and subject to me; and some of them were convinced of
the truth, as the publicans and harlots were of old; so that they were
able to confound any priest, that might come to the grates to dispute.
But the jailer was very cruel, and the under-jailer very abusive to me
and to Friends that came to see me; for he would beat Friends with a
great cudgel, that did but come to the window to look in upon me. I
could get up to the grate, where sometimes I took in my meat; at which
the jailer was often offended. One time he came in a great rage, and
beat me with a great cudgel, though I was not at the grate at that time;
and as he beat me, he cried, “Come out of the window,” though I was then
far enough from it. While he struck me, I was made to sing in the Lord’s
power; and that made him rage the more. Then he fetched a fiddler, and
brought him in where I was, and set him to play, thinking to vex me
thereby; but while he played, I was moved in the everlasting power of
the Lord God to sing; and my voice drowned the noise of the fiddle, and
struck and confounded them, and made them give over fiddling and go
their way.

Footnote 29:

  Moss-troopers were the remnant of a kind of freebooters, who infested
  the borders of England and Scotland in feudal times, making incursions
  on each other, less for the purpose of contention in arms, than for
  committing depredations on cattle and property.

Justice Benson’s wife was moved of the Lord to come to visit me, and to
eat no meat but what she ate with me at the bars of the dungeon window.
She was afterwards herself imprisoned at YORK, when she was great with
child, for speaking to a priest; and was kept in prison, and not
suffered to go out, when the time of her travail was come; so she was
delivered of her child in the prison. She was an honest, tender woman,
and continued faithful to the truth until she died.

Whilst I was in the dungeon at CARLISLE, James Parnell, a little lad of
about sixteen years of age, came to see me, and was convinced. And the
Lord quickly made him a powerful minister of the word of life, and many
were turned to Christ by him, though he lived not long: for, travelling
into ESSEX, in the work of the ministry, in the year 1655, he was
committed to COLCHESTER castle, where he endured very great hardships
and sufferings; being put by the cruel jailer into a hole in the castle
wall, called the oven, so high from the ground, that he went up to it by
a ladder; which being six feet too short, he was obliged to climb from
the ladder to the hole by a rope that was fastened above. And when
Friends would have given him a cord and a basket, to draw up his
victuals in, the inhuman jailer would not suffer them, but forced him to
go down and up by that short ladder and rope, to fetch his victuals,
(which for a long time he did), or else he might have famished in the
hole. At length, his limbs being much benumbed with lying in that place,
yet being constrained to go down to take up some victuals, as he came up
the ladder again with his victuals in one hand, and caught at the rope
with the other, he missed the rope, and fell down from a very great
height upon the stones; by which fall he was exceedingly wounded in his
head and arms, and his body was so much bruised, that he died in a short
time after.[30] When he was dead, the wicked professors, to cover their
own cruelty, wrote a book of him, and said, “he fasted himself to
death;” which was an abominable falsehood, and was manifested so to be
by another book, which was written in answer to that, and was called
“The Lamb’s Defence against Lies.”

Footnote 30:

  James Parnell, according to the historian Sewell, was trained up in
  the schools of literature. Though young, he became a valiant soldier
  of the Lamb;

                “In age a stripling, but in service old;”

  and died a true martyr in a dungeon’s gloom. Particulars of his
  barbarous treatment, and consequent death in jail, may be found in
  Sewell’s _History_, vol. i., under date 1655; and fuller information
  in his _Life_ by Callaway. In Barclay’s _Letters of early Friends_ is
  one from James Parnell written from Colchester Castle, wherein he
  says, “They have laboured to make my bonds grievous, but my strength
  the Philistines know not: I am kept and nourished in the midst of mine
  enemies; glory be to God the Highest, who hath counted me worthy to
  bear the bonds of the gospel.”

Now when I saw that I was not likely to be brought to a public hearing
and trial (although I had before answered in writing, the particular
matters charged against me, at the time of my first examination and
commitment), I was moved to send the following paper, as a public
challenge to all those that belied the truth and me behind my back, to
come forth and make good their charge:—

  “If any in Westmorland, or Cumberland, or elsewhere, that profess
  Christianity, and pretend to love God and Christ, are not satisfied
  concerning the things of God, which I, who am called George Fox, have
  spoken and declared, let them declare and publish their
  dissatisfaction in writing, and not back-bite, nor lie, nor persecute,
  in secret: this I demand of you all in the presence of the living God,
  as ye will answer it to him. For the exaltation of the truth, and the
  confounding of deceit, is this given forth. To that of God in your
  consciences I speak; declare or write your dissatisfaction to any of
  them, whom you call Quakers, that truth may be exalted, and all may
  come to the light, with which Christ has enlightened every one that
  cometh into the world: that nothing may be hid in darkness, in
  prisons, holes, or corners, but that all things may be brought to the
  light of Christ, and by the light of Christ may be tried. This am I
  moved of the Lord to write, and send forth to be set upon the
  market-crosses in Westmorland, and elsewhere. To the light of Christ
  in you I speak, that none of you may speak evil of the things of God,
  which you know not; nor act contrary to the light, that gave forth the
  Scriptures; lest you be found fighters against God, and the hand of
  the Lord be turned against you.”

                                                               G. F.

While I thus lay in the dungeon at CARLISLE, the report raised at the
time of the assize, “that I should be put to death,” was gone far and
near; insomuch that the parliament then sitting (which, I think, was
called the Little Parliament), hearing, that a young man at CARLISLE was
to die for religion, caused a letter to be sent to the sheriff and
magistrates concerning me. About the same time I wrote also to the
justices at CARLISLE, that had cast me into prison, and that persecuted
Friends at the instigation of the priests for tithes; expostulating the
matter with them thus:—

  “FRIENDS, THOMAS CRASTON AND CUTHBERT STUDHOLM.

  “Your noise is gone up to London before the sober people. What
  imprisoning, what gagging, what havoc and spoiling of the goods of
  people have you made within these few years! Unlike men; as though you
  had never read the Scriptures, or had not minded them! Is this the end
  of Carlisle’s religion? is this the end of your ministry; and is this
  the end of your church, and of your profession of Christianity? You
  have shamed it by your folly, your madness, and blind zeal. Was it not
  always the work of the blind guides, watchmen, leaders, and false
  prophets, to prepare war against them that would not put into their
  mouths? And have not you been the priests’ pack-horses, and
  executioners? When they spur you up to bear the sword against the
  just, do not you run on against the creatures, that cannot hold up
  such as the Scriptures did always testify against? Yet will you lift
  up your unholy hands, and call upon God with your polluted lips, and
  pretend a fast, who are full of strife and debate. Did your hearts
  never burn within you? Did you never come to question your conditions?
  Are you wholly given up to do the Devil’s lusts, to persecute? Where
  is your loving of enemies? Where is your entertaining of strangers?
  Where is your overcoming evil with good? Where are your teachers that
  can stop the mouths of gainsayers, and can convince gainsayers and
  such as oppose themselves? Have you no ministers of the Spirit, no
  soldiers with spiritual weapons displaying Christ’s colours? But all
  the dragon’s, the murderer’s, the persecutor’s arm of flesh; Cain’s
  weapons, chief priests taking counsel; Judas and the multitude with
  swords and staves; Sodom’s company raging about Lot’s house; like the
  priests and princes against Jeremiah; like the dragon, beast, and
  great whore, and the false church, which John saw, should cast into
  prison, and kill, and persecute? Whose weapons are you bearing? Doth
  not the false church make merchandise of cattle, corn, wine, and oil,
  even to the very souls of men? And hath not all this been since the
  true church went into the wilderness? Read Revelations the xiith, with
  the xviiith: do you not read and see what a spirit you are of, and
  what a bottomless pit you are in? And have not you dishonoured the
  place of justice and authority? What! turned your sword backward like
  madmen, who are a praise to the evil-doer, and would be a terror to
  the good, with all force and might to stop the way of justice! Doth
  not the Lord, think you, behold your actions? How many have you
  wronged? how many have you imprisoned and persecuted, and put out of
  your synagogues? Are you they that must fulfil the prophecy of Christ,
  Matt. xxiii. John xvi.?

  “Read the Scriptures, and see how unlike you are to the prophets,
  Christ, and his apostles; and what a visage you have, like unto them
  that persecuted the prophets, Christ, and the apostles. You are found
  in their steps, wrestling with flesh and blood, and not with
  principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickedness, and your
  teachers imprisoning and persecuting for outward things, you being
  their executioners; the like whereof hath not been in all the nations.
  The havoc that hath been made, the spoiling of the goods of people,
  taking away their oxen and fatted beeves, their sheep, corn, wool, and
  household goods, and giving them to the priests, that have done no
  work for them; more like moss-troopers than ministers of the gospel,
  they take them from Friends; sueing them in your courts, and fining
  them because they will not break the commands of Christ; that is,
  because they will not swear. Thus you act against them that do not
  lift up a hand against you; and as much as you turn against them you
  turn against Christ. But he is risen that will plead their cause, and
  you cannot be hid; for your works are come to light, and the end of
  your ministry is seen, what it is for—for means. You have dishonoured
  the truth, the gospel, and are they that make it chargeable. You have
  lost your glory. You have dishonoured yourselves. Persecution was ever
  blind and mad. Read the apostle, what he saith of himself, when he was
  in your nature. Exaltation and pride, and your lifting up yourselves,
  hath brought you to this; not being humble, not doing justice, not
  loving mercy. When such as have been beaten and bruised by your rude
  company, to whom you are a praise and encouragement, have come, and
  laid things before you, that you might do justice, preserve and keep
  peace, you, knowing they could not swear, have put an oath to them.
  This hath been your trick and cover, that ye might not do justice to
  the just; but by this means you have gone on still further to
  encourage the evil-doer. But the Lord sees your hearts! If ye were not
  men past feeling, ye would fear and tremble before the God of the
  whole earth, who is risen and will stain your glory, mar your pride,
  deface your beauty, and lay it in the dust. Though for a time you may
  swell in your pride, glory in your shame, and make a mock of God’s
  messengers, who for reproving sin in the gate, are become your prey,
  you will feel the heavy hand of God, and his judgments at the last.

  “This is from a lover of the truth, and of righteousness, and of your
  souls; but a witness against all such as make a trade of the
  prophets’, Christ’s, and the Apostles’ words, and are found in the
  steps of them that persecuted the prophets’, Christ’s, and the
  Apostles’ life; who will persecute them, that will not hold you up,
  and put into your mouths, and give you means. Tithes were before the
  law, and tithes were in the law; but tithes, since the days of the
  apostles, have been only since the false church got up. Now Christ,
  who is come to end the law, and to end war, redeems men out of the
  tenths, and out of the nines also. The redeemed of the Lord shall
  reign upon the earth, and know the election, which was before the
  world began. Since the days of the apostles, tithes have been set up
  by the Papists, and by them that went forth from the apostles into the
  world; so set up by the false church, that made merchandise of people,
  since the true church went into the wilderness. But now is the
  judgment of the great whore come, and the beast and false prophet, the
  old dragon, shall be taken and cast in the fire, and the Lamb and his
  saints shall have the victory. Now is Christ come, who will make war
  in righteousness, and destroy with the sword of his mouth all these
  inventors and inventions, that have got up, and been set up since the
  days of the apostles, and since the true church went into the
  wilderness. And the everlasting gospel, which is the power of God,
  shall be preached again to all nations, and kindreds and tongues, in
  this the Lamb’s day, before whom you shall appear to judgment. You
  have no way to escape. For He hath appeared, who is ‘the First and the
  Last, the beginning and the ending, the Alpha and the Omega; He that
  was dead, is alive again, and lives for evermore!’”

I mentioned before that Gervase Benson and Anthony Pearson, though they
had been justices of the peace, were not permitted to come to me in the
prison; whereupon they jointly wrote a letter to the magistrates,
priests, and people at CARLISLE, concerning my imprisonment; which was
thus:—

  “Him, who is called George Fox, who is persecuted by rulers and
  magistrates, by justices, by priests, and by people, and who suffers
  imprisonment of his body at this present, as a blasphemer, and a
  heretic, and a seducer, him do we witness, who in measure are made
  partakers of the same life, that lives in him, to be a minister of the
  eternal Word of God, by whom the everlasting gospel is preached; by
  the powerful preaching whereof the eternal Father of the saints hath
  opened the blind eyes, hath unstopped the deaf ears, hath let the
  oppressed go free, and hath raised up the dead out of the graves.
  Christ is now preached in and among the saints, the same that ever he
  was; and because his heavenly image is borne up in this his faithful
  servant, therefore doth fallen man (rulers, priests, and people)
  persecute him. Because he lives up out of the fall, and testifies
  against the works of the world, that the deeds thereof are evil, he
  suffers by you magistrates; not as an evil-doer. For thus it was ever,
  where the seed of God was kept in prison under the cursed nature, that
  nature sought to imprison them in whom it was raised. The Lord will
  make him to you as a burdensome stone; for the sword of the spirit of
  the Almighty is put into the hands of the saints, which shall wound
  all the wicked, and shall not be put up till it hath cut down all
  corrupt judges, justices, magistrates, priests, and professors; till
  he hath brought his wonderful thing to pass in the earth; which is to
  make new heavens and a new earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness;
  which now he is about to do. Therefore fear the Lord God Almighty, ye
  judges, justices, commanders, priests, and people; ye that forget God,
  suddenly will the Lord come, and destroy you with utter destruction,
  and will sweep your names out of the earth, and will restore his
  people judges, as at the first, and counsellors, as at the beginning.
  And all persecutors shall partake of the plagues of the whore, who
  hath made the kings of the earth and the great men drunk with the wine
  of her fornications, and hath drunk the blood of the saints; and
  therefore shall you be partakers of her plagues.

  “We are not suffered to see our friend in prison, whom we witness to
  be a messenger of the living God. Now all people, consider whether
  this be according to law, or from the wicked, perverse, envious will
  of the envious rulers and magistrates, who are of the same generation
  that persecuted Jesus Christ; for, said he, ‘as they have done to me,
  so will they do to you.’ And as he took the love, the kindness, and
  service that was showed and performed to any of his afflicted ones in
  their sufferings and distress, as done unto himself, so the injuries
  and wrongs that were done by any to any of his little ones, he
  resented, as done unto himself also. Therefore you, who are so far
  from visiting him yourselves in his suffering servant, that ye will
  not suffer his brethren to visit him, ye must depart, ye workers of
  iniquity, into the lake that burns with fire. The Lord is coming to
  thrash the mountains, and will beat them to dust; and all corrupt
  rulers, corrupt officers, and corrupt laws, the Lord will take
  vengeance on, by which the tender consciences of his people are
  oppressed. He will give his people his law, and will judge his people
  himself, not according to the sight of the eye, and hearing of the
  ear, but with righteousness, and with equity. Now are your hearts made
  manifest to be full of envy against the living truth of God, which is
  made manifest in his people, who are contemned and dispised of the
  world, and scornfully called Quakers. You are worse than the heathens,
  that put Paul in prison, for none of his friends or acquaintance were
  hindered to come to him by them; therefore they shall be witnesses
  against you. Ye are made manifest to the saints, to be of the same
  generation that put Christ to death, and that put the apostles in
  prison on the same pretence that you act under, in calling truth
  error, and the ministers of God blasphemers, as they did. But the day
  is dreadful and terrible, that shall come upon you, ye evil
  magistrates, priests and people, who profess the truth in words
  outwardly, and yet persecute the power of truth, and them that stand
  in and for the truth. While ye have time prize it, and remember what
  is written, Isa. liv. 17.”

                                                    GERVASE BENSON.
                                                    ANTHONY PEARSON.

Not long after this, the Lord’s power came over the justices, and they
were made to set me at liberty. But some time previous, the governor,
and Anthony Pearson, came down into the dungeon to see the place where I
was kept, and understand what usage I had. They found the place so bad,
and the savour so ill, that they cried shame on the magistrates for
suffering the jailer to do such things. They called for the jailers into
the dungeon, and required them to find sureties for their good
behaviour; and the under-jailer who had been such a cruel fellow, they
put into the dungeon with me, amongst the moss-troopers.

After I was set at liberty, I went to Thomas Bewley’s, where came a
Baptist teacher to oppose me; but he was convinced. Robert Widders being
with me, was moved to go to CALDBECK steeple-house, and the Baptist
teacher went along with him the same day. The people fell upon them, and
almost killed Robert Widders; and took the Baptist’s sword from him and
beat him sorely. This Baptist had the inheritance of an impropriation of
tithes; and he went home, and gave it up freely. Robert Widders was sent
to CARLISLE jail, where having lain a while, he was set at liberty
again.[31] William Dewsbury also went to another steeple-house hard by,
and the people almost killed him, they beat him so; but the Lord’s power
was over all, and healed him again. In that day many Friends went into
the steeple-houses, to declare the truth to the priests and people, and
great sufferings they underwent; but the Lord’s power sustained them.

Footnote 31:

  Robert Widders is often mentioned in this Journal, having travelled
  with George Fox in Scotland, as also in many parts of America. They
  went through great perils by sea and land, in the wilderness and in
  woods, in danger of wild beasts; yet through all the Lord supported
  him, and kept him faithful to the end. He was valiant for God’s truth,
  establishing many in the faith. He was a great sufferer from
  persecutors; once, at Caldbeck, he was thrown down on the ground, and
  kicked and beaten so cruelly, that blood gushed out of his mouth, and
  he was supposed to be dead. At Lamplugh, his clothes were torn on his
  back, and the hair from off his head; and at Bishop-Auckland, he was
  stoned and sorely bruised. His cattle, corn, and household goods were
  also swept away by wholesale, yet he was not at all dejected or
  concerned, knowing well for what he suffered. He was much resigned
  during his last sickness, often saying on his death-bed, “his heart
  was filled with the love of God;” and he departed this life in great
  peace in 1686, aged sixty-eight years.

Now I went into the country, and had mighty great meetings. The
everlasting gospel and word of life flourished, and thousands were
turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his teaching. Several that had
taken tithes, as impropriators, denied the receiving of them any longer,
and delivered them up freely to the parishioners. Passing into
WESTMORLAND, I had many great meetings. At STRICKLAND-HEAD I had a large
meeting, where a justice of peace out of Bishoprick, whose name was
Henry Draper, came, and many contenders were there. The priests and
magistrates were in a great rage against me in WESTMORLAND, and had a
warrant to apprehend me, which they renewed from time to time, for a
long time; yet the Lord did not suffer them to serve it upon me. I
travelled on amongst Friends, visiting the meetings till I came to
SWARTHMORE, where I heard that the Baptists and professors in Scotland
had sent to have a dispute with me. I sent them word, that I would meet
them in CUMBERLAND, at Thomas Bewley’s house, whither accordingly I
went, but none of them came.

Some dangers at this time I underwent in my travels; for at one time, as
we were passing from a meeting, and going through WIGTON on a
market-day, the people of the town had set a guard with pitch-forks; and
although some of their own neighbours were with us, they kept us out of
the town, and would not let us pass through it, under the pretence of
preventing the sickness; though there was no occasion for any such
thing. However, they fell upon us, and had like to have spoiled us and
our horses; but the Lord restrained them, that they did not much hurt;
and we passed away. Another time, as I was passing between two Friends’
houses, some rude fellows lay in wait in a lane, and exceedingly stoned
and abused us; but at last, through the Lord’s assistance, we got
through them, and had not much hurt. But this showed the fruits of the
priest’s teaching, which shamed their profession of Christianity.

After I had visited Friends in that county, I went through the county
into DURHAM, having large meetings by the way. A very large one I had at
Anthony Pearson’s, where many were convinced. From thence I passed
through NORTHUMBERLAND to DERWENT-WATER, where there were great
meetings; and the priests threatened that they would come, but none
came. The everlasting word of life was freely preached, and freely
received; and many hundreds were turned to Christ, their teacher.

In NORTHUMBERLAND many came to dispute, of whom some pleaded against
perfection: unto whom I declared, “that Adam and Eve were perfect before
they fell; and all that God made was perfect; and that the imperfection
came by the Devil, and the fall; but Christ, that came to destroy the
Devil, said, ‘Be ye perfect.’” One of the professors alleged that Job
said, “Shall mortal man be more pure than his Maker? The heavens are not
clean in his sight. God charged his angels with folly.” But I showed him
his mistake, and let him see, “that it was not Job that said so, but one
of those that contended against Job; for Job stood for perfection, and
held his integrity: and they were called miserable comforters.” Then
these professors said, the outward body was the body of death and sin. I
showed them their mistake in that also; for “Adam and Eve had each of
them an outward body, before the body of death and sin got into them;
and that man and woman will have bodies, when the body of sin and death
is put off again; when they are renewed up into the image of God again
by Christ Jesus, which they were in before they fell.” So they ceased at
that time from opposing further; and glorious meetings we had in the
Lord’s power.

Then we passed on to HEXHAM, where we had a great meeting at the top of
a hill. The priest threatened he would come, and oppose us, but he came
not; so that all was quiet; and the everlasting day, and renowned truth
of the ever-living God was sounded over those dark countries, and his
Son exalted over all. It was proclaimed amongst the people that “the day
was now come, wherein all that made a profession of the Son of God,
might receive him; and that to as many as would receive him, he would
give power to become the sons of God, as he had done to me.” And it was
further declared, that “he that had the Son of God, had life eternal;
but that he that had not the Son of God (though he professed all the
Scriptures, from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations),
had not life.” After all were directed to the light of Christ, by which
they might see him and receive him, and know where their true teacher
was, and the everlasting truth had been largely declared amongst them,
we passed away through HEXHAM peaceably, and came to GILSLAND, a country
noted for thieving.

Here a Friend seeing the priest, went to speak to him; whereupon the
latter came down to our inn, and the town’s-people gathered about us.
The priest said, he would prove us deceivers out of the Bible, but could
find no Scripture for his purpose. Then he went into the inn; and after
a while came out again, and brought some broken sentences of Scripture,
that mention “the doctrines and commandments of men, &c., and, touch
not, taste not, &c., for they perish with the using.” All which, poor
man! was his own condition; whereas we were persecuted, because we would
not taste, nor touch, nor handle their doctrines and traditions, which
we knew perished with the using. I asked him what he called the
steeple-house? “O,” said he, “the dreadful house of God, the temple of
God.” Then I showed him, and the poor dark people, that their bodies
should be the temples of God; and that Christ never commanded these
temples, but ended that temple at Jerusalem, which God had commanded.
While I was speaking, the priest got away; and afterwards the people
appeared as if they feared we would take their purses, or steal their
horses; judging us like themselves, who are naturally given to thieving.

The next day we came through the country into CUMBERLAND again, where we
had a general meeting of many thousands of people at the top of a hill
near LANGLANDS. A glorious and heavenly meeting it was; for the glory of
the Lord did shine over all; and there were as many as one could well
speak over, the multitude was so great. Their eyes were fixed on Christ
their teacher; and they came to sit under their own vine; insomuch that
Francis Howgill, coming afterwards to visit them, found they had no need
of words; for they were sitting under their teacher Christ Jesus; in the
sense whereof, he sat down amongst them, without speaking anything. A
great convincement there was in CUMBERLAND, DURHAM, NORTHUMBERLAND,
WESTMORLAND, LANCASHIRE, and YORKSHIRE; and the plants of God grew, and
flourished, the heavenly rain descending, and God’s glory shining upon
them, so that many mouths were opened by the Lord to his praise; yea, to
babes and sucklings he ordained strength.




                              CHAPTER VII.

1653-1654.—George Fox disputes most of the day with priest
    Wilkinson—many Friends lose their business for declining the world’s
    salutations, but afterwards their tried faithfulness and integrity
    procure them more than their neighbours—George Fox issues an address
    to Friends everywhere—two persecuting justices at Carlisle are cut
    off, and a third disgraced—George Fox passes through Halifax, a rude
    town of professors—at Synderhill-Green he has a mighty meeting of
    some thousands, and there was a general convincement—about sixty
    ministers are now raised up in the north, to travel towards the
    south, the east, and the west, in Truth’s service—George Fox’s
    address to Friends in the ministry—Rice Jones and many other false
    prophets rise up against Friends and are blasted—a wicked man binds
    himself with an oath to kill George Fox, but is prevented—great
    convincement in Lincolnshire—at Swannington George Fox has much
    controversy with professors—has a great dispute with priest Stevens,
    and seven other priests at Drayton—his father being present was
    convinced, and said, “Truly I see he that will but stand to the
    truth, it will carry him out”—Priest Stevens propagates lies
    respecting George Fox, which the Lord swept away—is taken before
    Colonel Hacker, who sends him to the Protector—speaks prophetically
    to the Colonel—has a friendly conference with the Protector—is
    dismissed by him very friendly—refuses his entertainment—Captain
    Drury scoffs at trembling, but is made to tremble in a remarkable
    manner—George Fox prays with some officers, who are greatly shaken
    by the Lord’s power—priests and professors greatly disturbed because
    many of their people are convinced, and moved to declare against the
    rest.


After my release from CARLISLE prison, I was moved to go to priest
Wilkinson’s steeple-house again at BRIGHAM; and being got in before him,
when he came in, I was declaring the truth to the people, though they
were but few; for the most and the best of his hearers were turned to
Christ’s free teaching; and we had a meeting of Friends hard by, where
Thomas Stubbs was declaring the word of life amongst them. As soon as
the priest came in, he opposed me; and there we stayed most part of the
day; for when I began, he opposed me; so if any law was broken, he broke
it. When his people would be haling me out, I manifested his fruits to
be such, as Christ spoke of, when he said, “they shall hale you out of
their synagogues;” and then he would be ashamed, and they would let me
alone. There he stood till it was almost night, jangling and opposing
me, and would not go to his dinner; for he thought to weary me out. But
at last, the Lord’s power and truth came so over him, that he packed
away with his people. When he was gone, I went to the meeting of
Friends, who were turned to the Lord, and by his power established on
Christ, the rock and foundation of the true prophets and apostles, but
not of the false.

About this time the priests and professors fell to prophesying against
us afresh. They had said long before, that we should be destroyed within
a month; and after that, they prolonged the time to half-a-year; but
that time being long expired, and we mightily increased in number, they
now gave forth, that we would eat out one another. For often after
meetings, many tender people having a great way to go, tarried at
Friends’ houses by the way, and sometimes more than there were beds to
lodge in; so that some have lain on the hay-mows; hereupon Cain’s fear
possessed the professors and world’s people. For they were afraid, that
when we had eaten one another out, we would all come to be maintained by
the parishes, and be chargeable to them. But after a while, when they
saw that the Lord blessed and increased Friends, as he did Abraham, both
in the field and in the basket, at their goings forth, and comings in,
at their risings up and lyings down, and that all things prospered with
them; then they saw the falseness of all their prophesies against us;
and that it was in vain to curse, where God had blessed.

At the first convincement, when Friends could not put off their hats to
people, or say You to a single person, but Thou and Thee;—when they
could not bow, or use flattering words in salutations, or adopt the
fashions and customs of the world, many Friends, that were tradesmen of
several sorts, lost their customers at first; for the people were shy of
them, and would not trade with them; so that for a time some Friends
could hardly get money enough to buy bread. But afterwards, when people
came to have experience of Friends’ honesty and faithfulness, and found
that their yea was yea, and their nay was nay; that they kept to a word
in their dealings, and that they would not cozen and cheat them; but
that if they sent a child to their shops for anything, they were as well
used as if they had come themselves; the lives and conversation of
Friends did preach, and reached to the witness of God in the people.
Then things altered so, that all the inquiry was, “where is there a
draper, or shopkeeper, or tailor, or shoemaker, or any other tradesman,
that is a Quaker?” Insomuch that Friends had more trade than many of
their neighbours, and if there was any trading, they had a great part of
it. Then the envious professors altered their note, and began to cry
out, “if we let these Quakers alone, they will take the trade of the
nation out of our hands.” This has been the Lord’s doing to and for his
people! which my desire is, that all, who profess his holy truth, may be
kept truly sensible of, and that all may be preserved, in and by his
power and Spirit, faithful to God and man; first to God, in obeying him
in all things; and then in doing unto all men, that which is just and
righteous, to all men and women, in all things, that they have to do or
deal with them in; that the Lord God may be glorified in their
practising truth, holiness, godliness, and righteousness, amongst people
in all their lives and conversation.

Friends being now grown very numerous in the northern parts of the
nation, and many young-convinced ones coming daily in among us, I was
moved of the Lord to write the following epistle, and send it forth
amongst them, in order to stir up the pure mind, and raise a holy care
and watchfulness in them over themselves, and one another, for the
honour of truth:—

  “_To you all, Friends everywhere, scattered abroad_.

  “In the measure of the life of God, wait for wisdom from God, even
  from him, from whom it comes. And all ye, who are children of God,
  wait for living food from the living God, to be nourished up to
  eternal life, from the one fountain, from whence life comes; that ye
  may all be guided and walk in order; servants in your places, young
  men and women in your places, and rulers of families; that every one,
  in your respective places, may adorn the truth, in the measure of it.
  With it let your minds be kept up to the Lord Jesus, from whom it
  comes, that ye may be a sweet savour to God, and in wisdom ye may all
  be ordered and ruled;—that a crown and a glory ye may be one to
  another in the Lord. And that no strife, bitterness, or self-will, may
  appear amongst you; but with the Light, in which is unity, all these
  may be condemned. And that every one in particular, may see to, and
  take care of, the ordering and ruling of his own family; that in
  righteousness and wisdom it may be governed, the fear and dread of the
  Lord being set in every one’s heart; that the secrets of the Lord
  every one may come to receive; that stewards of his grace you may come
  to be, to dispense it to every one as they have need; and so in
  savouring and right discerning you may all be kept; that nothing, that
  is contrary to the pure life of God, may be brought forth in you, or
  among you; but all that is contrary to it, may be judged by it; so
  that in light, in life, and love, ye may all live, and all that is
  contrary to the light, and life, and love, may be brought to judgment,
  and by that light condemned. And that no fruitless trees be among you;
  but all cut down and condemned by the light, and cast into the fire;
  so that every one may bear and bring forth fruit unto God, and grow
  fruitful in his knowledge, and in his wisdom; and that none may appear
  in words beyond what they are in the life, that gave forth the words.
  Here none shall be as the untimely figs; none shall be of those trees
  whose fruit withers; such go in Cain’s way, from the light, and by it
  are condemned.

  “Let none amongst you boast yourselves above your measure; for if you
  do, out of God’s kingdom you are excluded; for in that boasting part
  gets up the pride, and the strife, which is contrary to the light,
  that leads to the kingdom of God, and gives an entrance thereinto, and
  an understanding to know the things that belong to the kingdom of God.
  There the light and life of man every one receives, even Him who was,
  before the world was, by whom it was made, who is the righteousness of
  God, and his wisdom; to whom all glory, honour, thanks, and praise
  belong, who is God blessed for ever. Let no image or likeness be made;
  but wait in the light, which will bring condemnation on that part that
  would make the images; for that prisons the just. So to the lust yield
  not the eye, nor the flesh; for the pride of life stands in that which
  keeps out the love of the Father; and upon which his judgments and
  wrath remain, where the love of the world is sought after, and a crown
  that is mortal. In this ground the evil enters, which is cursed; which
  brings forth briars and thorns, where death reigns, and tribulation
  and anguish are upon every soul, and the Egyptian tongue is heard; all
  which is by the light condemned. There the earth is, which must be
  removed; by the light it is seen, and by the power it is removed, and
  out of its place it is shaken; to which the thunders utter their
  voices, before the mysteries of God be opened, and Jesus revealed.
  Therefore all ye whose minds are turned to this light, wait upon the
  Lord Jesus for the crown that is immortal, and that fadeth not away.”

                                                               G. F.

  “This is to be sent amongst all Friends in the truth, the flock of
  God, to be read at their meetings.”

While Friends abode in the northern parts, a priest of WREXHAM, in
Wales, whose name was Morgan Floyd, having heard reports concerning us,
sent two of his congregation into the North to inquire concerning us, to
try us, and bring him an account of us. But when these triers came down
amongst us, the power of the Lord overcame them, and they were both
convinced of the truth. So they stayed some time with us, and then
returned to Wales; where afterwards one of them departed from his
convincement; but the other, whose name was John-ap-John, abode in the
truth, and received a part in the ministry, in which he continued
faithful.

Now were the priests greatly disturbed at NEWCASTLE, at KENDAL, and in
most of the northern counties. There being one Gilpin, that had
sometimes come amongst us at KENDAL, and soon run out from the truth
into vain imaginations, the priests made what evil use they could of him
against us; but the Lord’s power confounded them all. And the Lord God
cut off two of the persecuting justices at CARLISLE; and the other,
after a time, was turned out of his place, and left the town.

About this time the oath or engagement to OLIVER CROMWELL, was tendered
to the soldiers; many of whom were disbanded, because, in obedience to
Christ, they could not swear. John Stubbs was one, who was convinced
when I was in CARLISLE prison, and became a good soldier in the Lamb’s
war, and a faithful minister of Christ Jesus, travelling much in the
service of the Lord in Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Italy, Egypt, and
America. And the Lord’s power preserved him out of the hands of the
Papists, though many times he was in great danger of the Inquisition.
But some of the soldiers who had been convinced, but had not come into
obedience to the truth, took Cromwell’s oath; and going afterwards into
Scotland, and coming before a garrison there, the garrison thinking they
had been enemies, fired at them, and killed many of them; which was a
sad judgment.

When the churches were settled in the North, and Friends were sat down
under Christ’s teaching, and the glory of the Lord shone over them, I
passed from SWARTHMORE to LANCASTER (about the beginning of the year
1654,) and so through the counties, visiting Friends till I came to
SYNDERHILL-GREEN,[32] where a meeting was appointed three weeks before;
leaving the North fresh and green, under Christ their teacher. But
before I came to SYNDERHILL-GREEN, we passed through HALIFAX, a rude
town of professors, and came to one, Thomas Taylor’s, who had been a
captain, where we met with some janglers; but the Lord’s power was over
all; for I travelled in the motion of God’s power. When I came to
SYNDERHILL-GREEN, there was a mighty meeting, some thousands of people
(as it was supposed). Many persons of note were there, as captains and
other officers; and there was a general convincement; for the Lord’s
power and truth was over all, and there was no opposition.

Footnote 32:

  Near Handsworth Woodhouse, Yorkshire.

About this time did the Lord move upon the spirits of many, whom he had
raised up, and sent forth to labour in his vineyard, to travel
southwards, and spread themselves, in the service of the gospel, to the
eastern, southern, and western parts of the nation; as Francis Howgill
and Edward Burrough to LONDON; John Camm and John Audland to BRISTOL;
Richard Hubberthorn and George Whitehead[33] towards NORWICH; Thomas
Holmes[34] into Wales, and others different ways; for above sixty
ministers had the Lord raised up, and now sent abroad out of the North
country. The sense of their service being very weighty upon me, I was
moved to give forth the following paper:—

        “_To Friends in the Ministry._

  “All Friends everywhere, Know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the seed
  of the serpent, and is above the seed of the serpent; which Seed sins
  not, but bruiseth the serpent’s head, that doth sin, and tempts to
  sin; which Seed God’s promise and God’s blessing is to; and which is
  one in the male and in the female. Where it is head, and hath bruised
  the head of the other, to the beginning you are come; and the younger
  is known, and he that is servant to the younger. And the promise of
  God, which is to the Seed, is fulfilled and fulfilling; the Scriptures
  come to be opened and owned; the flesh of Christ known, who took upon
  him the seed of Abraham according to the flesh; and the everlasting
  priesthood known, the everlasting covenant. Christ takes upon him the
  seed of Abraham, and is a priest after the order of Melchizedek;
  without father, without mother, without beginning of days (mark) or
  end of life; this is the priest that ever lives; the covenant of life,
  of light and peace. And the everlasting offering here is known once
  for all, which offering overthrows that nature which offered; out of
  which the priesthood arose, that could not continue by reason of
  death. And here is the other offering known, the everlasting offering
  which perfects for ever them that are sanctified; which offering
  blotted out the hand-writing of ordinances, triumphs over them, and
  ascends above all principalities and powers.

  “Now he that hath the Spirit of Jesus, sees this; and here is the love
  of God received, that doth not rejoice in iniquity, but leads to
  repent of it. This is the word of the Lord God to you all, Friends
  everywhere scattered abroad, Know the power of God in one another, and
  in that rejoice; for then you rejoice in the cross of Christ, who is
  not of the world; which cross is the power of God to all them that are
  saved. You, that know the power, and feel the power, you feel the
  cross of Christ, you feel the gospel, which is the power of God unto
  salvation to every one that believeth. Now, he that believes in the
  light, believes in the everlasting covenant, in the one offering;
  comes to the life of the prophets and Moses; comes to see Christ the
  hope, the mystery, which hope perisheth not, but lets you see the hope
  that perisheth, which is not that mystery; and the expectation in that
  perishing hope fades. Where this never-failing hope is witnessed, the
  Lord comes to be sanctified in the heart, and you come to the
  beginning, to Christ the hope, which perisheth not; but the other
  hope, and the other expectation perisheth. So all of you, know the
  perishing of the other, and the failing of the expectation therein;
  and know that which perisheth not; that you may be ready to give a
  reason of this hope with meekness and fear, to every man that asketh
  you. Christ the hope, the mystery, that perisheth not; the end of all
  perishing things, the end of all changeable things, the end of the
  decaying covenant, the end of that which waxeth old and doth decay;
  the end of the first covenant, of Moses, and of the prophets; the
  righteousness of God, Christ Jesus the Son; his throne ye will know,
  heirs with him ye will be; who makes his children kings and priests to
  him, and brings them to know his throne and his power.

  “There is no justification out of the light, out of Christ;
  justification is in the light in Christ; here is the doer of the will
  of God, here is the entering into the kingdom. He that believes in the
  light, becomes a child of light; and here the wisdom is received that
  is justified of her children. Here believing in the light, you shall
  not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life; and come
  every one to witness the light that shines in your hearts, which light
  will give you the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
  face of Jesus Christ. With which light you will see him reign, who is
  the prince of life and of peace; which light turns from him, that is
  out of the truth, and abode not in it; where the true peace is not.

  “Friends, be not hasty; for he that believes in the light, makes not
  haste. Here the grace is received, by which you come to be saved; the
  election is known, which obtains the promise; the will is seen that
  wills; the mind is known that runs and obtains not, but stops and
  becomes dull. Now, that with the light being seen, and judged, and
  stopped, the patience is here known which obtains the crown, and the
  immortality is come to light. So all they now that act contrary to the
  light, and do not believe in it, do not come to justification. And,
  all Friends, if you go from the light, from wanting to have the
  promise of God fulfilled to the Seed, whereby you may know Christ to
  reign, you thereby bring on yourselves changeable garments, and come
  to wear the changeable garments, and the strange flesh, which leads to
  adultery, which the law goes upon, which shuts out of the kingdom: and
  out of this will doth proceed the work or building, that is for the
  fire; whereby you may come to suffer loss. Therefore love the light,
  which doth condemn that, and receive the power from the Lord, with
  which you stand over that, and condemn it: feeling and seeing that
  which gives you the victory over the world, and to see out of time, to
  before time.

  “Again Friends, know Abraham, that must obey the voice of Sarah, that
  bears seed; which casts forth the bondwoman and her son: do not go
  forth, there will the wildness lodge. Know that which bears the wild
  son, and its mother, who is not Sarah; for the promise is to the Seed,
  not of many, but one, which seed is Christ: and this Seed now you come
  to witness stands above all, yea, on the head of the serpent. And so
  all, as I said before, who come to feel and witness this, come to the
  beginning; and this to all the seed of God, the church, that it you
  all may come to know, where there is no blemish, nor spot, nor
  wrinkle, nor any such thing. This is that which is purchased by the
  blood of Jesus, and to the Father presented out of all that defiles;
  which is the pillar and ground of truth. None come to this, but such
  as come to the light of Christ, who purchased this church. They who go
  from the light are shut out and condemned, though they profess all the
  Scriptures declared from it. Therefore walk in the light, that you may
  have fellowship with the Son, and with the Father; and come all to
  witness his image, his power, and his law, which is his light; which
  hath converted your souls, and brought them to submit to the higher
  power, above that which is out of the truth: that you may know here
  the mercy and truth, and the faith that works by love, which Christ is
  the author of, who lighteth every one of you; which faith gives the
  victory. Now that which gives the victory is perfect; and that which
  the ministers of God received from God, is that which is perfect; and
  that which they are to minister is for the perfecting of the saints,
  till they all come in the unity of the faith unto a perfect man. This
  is the word of the Lord God to you all; every one in the measure of
  life wait, that with it all your minds may be guided up to the Father
  of life, the Father of Spirits; to receive power from him, and wisdom,
  that with it you may be ordered to his glory; to whom be all glory for
  ever! All keep in the light and life, that judgeth down that which is
  contrary to the light and life. So the Lord God Almighty be with you
  all. And keep your meetings everywhere, being guided by that of God;
  by that you may see the Lord God among you, even him who lighteth
  every man that cometh into the world: by whom the world was made; that
  men, who are come into the world, might believe. He that believeth
  not, the light condemns him: he that believeth, cometh out of
  condemnation. So this light, which lighteth every man that cometh into
  the world, and which they that hate it stumble at, is the light of
  men.

  “All Friends, that speak in public, see that it be in the life of God;
  for that begets to God: the fruits of that shall never wither. This
  sows to the Spirit, which is in prison, and of the Spirit reaps life;
  and the other sows to the flesh, and of the flesh reaps corruption.
  And this you may see all the world over, amongst these seeds-men, what
  may be reaped in the field, that is, the world. Therefore in the
  Spirit of the Lord God wait, which cuts down and casts out all this,
  the root and branches of it. In that wait to receive power, and the
  Lord God Almighty preserve you in it; whereby you may come to feel the
  light, that comprehends time and the world, and fathoms it; which,
  believed in, gives you victory over the world. And here the power of
  the Lord is received, which subdues all the contrary, and puts off the
  garments that will stain and pollute. With this light you come to
  reach the light in every man, which Christ enlightens every man that
  cometh into the world withal: and here the things of Christ come to be
  known, and the voice of Christ heard. Therefore keep in the light, the
  covenant of peace, and walk in the covenant of life.

  “There is that which maketh merry over the witness of God; and there
  is that which maketh merry in the Lord; which rejoiceth over that
  which hath made merry over it: of that take notice, you who are in the
  light. Such the Lord doth beautify, whose trust is in his strength:
  and the Lord doth see such, and them that are in his light. But such
  as are from the light, whose eyes are after their abominations and
  idols, their eyes are to be blinded; and their beautiful idols, and
  their abominations to be destroyed, and by the light condemned, which
  they have made from the life, in their own strength; which with the
  light is seen, and overthrown by the power of God. ‘If you can change
  my covenant,’ saith the Lord, ‘which keeps the day in its season, and
  the night in its season (mark, my covenant, the light); if you can
  change this, then may you change the covenant of God with his seed.’

  “So all Friends, that are turned to the light, which cometh from him,
  by whom the world was made, who was, before it was made, Christ Jesus,
  the Saviour of your souls; abide in the light, and you will see your
  salvation to be walls and bulwarks against that, which the light
  discovers to be contrary to it. Waiting in the light, you will receive
  the power of God, which is the gospel of peace; that you may be shod
  with it, and know that in one another, which raiseth up the seed of
  God, sets it over the world and the earth, and crucifies the
  affections and lusts: then the truth comes to reign, which is the
  girdle.”

                                                                G.F.

Footnote 33:

  George Whitehead, who was convinced when about seventeen years old,
  became a valiant minister for about sixty-eight years, till the time
  of his decease, which took place, in great peace, after an illness of
  some weeks. He waited, patiently resigned to the will of God, desiring
  to be dissolved and be with Christ; saying, “he felt the sting of
  death to be taken away.” He was a preacher of the gospel in life and
  power, and turned many from darkness to light, being a chief
  instrument in gathering a people to the Lord in and about Norwich. At
  one meeting he had in those parts, it is recorded that “nearly the
  whole congregation was convinced by the mighty power of God, through
  his lively and piercing testimony and prayer.” He suffered great
  hardships, long and sore imprisonments, and severe whipping for his
  testimony to the truth, much of which is recorded in his published
  Journal, with his travels and other services, to which the reader is
  referred.

Footnote 34:

  Thomas Holmes was serviceable in his day and generation, suffering
  imprisonment on Truth’s account. In 1656, he was in jail, at Chester,
  with seven or eight other Friends. Some of his services in Wales are
  related, in a letter from him (probably to George Fox,) in Barclay’s
  _Letters of Early Friends_, p. 222.

About this time Rice Jones of NOTTINGHAM (who had been a Baptist, and
was turned Ranter,) and his company, began to prophesy against me,
giving out, that I was then at the highest, and that after that time I
should fall down as fast. He sent a bundle of railing papers from
NOTTINGHAM to MANSFIELD, CLAWSON, and the towns thereabouts, judging
Friends for declaring the truth in the markets and in steeple-houses;
which papers I answered. But his and his company’s prophecies came upon
themselves; for soon after they fell to pieces, and many of his
followers became Friends, and continued so. And through the Lord’s
blessed power, truth and Friends have increased, and do increase in the
increase of God: and I, by the same power, have been and am preserved,
and kept in the everlasting Seed, that never fell, nor changes. But Rice
Jones took the oaths that were put to him, and so disobeyed the command
of Christ. Many such false prophets have risen up against me, but the
Lord hath blasted them, and will blast all who rise against the blessed
Seed, and me in that. My confidence is in the Lord; for I saw their end,
and how the Lord would confound them, before he sent me forth.

I was now at SYNDERHILL-GREEN, where I had had a large meeting in the
daytime; and at night we had a great meeting again in Thomas Stacey’s
house; for people came from far, and could not soon depart. The high
sheriff of the county told Captain Bradford, that he intended to come up
with half a dozen of his troopers to the meeting; but the Lord prevented
him. When I had attended some meetings thereabouts, I travelled up and
down in YORKSHIRE, as far as HOLDERNESS, and to the land’s end that way,
visiting Friends and the churches of Christ; which were finely settled
under Christ’s teaching. At length I came to Captain Bradford’s house,
whither many Ranters came from YORK to wrangle; but they were confounded
and stopped. Thither came also she who was called the Lady Montague, who
was then convinced, and lived and died in the truth.

Then I came again to Thomas Taylor’s, within three miles of HALIFAX,
where was a meeting of about two hundred people; amongst which were many
rude people, and divers butchers, several of whom had bound themselves
with an oath before they came out, that they would kill me (as I was
told); one of those butchers had been accused of killing a man and a
woman. They came in a very rude manner, and made a great disturbance in
the meeting. The meeting being in a field, Thomas Taylor stood up, and
said unto them, “If you will be civil, you may stay, but if not, I
charge you to be gone from off my ground.” But they were the worse, and
said they would make it like a common; and they yelled, and made a
noise, as if they had been at a bear-baiting. They thrust Friends up and
down; and Friends being peaceable, the Lord’s power came over them.
Several times they thrust me off from the place I stood on, by the
crowding of the people together against me; but still I was moved of the
Lord to stand up again, as I was thrust down. At last I was moved of the
Lord to say unto them, “if they would discourse of the things of God,
let them come up to me one by one; and if they had anything to say or to
object, I would answer them all, one after another;” but they were all
silent, and had nothing to say. And then the Lord’s power came so over
them all, and answered the witness of God in them, that they were bound
by the power of God; and a glorious, powerful meeting we had, and his
power went over all, and the minds of the people were turned by the
Spirit of God in them to God, and to Christ their teacher. The powerful
word of life was largely declared that day; and in the life and power of
God we broke up our meeting; and that rude company went their way to
HALIFAX. The people asked them, why they did not kill me, according to
the oath they had sworn; and they maliciously answered, that I had so
bewitched them, that they could not do it. Thus was the devil chained at
that time. Friends told me, that they used to come at other times, and
be very rude; and sometimes break their stools and seats, and make
frightful work amongst them; but the Lord’s power had now bound them.

Shortly after this, the butcher, that had been accused of killing a man
and a woman before, and who was one of them that had then bound himself
by an oath to kill me, killed another man, and was sent to YORK jail.
Another of those rude butchers, who had also sworn to kill me, having
accustomed himself to thrust his tongue out of his mouth, in derision of
Friends, when they passed by him, had it so swollen out of his mouth,
that he could never draw it in again, but died so. Several strange and
sudden judgments came upon many of these conspirators against me, which
would be too large here to declare. God’s vengeance from heaven came
upon the blood-thirsty, who sought after blood; for all such spirits I
laid before the Lord, and left them to him to deal with them, who is
stronger than all; in whose power I was preserved, and carried on to do
his work. The Lord hath raised a fine people in these parts, whom he
hath drawn to Christ, and gathered in his name; who feel Christ amongst
them, and sit under his teaching.

After this I came to BALBY; from whence several Friends went with me
into LINCOLNSHIRE; of whom some went to the steeple-houses, and some to
private meetings. There came to the meeting where I was, the sheriff of
LINCOLN, and several with him, who made great contention and jangling
for a time. But at length the Lord’s power struck him, that he was
convinced of the truth, and received the word of life, as did several
others also that had opposed, and continued among Friends till they
died. Great meetings there were, and a large convincement in those
parts. Many were turned to the Lord Jesus, and came to sit under his
teaching; leaving their priests, and their superstitious ways; and the
day of the Lord flourished over all. Amongst them that came to our
meetings in that country, was one called Sir Richard Wrey, who was
convinced; as was also his brother, and his brother’s wife, who abode in
the truth, and died therein, though he afterwards ran out.

Having visited these countries, I came into DERBYSHIRE; the sheriff of
LINCOLN, who was lately convinced, being with me. In one meeting we had
some opposition, but the Lord’s glorious power gave dominion over all.
At night there came a company of bailiffs and serving-men, and called me
out. I went out to them, having some Friends with me. They were
exceedingly rude and violent; for they had plotted together, and
intended to carry me away with them in the dark of the evening by force:
and then to do me a mischief; but the Lord’s power went over them, and
chained them, so that they could not effect their design; and at last
they went away. The next day, Thomas Aldam understanding that the
serving-men belonged to one called a knight, who lived not far off, went
to his house, and laid before him the bad conduct of his servants. The
knight rebuked them, and did not allow of their evil carriage towards
us.

After this we came into NOTTINGHAMSHIRE to SKEGBY, where we had a great
meeting of divers sorts of people: and the Lord’s power went over them,
and all was quiet. The people were turned to the Spirit of God, by which
many came to receive his power, and to sit under the teaching of Christ,
their Saviour. A great people the Lord hath in those parts.

I passed towards KIDSLEY PARK, where came many Ranters; but the Lord’s
power checked them. From thence I went into the PEAK COUNTRY towards
Thomas Hammersley’s, where came the Ranters of that country, and many
high professors. The Ranters opposed me, and began swearing. When I
reproved them for it, they would bring Scripture for it, and said,
Abraham, and Jacob, and Joseph swore; and the priests, Moses, the
prophets, and the angels swore. Then I told them, “I confessed all these
did so, as the Scripture records; but, said I, Christ (who said, ‘Before
Abraham was, I am’) saith, ‘Swear not at all.’ And Christ ends the
prophets, and the old priesthood, and the dispensation of Moses, and
reigns over the house of Jacob and of Joseph; and he says, ‘Swear not at
all.’ And God, when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world,
saith, ‘Let all the angels of God worship him,’ to wit, Christ Jesus,
who saith, ‘Swear not at all.’ And as for the plea that men make for
swearing to end their strife, Christ, who says, ‘Swear not at all,’
destroys the Devil and his works, who is the author of strife, for that
is one of his works. And God said, ‘This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear ye him.’ So the Son is to be heard, who forbids
swearing. And the apostle James, who heard the Son of God, followed him,
and preached him, forbids all oaths, James v. 12.” So the Lord’s power
went over them: and his Son and his doctrine was set over them. The word
of life was fully and richly preached, and many were convinced that day.
This Thomas Hammersley being summoned to serve upon a jury, was admitted
to serve without an oath; and when he, as foreman of the jury, brought
in the verdict, the judge declared, “that he had been a judge many
years, but never heard a more upright verdict than that Quaker had then
brought in.” Much might be written of things of this nature, which time
would fail to declare. But the Lord’s blessed power and truth was
exalted over all, who is worthy of all praise and glory for ever!

Travelling through DERBYSHIRE, I visited Friends till I came to
SWANNINGTON, in LEICESTERSHIRE, where there was a general meeting, to
which many Ranters, Baptists, and other professors came; for great
contests there had been with them, and with the priests in that town. To
this meeting several Friends came from various parts, as John Audland,
Francis Howgill, and Edward Pyot from BRISTOL, and Edward Burrough from
LONDON; and several were convinced in those parts. The Ranters made a
disturbance, and were very rude, but at last the Lord’s power came over
them, and they were confounded. The next day Jacob Bottomley, a great
Ranter, came from LEICESTER; but the Lord’s power stopped him, and came
over them all. There came a priest too, but he also was confounded by
the mighty power of the Lord. About this time the priests, Baptists,
Ranters, and other professors, were very rude, and stirred up the rude
people against us. We sent to the Ranters to come forth, and try their
God. Abundance of them came, who were very rude, and sung, and whistled,
and danced; but the Lord’s power so confounded them, that many of them
came to be convinced.

After this I went to TWYCROSS, whither came some Ranters, who sung and
danced before me. But I was moved in the dread of the Lord to reprove
them; and the Lord’s power came over them, so that some of them were
convinced, and received the Spirit of God; and are become a fine people,
living and walking soberly in the truth of Christ. I went to Anthony
Brickley’s in WARWICKSHIRE, where there was a great meeting; several
Baptists and other people came and jangled; but the Lord’s power came
over them.

Then I went to DRAYTON in LEICESTERSHIRE to visit my relations. As soon
as I was come in, Nathaniel Stephens the priest, having got another
priest, and given notice to the country, sent to me to come to them, as
they could not do anything till I came. Having been three years away
from my relations, I knew nothing of their design. But at last I went
into the steeple-house yard, where the two priests were; and they had
gathered abundance of people. When I came there, they would have me go
into the steeple-house. I asked them what I should do there; and they
said, Mr. Stephens could not bear the cold. I told them he might bear it
as well as I. At last we went into a great hall, Richard Farnsworth
being with me; and a great dispute we had with these priests, concerning
their practices, how contrary they were to Christ and his apostles. The
priests would know where tithes were forbidden or ended. I showed them
out of the seventh chapter to the Hebrews, “that not only tithes but the
priesthood that took tithes, was ended; and the law was ended and
disannulled, by which the priesthood was made, and tithes were commanded
to be paid.” Then the priests stirred up the people to some lightness
and rudeness. I had known Stephens from a child, therefore I laid open
his condition, and the manner of his preaching; and “how that he, like
the rest of the priests, did apply the promises to the first birth,
which must die. But I showed that the promises were to the Seed, not to
the many seeds, but to one Seed, Christ; who was one in male and female;
for all were to be born again before they could enter into the kingdom
of God.” Then he said, I must not judge so: but I told him, “he that was
spiritual judged all things.” Then he confessed that that was a full
Scripture; “but, neighbours,” said he, “this is the business; George Fox
is come to the light of the sun, and now he thinks to put out my
star-light.” I told him, “I would not quench the least measure of God in
any, much less put out his star-light, if it were true star-light—light
from the morning star.” But I told him, “if he had anything from Christ
or God, he ought to speak it freely, and not take tithes from the people
for preaching, seeing Christ commanded his ministers to give freely, as
they had received freely.” So I charged him to preach no more for
tithes, or any hire. But he said he would not yield to that. After a
while the people began to be vain and rude; so we broke up; yet some
were made loving to the truth that day. Before we parted, I told them
that, if the Lord would, I intended to be at the town again that day
week.

In the interim I went into the country, and had meetings, and came
thither again that day week. Against that time this priest had got seven
priests to help him: for priest Stephens had given notice at a lecture
on a market-day at ATHERSTONE, that such a day there would be a meeting
and a dispute with me. I knew nothing of it; but had only said, I should
be in town that day week again. These eight priests had gathered several
hundreds of people, even most of the country thereabouts, and they would
have had me into the steeple-house; but I would not go in, but got on a
hill and there spoke to them and the people. There were with me Thomas
Taylor, who had been a priest, James Parnell, and several other Friends.
The priests thought that day to trample down truth; but the truth came
over them. Then they grew light, and the people rude; and the priests
would not stand trial with me; but would be contending here and there a
little, with one Friend or other. At last one of the priests brought his
son to dispute with me; but his mouth was soon stopped. When he could
not tell how to answer, he would ask his father: and his father was
confounded also, when he came to answer for his son. So, after they had
toiled themselves, they went away in a rage to priest Stephens’ house to
drink. As they went away, I said, “I never came to a place where so many
priests together would not stand the trial with me.” Whereupon they and
some of their wives came about me, laid hold of me, and fawningly said,
“what might I have been, if it had not been for the Quakers!” Then they
began to push Friends to and fro, to thrust them from me, and to pluck
me to themselves. After a while several lusty fellows came, took me up
in their arms, and carried me into the steeple-house porch, intending to
carry me into the steeple-house by force; but the door being locked,
they fell down on a heap, having me under them. As soon as I could, I
got up from under them, and went to the hill again: then they took me
from that place to the steeple-house wall, and set me on something like
a footstool; and all the priests being come back, stood under with the
people. The priests cried, “Come, to argument, to argument:” I said, “I
denied all their voices, for they were the voices of hirelings and
strangers.” And they cried, “Prove it, prove it.” Then I directed them
to the tenth of John, where they might see what Christ said of such; he
declared, “he was the true shepherd that laid down his life for his
sheep, and his sheep heard his voice, and followed him; but the hireling
would fly, when the wolf came, because he was a hireling.” I offered to
prove that they were such hirelings. Then the priests plucked me off
from the stool again; and they themselves got all upon footstools under
the steeple-house wall.

Then I felt the mighty power of God arise over all, and told them, “if
they would but give audience, and hear me quietly, I would show them by
the Scriptures, why I denied those eight priests or teachers, that stood
before me; and all the hireling teachers of the world whatsoever; and I
would give them Scriptures for what I said.” Whereupon both priests and
people consented. Then I showed them out of the prophets Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Micah, Malachi, and others, that they were in the
steps of such as God sent his true prophets to cry against; for, said I,
“You are such as the prophet Jeremiah cried against, chap. v. when he
said, ‘The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their
means;’ which he called an astonishing and horrible thing. You are such
as they that used their tongues and said, Thus saith the Lord, when the
Lord never spoke to them: and such as followed their own spirits, and
saw nothing; but spoke forth a divination of their own brain; and by
their lies and their lightness had caused the people to err, Jer. xiv.
You are such as they were, that sought for their gain from their
quarter; that were as greedy, dumb dogs, that could never have enough,
whom the Lord sent his prophet Isaiah to cry against, Isaiah lvi. You
are such, as they were, who taught for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread; who sewed pillows under people’s arm-holes, that they might lie
soft in their sins, Ezek. xiii. You are such as they that taught for the
fleece, and the wool, and made a prey of the people, Ezek. xxxiv. But
the Lord is gathering his sheep from your mouths, and from off your
barren mountains; and is bringing them to Christ, the one Shepherd, whom
he hath set over his flocks; as by his prophet Ezekiel he then declared
he would do. You are such as they that divined for money, and preached
for hire; and if a man did not put into their mouths, they prepared war
against him, as the prophet Micah complained, chap. iii.” Thus I went
through the prophets, too largely to be here repeated. Then coming to
the New Testament, I showed from thence, “that they were like the chief
priests, and scribes, and Pharisees of old, such as Christ cried woe
against, Matt, xxiii. And that they were such false apostles, as the
true apostles cried against, such as taught for filthy lucre; such
antichrists and deceivers, as they cried against, that minded earthly
things, and served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies: for
they that served Christ gave freely, and preached freely, as he
commanded them. But they that will not preach without hire, tithes, or
outward means, serve their own bellies, and not Christ; and through the
good words of the Scriptures, and feigned words of their own, they made
merchandise of the people then, as (said I) ye do now.”

So when I had largely quoted the Scriptures, and showed them, wherein
they were like the Pharisees, loving to be called of men masters, and to
go in long robes, and to stand praying in the synagogues, and to have
the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the like; and when I had thrown them
out in the sight of the people amongst the false prophets, deceivers,
scribes, and Pharisees, and showed at large, how such as they were
judged and condemned by the true prophets, by Christ, and by the
apostles, “I directed them to the light of Christ Jesus, who enlightens
every man that cometh into the world; that by it they might see, whether
these things were not true, as had been spoken.” When I appealed to that
of God in their consciences, the light of Christ Jesus in them, they
could not bear to hear of it; they were all quiet till then; but then a
professor said, “George, what! wilt thou never have done?” I told him, I
should have done shortly. So I went on a little longer, and cleared
myself of them in the Lord’s power. When I had done, all the priests and
people stood silent for a time: at last one of the priests said, they
would read the Scriptures that I had quoted. I told them, with all my
heart. They began to read the 23rd of Jeremiah, and there they saw the
marks of the false prophets, that he cried against. When they had read a
verse or two, I said, “Take notice, people:” but the priests said, “Hold
thy tongue, George.” I bid them read the whole chapter throughout; for
it was all against them: then they stopped, and would read no further;
but asked me a question. I told them, I would answer their question, the
matter being first granted that I had charged them with, viz., that they
were false prophets, false teachers, antichrists, and deceivers, such as
the true prophets, Christ, and the apostles cried against. A professor
said Nay to that; but I said, “Yea; for you leaving the matter, and
going to another thing, seem to consent to the proof of the former
charge.” Then I answered their question, which was this; Seeing those
false prophets were adulterated, whether I did judge Stephens to be an
adulterer? To which I answered, he was adulterated from God in his
practice, like those false prophets and the Jews. They would not stand
to vindicate him, but broke up the meeting. Then the priests whispered
together; and priest Stephens came to me, and desired that my father and
brother and I might go aside with him, that he might speak to me in
private; and the rest of the priests should keep the people from coming
to us. I was very loath to go aside with him; but the people cried, “Go,
George; do, George, go aside with him.” I was afraid, if I did not go,
they would say, I was disobedient to my parents; so I went, and the rest
of the priests were to keep the people off; but they could not, for the
people being willing to hear, drew close to us. I asked the priest what
he had to say; and he said, “if he was out of the way, I should pray for
him: and if I was out of the way he would pray for me: and he would give
me a form of words to pray for him by.” I replied, “It seems thou dost
not know whether thou art in the right way, or not; neither dost thou
know whether I am in the right way, or not; but I know that I am in the
everlasting way, Christ Jesus, which thou art out of. And thou wouldest
give me a form of words to pray by, and yet thou deniest the Common
Prayer-Book to pray by, as well as I; and I deny thy form of words, as
well as it. If thou wouldst have me pray for thee by a form of words, is
not this to deny the apostle’s doctrine and practice of praying by the
Spirit, as it gave words and utterance?” Here the people fell a
laughing: but I was moved to speak more to him. And when I had cleared
myself to him and them, we parted, after I had told them, that I should
(God willing) be in the town that day week again. So the priests packed
away, and many people were convinced; for the Lord’s power came over
all. Though they thought to have confounded truth that day, many were
convinced of it; and many that were convinced before, were by that day’s
work confirmed in the truth, and abode in it; and a great shake it gave
to the priests. My father, though he was a hearer and follower of the
priest, was so well satisfied, that he struck his cane upon the ground,
and said, “Truly, I see, he that will but stand to the truth, it will
carry him out.”

I passed about in the country till that day week, and then came again;
for we had appointed a meeting at my relations’ house. Now priest
Stephens having had notice beforehand thereof, had got another priest to
him; and they had a company of troopers with them, and sent for me to
come to them. But I sent them word our meeting was appointed, and they
might come to it, if they would. The priests came not; but the troopers
came, and many rude people. They had laid their plot, that the troopers
should take every one’s name, and then command them to go home; and such
as would not go, they should take, and carry them away with them.
Accordingly they began, and took several names, charging them to go
home; but when they came to take my name, my relations told them, I was
at home already: so they could not take me away that time. Nevertheless
they took my name: but the Lord’s power was over them, and they went
away, both professors and troopers, crossed and vexed, because they
obtained not their end. But several were convinced that day, and admired
the love and power of God. This was that priest Stephens, who once said
of me, “never was such a plant bred in England:” yet afterwards he
reported, “that I was carried up into the clouds, and found again full
of gold and silver;” and many lies, and false reports he raised
respecting me: but the Lord swept them all away. The reason why I would
not go into their steeple-house was, because I was to bear my testimony
against it, and to bring all off from such places, to the Spirit of God;
that they might know their bodies to be the temples of the Holy Ghost;
and to bring them off from all the hireling teachers, to Christ their
free teacher, who died for them, and purchased them with his blood.

After this I went into the country, and had several meetings, and came
to SWANNINGTON, where the soldiers came again; but the meeting was
quiet, the Lord’s power was over all, and the soldiers did not
interfere. Then I went to LEICESTER, and then to WHETSTONE. There came
about seventeen troopers of Colonel Hacker’s regiment, with his marshal,
and took me up before the meeting, though Friends were beginning to
gather together; for there were several Friends come from various parts.
I told the marshal, “he might let all the Friends go, I would answer for
them all;” so he took me, and let them go, except Alexander Parker, who
went with me.[35] At night they had me before Colonel Hacker, his major,
and captains, a great company of them; and much discourse we had about
the priests, and meetings, for at this time there was a rumour of a plot
against Oliver Cromwell. Much reasoning I had with them about the light
of Christ, which enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world.
Colonel Hacker asked, whether it was not this light of Christ that made
Judas betray his master, and afterwards led him to hang himself? I told
him, “No; that was the spirit of darkness, which hated Christ and his
light.” Then Colonel Hacker said, I might go home, and keep there, and
not go abroad to meetings. I told him, “I was an innocent man, free from
plots, and denied all such work.” His son Needham said, “Father, this
man hath reigned too long, it is time to have him cut off.” I asked him,
“For what? what had I done? or whom had I wronged from a child? for I
was bred and born in that country, and who could accuse me of any evil
from a child?” Then Colonel Hacker asked me again, if I would go home,
and stay there? I told him, “if I should promise him that, it would
manifest that I was guilty of something, to go home, and make my home a
prison; and if I went to meetings, they would say, I broke their order.”
I told them, “I should go to meetings, as the Lord should order me, and
therefore could not submit to their requirings;” but I said, “we were a
peaceable people.” “Well then,” said Colonel Hacker, “I will send you to
my Lord Protector, by Captain Drury, one of his life-guards.”

Footnote 35:

  “Alexander Parker,” says Whiting, “was an eminent servant of God, and
  minister of Jesus Christ; born near Bolton, in Lancashire,
  well-educated, and had a gentleman-like carriage and deportment, for I
  knew him well.” He travelled extensively in the service of the gospel,
  often in company with George Fox, being frequently mentioned in this
  Journal. He suffered fines, imprisonments, and persecution, being once
  pulled down as he was preaching in London, and fined for it £20. He
  died in great peace in 1689, having written many books and epistles,
  in which, though being dead, he yet speaketh.

That night I was kept a prisoner at the Marshalsea; and the next morning
by six o’clock, I was delivered to Captain Drury. I desired he would let
me speak with Colonel Hacker before I went, and he had me to his
bed-side. Colonel Hacker set upon me presently again, to go home and
keep no more meetings. I told him, “I could not submit to that, but must
have my liberty to serve God and go to meetings.” “Then,” said he, “you
must go before the Protector.” “Whereupon I kneeled by his bedside, and
besought the Lord to forgive him, for he was as Pilate, though he would
wash his hands; and when the day of his misery and trial should come
upon him, I bid him then remember what I had said to him. But he was
stirred up, and set on by priest Stephens, and the other priests and
professors, wherein their envy and baseness was manifest; who, when they
could not overcome me by disputes and arguments, nor resist the Spirit
of the Lord that was in me, then they got soldiers to take me up.

Afterwards, when this Colonel Hacker was in prison in LONDON, a day or
two before he was executed, he was put in mind of what he had done
against the innocent; and he remembered it, and confessed to it to
Margaret Fell, saying he knew well whom she meant; and he had a trouble
upon him for it. So his son, who told his father I had reigned too long,
and that it was time to have me cut off, might observe how his father
was cut off afterwards, he being hanged at TYBURN.

Now was I carried up a prisoner by Captain Drury from LEICESTER; and
when we came to HARBOROUGH, he asked me, if I would go home and stay a
fortnight? “I should have my liberty,” he said, “if I would not go to,
nor keep meetings.” I told him, “I could not promise any such thing.”
Several times upon the road did he ask, and try me after the same
manner, and still I gave him the same answers. So he brought me to
LONDON, and lodged me at the Mermaid over-against the Mews at
CHARING-CROSS. As we travelled, I was moved of the Lord to warn people
at the inns and places, where I came, of the day of the Lord that was
coming upon them. William Dewsbury and Marmaduke Storr being in prison
at NORTHAMPTON, he let me go and visit them.

After Captain Drury had lodged me at the Mermaid, he left me there, and
went to give the Protector an account of me. When he came to me again,
he told me, the Protector required that I should promise not to take up
a carnal sword or weapon against him or the government, as it then was,
and I should write it in what words I saw good, and set my hand to it. I
said little in reply to Captain Drury. But the next morning I was moved
of the Lord to write a paper to the Protector, Oliver Cromwell; “Wherein
I did in the presence of the Lord God declare, that I denied the wearing
or drawing of a carnal sword, or any other outward weapon, against him
or any man: and that I was sent of God to stand a witness against all
violence, and against the works of darkness; and to turn people from
darkness to light; and to bring them from the causes of war and
fighting, to the peaceable gospel, and from being evil-doers, which the
magistrates’ swords should be a terror to.” When I had written what the
Lord had given me to write, I set my name to it, and gave it to Captain
Drury to hand to Oliver Cromwell, which he did.

After some time Captain Drury brought me before the Protector himself at
WHITEHALL. It was in a morning, before he was dressed, and one Harvey,
who had come a little among Friends, but was disobedient, waited upon
him. When I came in, I was moved to say, “Peace be in this house; and I
exhorted him to keep in the fear of God, that he might receive wisdom
from Him, that by it he might be directed, and order all things under
his hand to God’s glory.” I spoke much to him of truth, and much
discourse I had with him about religion; wherein he carried himself very
moderately. But, he said, we quarrelled with priests, whom he called
ministers. I told him, “I did not quarrel with them, but they quarrelled
with me and my friends.” “But,” said I, “if we own the prophets, Christ,
and the apostles, we cannot hold up such teachers, prophets, and
shepherds, as the prophets, Christ, and the apostles declared against;
but we must declare against them by the same power and Spirit.” Then I
showed him, “that the prophets, Christ, and the apostles declared
freely, and against them that did not declare freely; such as preached
for filthy lucre, and divined for money, and preached for hire, and were
covetous and greedy, that can never have enough; and that they that have
the same Spirit, that Christ, and the prophets, and the apostles had,
could not but declare against all such now, as they did then.” As I
spoke, he several times said, it was very good, and it was truth. I told
him, “that all Christendom (so called) possessed the Scriptures, but
wanted the power and Spirit that they had, who gave forth the
Scriptures, and that was the reason they were not in fellowship with the
Son, nor with the Father, nor with the Scriptures, nor one with
another.”

Many more words I had with him, but people coming in, I drew a little
back; and as I was turning, he caught me by the hand, and with tears in
his eyes, said, “Come again to my house, for if thou and I were but an
hour a day together, we should be nearer one to the other;” adding that
he wished me no more ill than he did his own soul. I told him, “if he
did, he wronged his own soul;” and I bid him “hearken to God’s voice,
that he might stand in His counsel and obey it; and if he did so, that
would keep him from hardness of heart; but if he did not hear God’s
voice, his heart would be hardened.” He said, it was true. Then I went
out; and when Captain Drury came out after me, he told me, “his lord
Protector said, I was at liberty, and might go whither I would.” Then I
was brought into a great hall, where the Protector’s gentlemen were to
dine; and I asked them, what they brought me thither for? they said, it
was by the Protector’s order, that I might dine with them. I bid them
let the Protector know, I would not eat of his bread, nor drink of his
drink. When he heard this, he said, “Now I see there is a people risen
and come up, that I cannot win either with gifts, honours, offices, or
places; but all other sects and people I can.” It was told him again,
“that we had forsaken our own, and were not likely to look for such
things from him.”

Being set at liberty I went to the inn again, where Captain Drury had at
first lodged me. This Captain Drury, though he sometimes carried fairly,
was an enemy to me and to truth, and opposed it; and when professors
came to me (while I was under his custody,) and he was by, he would
scoff at trembling, and call us Quakers, as the Independents and
Presbyterians had nick-named us before. But afterwards he once came to
me, and told me, that, as he was lying on his bed to rest himself in the
day-time, a sudden trembling seized on him, that his joints knocked
together, and his body shook so that he could not rise from his bed; he
was so shaken, that he had not strength enough left to rise. But he felt
the power of the Lord was upon him, and he fell off his bed, and cried
to the Lord, and said, he never would speak against the Quakers more, or
such as trembled at the word of God.

During the time I was prisoner at CHARING-CROSS, there came abundance to
see me, people of almost all sorts, priests, professors, officers of the
army, &c. And one time a company of officers being with me, desired me
to pray with them. I sat still, with my mind retired to the Lord. At
last I felt the power and Spirit of God move in me, and the Lord’s power
did so shake and shatter them, that they wondered, though they did not
live in it.

Among those that came to see me, was one Colonel Packer, with several of
his officers; and while they were with me, came in one Cobb, and a great
company of Ranters with him. The Ranters began to call for drink and
tobacco; but I desired them to forbear it in my room, telling them, if
they had such a desire for it, they might go into another room. One of
them cried, “all is ours;” and another said, “all is well.” I replied,
“how is all well, while thou art so peevish, and envious, and crabbed?”
for I saw he was of a peevish nature. I spoke to their conditions, and
they were sensible of it, and looked upon one another, wondering.

Then Colonel Packer began to talk with a light, chaffy mind, concerning
God, and Christ, and the Scriptures; it was a great grief to my soul and
spirit, when I heard him talk so lightly; so that I told him, “he was
too light to talk of the things of God, for he did not know the solidity
of a man.” Thereupon the officers raged, and said, would I say so of
their colonel. This Packer was a Baptist, and he and the Ranters bowed
and scraped to one another very much; for it was the manner of the
Ranters to be exceedingly complimental (as they call it), so that Packer
bid them give over their compliments; but I told them, “they were fit to
go together, for they were both of one spirit.”

This Colonel Packer lived at THEOBALDS near WALTHAM, and was made a
justice of peace. He set up a great meeting of the Baptists at THEOBALDS
PARK; for he and some other officers had purchased it. They were
exceedingly high, and railed against Friends and truth, and threatened
to apprehend me with their warrants if ever I came there. Yet after I
was set at liberty, I was moved of the Lord God to go down to THEOBALDS,
and appoint a meeting hard by them; to which many of his people came,
and divers of his hearers were convinced of the way of truth, and
received Christ, the free teacher, and came off from him; and that made
him rage the more. But the Lord’s power came over him, so that he had
not power to meddle with me. Then I went to WALTHAM close by him, and
had a meeting there; but the people were very rude, and gathered about
the house and broke the windows. Whereupon I went out to them, with the
Bible in my hand, and desired them to come in; and told them, “I would
show them Scripture both for our principles and practices.” And when I
had done so, I showed them also, “that their teachers were in the steps
of such, as the prophets, and Christ, and the apostles testified
against.” Then I directed them to the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God
in their own hearts, that by it they might come to know their free
teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. The meeting being ended, they went away
quieted and satisfied, and a meeting has since been settled in that
town. But this was some time after I was set at liberty by Oliver
Cromwell.

When I came from WHITEHALL to the Mermaid at CHARING-CROSS, I stayed not
long there; but went into the city of LONDON, where we had great and
powerful meetings; so great were the throngs of people, that I could
hardly get to and from the meetings for the crowds; and the truth spread
exceedingly. Thomas Aldam and Robert Craven, who had been sheriff of
LINCOLN, and many Friends, came up to LONDON after me; but Alexander
Parker abode with me.

After a while I went to WHITEHALL again, and was moved “to declare the
day of the Lord amongst them, and that the Lord was come to teach his
people himself;” so I preached truth both to the officers, and to them
that were called Oliver’s gentlemen, who were of his guard. But a priest
opposed, while I was declaring the word of the Lord amongst them; for
Oliver had several priests about him, of which this was his news-monger;
an envious priest, and a light, scornful, chaffy man. I bid him repent;
and he put it in his newspaper the next week, that I had been at
WHITEHALL, and had bid a godly minister there repent. When I went
thither again, I met with him; and abundance of people gathered about
me. I manifested the priest to be a liar in several things that he had
affirmed; and so he was silenced. He put in the news, that I wore silver
buttons, which was false, for they were but alchymy. Afterwards he said
in the news, that I hung ribands on people’s arms, which made them
follow me; this was another of his lies, for I never wore or used
ribands in my life. Three Friends went to examine this priest, that gave
forth this false intelligence, and to know of him where he had that
information. He said, it was a woman that told him so; and if they would
come again, he would tell them her name. When they returned, he said it
was a man, but would not mention his name then; but if they would come
again, he would tell them his name, and where he lived. They went the
third time, and then he would not say who told him; but offered, if I
would give it under my hand, that there was no such thing, he would put
that into the news. Thereupon the Friends carried it to him under my
hand; but when they came, he broke his promise, and would not insert it;
but was in a rage, and threatened them with the constable. This was the
deceitful doing of this forger of lies; which he spread over all the
nation in the news, to render truth odious, and to put evil into
people’s minds against Friends and truth; of which a more large account
may be seen in a book printed soon after this time, for the clearing of
Friends and truth from the slanders, lies, and false reports raised and
cast upon them. These priests, the news-mongers, were of the Independent
sect, like those in LEICESTER; but the Lord’s power came over all their
lies, and swept them away; and many came to see the naughtiness of these
priests. The God of Heaven carried me over all in his power, and his
blessed power went over the nation: insomuch, that many Friends about
this time were moved to go up and down, to sound forth the everlasting
gospel in most parts of it, and also in SCOTLAND: and the glory of the
Lord was felt over all to his everlasting praise. A great convincement
there was in LONDON, and some in the Protector’s house and family; I
went to see him again, but could not get access to him, the officers
were grown so rude.

The Presbyterians, Independents, and Baptists, were greatly disturbed;
for many of their people turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and sat down
under his teachings: they received his power, and felt it in their
hearts: and then they were moved of the Lord to declare against the rest
of them.

I appointed a meeting in the fields near ACTON, in which the word of
life, the saving truth, was declared freely. The Lord’s power was
eminently manifested, and his blessed day exalted over all.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

1654-1655.—Address to professors of Christianity against persecution—to
    such as follow the world’s fashions—to the Pope, and all kings, and
    rulers in Europe, against persecution—to the justices appointed for
    trying ministers of religion, being a testimony against hireling
    ministers—Samuel Fisher and others are convinced at a meeting at
    Romney, where the Lord’s power is marvellously displayed—a large
    meeting at Coggeshall of about two thousand people, which lasted
    several hours—many reproaches are cast upon the truth, and lying
    slanderous books published, which are answered, and the truth set
    over the gainsayers—to those who scorn trembling and quaking—great
    rage is manifested against the truth and Friends, and their
    plainness is contemned—to the churches gathered into outward forms,
    opening their state and warning of the woes coming upon them—to the
    Protector, respecting the imprisonment of Friends for refusing to
    take oaths and pay tithes, &c.—to Friends, to offer themselves to
    lie in prison for a brother or sister—an encouragement to Friends in
    their several exercises.


About this time I was moved to write a paper, and send it among the
professors; as follows:—

  “_To all professors of Christianity._

  “All they that professed Jesus Christ in words, and yet heard him not
  when he was come, said, he was a deceiver and a devil. The chief
  priests called him so. The Jews said, ‘He hath a devil, and is mad;
  why do ye hear him?’ But others said, ‘These are not the words of him
  that hath a devil: can a devil open the eyes of the blind?’ The Jews
  then doubted, whether he was the Christ or not; and so all, like the
  Jews, in the knowledge, in the notion, that profess Christ without
  only, where Christ is risen within, do not own him, but doubt of him;
  though Christ is the same now and for ever. Jesus Christ said, ‘I and
  my Father are one;’ then the Jews took up stones to stone him. And
  where Jesus Christ is now spiritually come and made manifest, such as
  are Christians in outward profession only, have the same hard hearts
  inwardly now, as the Jews had then; and cast stones at him where he is
  risen. Jesus said, ‘For which of these good works do ye stone me?’ The
  Jews answered, ‘For thy good works we stone thee not; but for
  blasphemy, in that thou being a man, makest thyself God.’ Jesus
  answered them, ‘Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?
  and the Scripture cannot be broken. Say ye of him, whom the Father
  hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I
  said, I am the Son of God?’ The Jews said to him, ‘Say we not well,
  that thou hast a devil?’ Jesus answered, ‘I honour my Father, and ye
  dishonour me.’ And they that were in the synagogue rose up, and thrust
  him out of the city; and took him up to the edge of the hill whereon
  their city was built, to cast him down headlong. The pharisees said of
  him, ‘He casteth out devils, by the prince of devils.’ Jesus Christ
  was called a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
  sinners; but wisdom is justified of her children. The officers, when
  the high-priests and pharisees asked them, ‘Why have ye not brought
  him?’ said, ‘Never man spake like this man.’ The Pharisees said, ‘Are
  ye also deceived? Do any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believe on
  him?’ but this people, which know not the law, are accursed. Nicodemus
  (he that came unto Jesus by night), said unto them, ‘Doth our law
  judge any man, before it hear him?’ When Stephen confessed Jesus, the
  substance of all figures and types, and was brought before the chief
  priests to his trial, he told them, ‘The Most High dwelleth not in
  temples made with hands:’ and brought the prophets’ words to witness,
  and told them they were stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and
  ears, and always resisted the Holy Ghost, as their fathers had done.
  Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, and said he saw Jesus, and they
  ran upon him and stoned him to death, as he was calling upon the Lord.
  When Paul confessed Jesus Christ and his resurrection, Festus said he
  was mad. When Paul preached the resurrection, some mocked; the Jews
  persuaded the people, and they stoned him, and drew him out of the
  city, thinking he had been dead. They stirred up the Gentiles to make
  their minds evil-affected towards the brethren. They stirred up the
  devout and honourable women, and the chief of the city, and raised
  persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
  coasts; and there was an assault made both of the Gentiles and of the
  Jews with their rulers, to use them despitefully and to stone them. In
  like manner all in the nature of those Jews now, whose religion stands
  in notions, stir up the rulers, and ignorant people, and incense them
  against Jesus Christ, to stone all with one consent, in whom he is
  risen. This is, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, and the
  blindness of the people discovered.

  “The same power now is made manifest, and doth overturn the world, as
  did then overturn the world, to the exalting of the Lord, and to the
  pulling down of the kingdom of Satan and of this world, and setting up
  his own kingdom, to his everlasting praise. The Lord is now exalting
  himself, and throwing down man’s self. The proud one’s head is aloft,
  fearing he should lose his pride and his crown. The priests incense
  the ignorant people, for fear their trade should go down; and the
  professors show forth what is in them, being full of rage; which
  proves that Jesus Christ, the substance, is not there; but a stony
  heart to stone the precious, where it is risen. The carnal mind feeds
  upon the outward letter; earth feeds upon earth; and that vineyard is
  not dressed, but is full of briars and nettles; and ravenous beasts,
  swine and dogs, wolves and lions, and all venomous creatures lodge in
  that habitation. That house is foul and is not swept. These are the
  persecutors of the just, enemies of the truth, and of Christ;
  blasphemers of God and his truth. These call upon God with their lips,
  but their hearts are far from him. These feed on lies, priests and
  people. These incense the people, and stir up envy; for it begets its
  own, one like itself. These are as the waves of the sea, foaming out
  their own shame. These have double eyes, whose bodies are full of
  darkness. These paint themselves with the prophets’, with Christ’s,
  and with the apostles’ words most fair. Whited walls ye are; painted
  sepulchres; murderers of the just. Your eyes, your minds, your hearts
  are double. Ye flatterers, repent and turn from your carnal ends, who
  are full of mischief, pretending God and godliness, taking him for
  your cloak; but he will uncover you, and he hath uncovered you to his
  children. He will make you bare, discover your secrets, and take off
  your crown; he will take away your mantle and your veil, and strip you
  of your clothing, that your nakedness may appear, and how you sit
  deceiving the nations. Your abomination and your falseness is now made
  manifest to them, who are of God; who in his power triumph over you,
  rejoice over you, the beast, the dragon, the false prophet, the
  seducer, the hypocrite, the mother of all harlots. Now thou must have
  thy cup double, give it to her double.

  “Sing over her, ye righteous ones, sing over them all ye saints;
  triumph in glory, triumph over deceit; sing the song of the Lamb,
  triumph over the world; spread the truth abroad. Come ye captive ones
  out of prison, and rejoice with one accord, for the joyful days are
  coming. Let us be glad and rejoice for ever! singleness of heart is
  come, pureness of heart is come, joy and gladness is come. The
  glorious God is exalting himself: truth hath been talked of, but now
  it is possessed. Christ hath been talked of; but now he is come and is
  possessed. The glory hath been talked of; but now it is possessed, and
  the glory of man is defacing. The Son of God hath been talked of; but
  now he is come, and hath given us understanding. Unity hath been
  talked of; but now it is come. Virgins have been talked of; but now
  they are come with oil in their lamps. He will be glorified alone.

  “Where pride is thrown down, earth and the fleshly will is thrown
  down, and the pure is raised up; there alone is the Lord exalted. Let
  the heavens bow down to him, and the earth reel to and fro, and
  stagger up and down. The Lord is setting up his throne and his crown,
  and throwing down the crown of man, and he alone will be glorified; to
  whom be all honour and glory, all praises and all thanks! Who gives
  his children wisdom and strength, knowledge and virtue, power and
  riches, blessings and durable substance; an eye to discern, and an ear
  to hear things singly; and brings down the pride of man’s heart, and
  turns the wicked out of the kingdom. The righteous inherit
  righteousness; the pure, pureness; the holy, holiness. Praises,
  praises be to the Lord, whose glory now shines, whose day is broken
  forth; which is hid from the world, hid from all worldly-wise ones,
  and from all the prudent of this world; hid from the fowls of the air,
  hid from all vultures’ eyes, all venomous beasts, all liars, all dogs,
  and all swine. But to them that fear his name, the secrets of the Lord
  are made manifest, the treasures of wisdom are opened, and the fulness
  of knowledge: for thou, O Lord, dost make thyself manifest to thy
  children.”

                                                               G. F.

My spirit was greatly burdened to see the pride, that existed in the
nation, even among professors; and in the sense thereof I was moved to
give forth the following paper, directed—

  “_To such as follow the World’s Fashions._

  “What a world is this! how doth the devil garnish himself! and how
  obedient are people to do his will and mind! They are altogether so
  carried away with fooleries and vanities, both men and women, that
  they have lost the hidden man of the heart, and the meek and quiet
  spirit; which with the Lord is of great price. They have lost the
  adorning of Sarah; they are putting on gold and gay apparel; women
  plaiting the hair, men and women powdering it; making their backs look
  like bags of meal. They look so strange, that they can scarce look at
  one another, they are so lifted up in pride. Pride is flown up into
  their head, and hath so lifted them up, that they snuff up, like wild
  asses; like Ephraim, they feed upon wind; and are like wild heifers,
  who feed upon the mountains. Pride hath puffed up every one of them:
  they are out of the fear of God, men and women, young and old; one
  puffs up another. They must be in the fashion of the world, else they
  are not in esteem; else they shall not be respected, if they have not
  gold or silver upon their backs, or if the hair be not powdered. But
  if he have store of ribands hanging about his waist, and at his knees,
  and in his hat, of divers colours, red, white, black, or yellow, and
  his hair be powdered, then he is a brave man; then he is accepted, he
  is no Quaker, because he has ribands on his back, and front, and
  knees, and his hair powdered. This is the array of the world. But is
  not this from the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, or the pride
  of life?

  “Likewise the women having their gold, their patches on their faces,
  noses, cheeks, foreheads; having their rings on their fingers, wearing
  gold, having their cuffs double, under and above, like unto a butcher
  with his white sleeves; having their ribands tied about their hands,
  and three or four gold laces about their clothes; this is no Quaker,
  say they. This attire pleaseth the world: and if they cannot get these
  things, they are discontented. But this is not the attire of Sarah,
  whose adorning was the hidden man of the heart, the ornament of a
  quiet and meek spirit. This is the adorning of the heathen, not of the
  apostle, nor of the saints, whose adorning was, not wearing of gold,
  nor plaiting of hair, but a meek and quiet spirit; which was and is of
  great price with the Lord. Here was the sobriety and good ornament,
  which was accepted of the Lord. This was Paul’s exhortation and
  preaching; but we see, the talkers of Paul’s words live out of Paul’s
  command, and out of the example of Sarah; and are found in the steps
  of the great heathen, who comes to examine the apostles in his
  gorgeous apparel.

  “Now, are not these, that have got their ribands hanging about their
  arms, hands, back, waists, knees, hats, like unto fiddlers’ boys? This
  shows that you are got into the basest and most contemptible life, who
  are in the fashion of the fiddler’s boys and stage-players, quite out
  of the paths and steps of solid men; and in the very steps and paths
  of the wild heads, who give themselves up to every invention and
  vanity of the world that appears, and are inventing how to get it upon
  their backs, heads, feet, and legs, and say, if it be out of the
  fashion it is nothing worth. Are not these the spoilers of the
  creation, who have the fat and the best of it, and waste and destroy
  it? Do not these cumber God’s earth? Let that of God in all
  consciences answer, and those who are in the wisdom, judge. And
  further, if one get a pair of trousers like a coat, and hang them
  about with points, and up almost to the middle, a pair of double cuffs
  upon his hands, and a feather in his cap, here is a gentleman; bow
  before him, put off your hats, get a company of fiddlers, a set of
  music, and women to dance. This is a brave fellow. Up in the chamber;
  up in the chamber without, and up in the chamber within. Are these
  your fine Christians? Yea, say they, they are Christians.

  “But, say the serious people, they are out of Christ’s life, and out
  of the apostles’ command, and out of the saints’ ornament. And to see
  such as are before described, as are in the fashions of the world
  before-mentioned, a company of them playing at bowls, or at tables, or
  at shuffle-board; or each taking his horse, that has bunches of
  ribands on his head, as the rider has on his own (who, perhaps, has a
  ring in his ear too) and so go to horse-racing, to spoil the
  creatures; O, these are gentlemen indeed, these are bred up gentlemen,
  these are brave fellows, and they must take their recreation; for
  pleasures are lawful. These in their sports set up their shouts, like
  wild asses. They are like the kine or beasts, when they are put to
  grass, lowing when they are full. Here is the glorying of those before
  mentioned; but it is in the flesh, not in the Lord. These are bad
  Christians, and show that they are gluttoned with the creatures, and
  then the flesh rejoiceth. Here is bad breeding of youth and young
  women, who are carried away with the vanities of the mind in their own
  inventions, pride, arrogancy, lust, gluttony, uncleanness. They eat
  and drink, and rise up to the play. This is the generation which God
  is not well-pleased with; for their eyes are full of adultery, and
  cannot cease from evil. These be they that live in pleasures upon
  earth; these be they who are dead while they live; who glory not in
  the Lord, but in the flesh. These be they that are out of the life,
  that the Scriptures were given forth from; who live in the fashions
  and vanities of the world, out of truth’s adorning, in the devil’s
  adorning (who is out of the truth); and not in the adorning of the
  Lord, which is a meek and quiet spirit, which is with the Lord of
  great price. But this ornament and this adorning is not put on by them
  that adorn themselves, and have the ornament of him that is out of the
  truth. That is not accepted with the Lord, which is accepted in their
  eye.”

                                                               G. F.

Moreover it came upon me about this time from the Lord, to write a short
paper and send forth, as an exhortation and warning to the Pope, and all
kings and rulers in EUROPE; as follows:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “Ye heads, and rulers, kings, and nobles of all sorts, be not bitter,
  nor hasty in persecuting the lambs of Christ, neither turn yourself
  against the visitation of God, and his tender love and mercies from on
  high, who sent to visit you; lest the Lord’s hand, arm, and power,
  take hold swiftly upon you; which is now stretched over the world. It
  is turned against kings, and shall turn wise men backward, and will
  bring their crowns to the dust, and lay them low and level with the
  earth. The Lord will be king, who gives crowns to whomsoever obey his
  will. This is the age wherein the Lord God of heaven and earth is
  staining the pride of man, and defacing his glory. You that profess
  Christ, and do not love your enemies, but on the contrary shut up and
  imprison those who are his friends; these are marks that you are out
  of his life, and do not love Christ, who do not the things he
  commands. The day of the Lord’s wrath is kindling, and his fire is
  going forth to burn up the wicked; which will leave neither root nor
  branch. They that have lost their habitation with God, are out of the
  Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, and from the light that Jesus
  Christ hath enlightened them withal; and so from the true foundation.
  Therefore be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slower to persecute:
  for the Lord is bringing his people to himself, from all the world’s
  ways, to Christ the way; and from all the world’s churches, to the
  church which is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and from
  all the world’s teachers, to teach his people himself by his Spirit;
  from all the world’s images, into the image of himself; and from their
  likeness into his own likeness; and from all the world’s crosses of
  stone or wood, into his power, which is the cross of Christ. For all
  these images, crosses, and likenesses are among them, that are
  apostatized from the image of God, the power of God, the cross of
  Christ, which now fathoms the world, and is throwing down that which
  is contrary to it; which power of God never changes.

  “Let this go to the kings of France, and of Spain, and to the Pope,
  for them to prove all things, and to hold that which is good. And
  first to prove, that they have not quenched the Spirit: for the mighty
  day of the Lord is come, and coming upon all wickedness, and
  ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who will plead with all flesh
  by fire and by sword. And the truth, the crown of glory, and the
  sceptre of righteousness over all shall be exalted; which shall answer
  that of God in every one upon the earth, though they be from it.
  Christ is come a light into the world, and doth enlighten every one
  that cometh into the world; that all through him might believe. He
  that feeleth the light that Christ hath enlightened him withal, he
  feeleth Christ in his mind, and the cross of Christ, which is the
  power of God; he shall not need to have a cross of wood or stone, to
  put him in mind of Christ, or of his cross, which is the power of God
  manifest in the inward parts.”

                                                               G. F.

Besides this I was moved to write a letter to the Protector, to warn him
of the mighty work the Lord hath to do in the nations, and of the
shaking of them; and to beware of his own wit, craft, subtilty, and
policy, or seeking any by-ends to himself.

There was about this time an order for the trying of ministers (so
called), and for approving, or ejecting them out of their places or
benefices; whereupon I wrote a paper to the justices, and other
commissioners, who were appointed to that work, as follows:—

  “FRIENDS,

  “You that are justices, and in commission to try ministers, who have
  so long been in the vineyard of God, see whether they be such as are
  mentioned in the Scriptures, whom the prophets, Christ, and the
  apostles, disapproved of. And if they be such as they disapproved, see
  how ye can stand approved in the sight of God, to let such go into his
  vineyard, and approve of them who will admire your persons, because of
  advantage, and if you do not give them advantage, they will not admire
  your persons. Such Jude speaks of. See if they be not such as teach
  for filthy lucre, for the love of money, covetous, such as love
  themselves, who have a form of godliness, but deny the power; from
  such the apostles bid to ‘turn away.’ The apostle said their mouths
  should be stopped, who served not the Lord Jesus, but their own
  bellies, being evil, who mind earthly things. Paul gave Timothy a
  description to try ministers by; he said, ‘they must not be covetous,
  nor given to wine, nor filthy lucre, nor novices; lest being lifted up
  into pride, they fall into the condemnation of the devil:’ these he
  was to try and prove without partiality. Now take heed of approving
  such as he disapproved; for since the apostles’ days such as he
  disapproved have had their liberty; and they have told us, the tongues
  were their original, and that they were orthodox men; and that the
  steeple-house, with a cross on the top of it, was the church (the
  Papist’s mass-house, you may look on the top of it, and see the sign).
  But the Scriptures tell us, ‘all the earth was of one language before
  the building of Babel;’ and when Pilate crucified Christ, he set the
  tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, over his head. And John tells us,
  that the beast had power over the tongues, kindreds, and nations; and
  that the whore sits upon the tongues, of whose cup all nations have
  drunk, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her.
  John also said the tongues are waters.

  “Christ gives marks to his disciples, and to the multitude, how to try
  such as these that you are to try. They are called of men, master;
  they love the chiefest seat in the assemblies; they are sayers but not
  doers; and, said he, they shall put you out of the synagogues. Seven
  woes he denounced against them, and so disapproved them. Christ said,
  false prophets should come; and John saw they were come; for they went
  forth from them, and the world since hath gone after them. But Babylon
  must be confounded, the mother of harlots; and the Devil must be
  taken; and with him the beast, and the false prophet must be cast into
  the lake of fire; for the Lamb and his saints over all must reign, and
  have the victory. The Lord God sent his prophets of old, to cry
  against the shepherds that sought for the fleece, Ezek. xxxiv., and to
  cry against such shepherds as seek for their gain from their quarter,
  and never have enough, Isa. v. 6; and to cry against the prophets that
  prophesied falsely, and the priests that bore rule by their means;
  which was the filthy and horrible thing, Jer. v. And if you would
  forbear to give them means, you would see how long they would bear
  rule.

  “There was in old time a storehouse for the fatherless, strangers, and
  widows, to come to and be filled; and they did not prosper then who
  did not bring their tithes to the storehouse. But did not Christ put
  an end to that priesthood, tithes, temple, and priests? And doth not
  the apostle say, that the priesthood is changed, the law is changed,
  and the commandment disannulled? Might not they have pleaded the law
  of God that gave them tithes? Have ever any of the priests prospered
  that take tithes since, by the law of man? Was not the first author of
  them, since Christ’s time, the Pope, or some of his church? Did the
  apostles cast men into prison for tithes, as your ministers do now? As
  instance; Ralph Hollingworth, priest of Phillingham, for petty tithes,
  not exceeding six shillings, has cast into Lincoln prison a poor
  thatcher, named Thomas Bromby; where he has been about eight and
  thirty weeks, and still remains a prisoner. And the priest petitioned
  the judge that the poor man might not labour in the city, to get a
  little money towards his maintenance in prison. Is this a good savour
  amongst you, that are in commission to choose ministers? Is this glad
  tidings, to cast into prison a man that is not his hearer, because he
  could not put into his mouth? Can such as are in the fear of God, and
  in his wisdom, own such things?

  “The ministers of Christ are to plant a vineyard, and then eat of the
  fruit; to plough, sow, and thrash, and get the corn; and then let them
  reap; but not cast them into prison for whom they do no work. Christ,
  when he sent forth his ministers, bid them give freely, as they had
  received freely; and into what city or town soever they came, inquire
  who were worthy and there abide; and what they set before you, said
  he, that eat. And when these came back again to Christ, and he asked
  them if they wanted anything, they said No. They did not go to a town,
  and call the people together, to know how much they might have by the
  year, as these that are in the apostacy do now. The apostle said,
  ‘have I not power to eat and to drink?’ But he did not say, to take
  tithes, Easter-reckonings, Midsummer-dues, augmentations, and great
  sums of money; but ‘have I not power to eat and to drink?’ Yet he did
  not use that power among the Corinthians. But they that are
  apostatized from him, will take tithes, great sums of money,
  Easter-reckonings, and Midsummer-dues; and cast them into prison that
  will not give it them, whom they do no work for. The ox’s mouth must
  not be muzzled that treads out the corn; but see if the corn be
  trodden out in you, and the wheat be in the garner. This is from a
  lover of your souls, and one that desires your eternal good.”

                                                               G. F.

After I had made some stay in the city of LONDON, and cleared myself of
what service lay upon me at that time there, I was moved of the Lord to
go down into BEDFORDSHIRE to John Crook’s house, at LUTON, where there
was a great meeting, and people generally convinced of the Lord’s truth.
When I was come thither, John Crook told me that next day several of
those that were called the gentlemen of the country, would come to dine
with him and to discourse with me. They came, and I declared to them
God’s eternal truth. Several Friends went to the steeple-houses that
day. And there was a meeting in the country, which Alexander Parker went
to; and towards the middle of the day it came upon me to go to it,
though it was several miles off. John Crook went with me. When we
arrived, there was one —— Gritton, who had been a Baptist, but was got
higher than they, and called himself a trier of spirits. He told people
their fortunes, and pretended to discover to them when their goods were
stolen or houses broken up, who the persons were that did it; by which
he had got into the affections of many people thereabouts. This man was
in that meeting, speaking, and making a hideous noise over the
young-convinced Friends, when I came in; and he bid Alexander Parker
give a reason of his hope. Alexander Parker told him, Christ was his
hope; but because he did not answer him so soon as he expected, he
boastingly cried, “his mouth is stopped.” Then Gritton directed his
speech to me, for I stood still and heard him express many things, which
were not agreeable to Scripture. I asked him, whether he could make
those things out by Scripture which he had spoken, and he said, Yes,
yes. Then I bid the people take out their Bibles to search the places he
should quote for proof of his assertions; but he could not make good by
Scripture that which he had said. So he was ashamed and fled out of the
house, and his people were generally convinced: for his spirit was
discovered, and he came no more amongst them. When his people were
convinced and settled in God’s truth, they gave forth a book against
him, and denied his spirit and his false discoveries. Many were turned
to Christ Jesus that day, and came to sit under his teaching; insomuch
that the judges were in a great rage, and many of the magistrates in
BEDFORDSHIRE, because there were so many turned from the hireling
priests to the Lord Jesus Christ’s free teaching. But John Crook[36] was
kept by the power of the Lord; yet he was discharged from being a
justice.

Footnote 36:

  John Crook was a Justice of the Peace, and a man of note in the county
  of Bedford. He became an eminent preacher of the gospel, in which he
  laboured extensively, and many were the seals of his ministry. He
  suffered many imprisonments, which he bore with patience, as also his
  bodily infirmities, often expressing the inward joy and peace he had
  with the Lord. He died in 1699, in the eighty-second year of his age,
  having been a minister about forty-four years, and his writings were
  published in 1701, entitled, _The Design of Christianity testified in
  the Books, Epistles, and MSS. of John Crook_.

After some time I returned to LONDON again, where Friends were finely
established in the truth, and great comings-in there were. About this
time several Friends went beyond sea to declare the everlasting truth of
God. When I had stayed a while in the city, I went into KENT. When we
came to ROCHESTER, there was a guard kept to examine passengers, but we
passed by, and were not stopped. So I went to CRANBROOK, where there was
a great meeting; several soldiers were at it, and many were turned to
the Lord that day. After the meeting, some of the soldiers were somewhat
rude, but the Lord’s power came over them. Thomas Howsigoe, an
Independent preacher, who lived near CRANBROOK, was convinced, and
became a faithful minister for the Lord Jesus. Some Friends had
travelled into KENT before, as John Stubbs and William Caton, and the
priests and professors had stirred up the magistrates at MAIDSTONE to
whip them, for declaring God’s truth unto them; as may be seen at large
in the Journal of William Caton’s life. Captain Dunk was also convinced
in KENT. He went with me to RYE, where we had a meeting; to which the
Mayor and officers, and several captains came. They took down what I
said in writing, which I was well pleased with. All was quiet, and the
people affected with the truth.

From RYE I went to ROMNEY, where, the people having had notice of my
coming some time before, there was a very large meeting. Thither came
Samuel Fisher, an eminent preacher among the Baptists, who had had a
parsonage reputed worth about two hundred pounds a year, which for
conscience sake he had given up. There was also the pastor of the
Baptists, and abundance of their people. The power of the Lord was so
mightily over the meeting, that many were reached thereby, and one
greatly shaken, and the life sprung up in many. One of the pastors of
the Baptists, being amazed at the work of the Lord’s power, bid one of
our friends that was so wrought upon, have a good conscience; whereupon
I was moved of the Lord to bid him take heed of hypocrisy and deceit;
and he was silent. A great convincement there was that day; many were
turned from darkness to the divine light of Christ, and came to see
their teachers’ errors, and to sit under the Lord Jesus Christ’s
teaching, to know him their way, and the covenant of light, which God
had given to be their salvation; and they were brought to the one
baptism, and to the one baptizer, Christ Jesus. When the meeting was
over, Samuel Fisher’s wife said, “Now we may discern this day between
flesh and spirit, and distinguish spiritual teaching from fleshly.” The
people were generally well satisfied with what had been declared; but
the two Baptist teachers and their company, when they were gone from the
meeting, fell to reasoning amongst the people. Samuel Fisher, with many
others, reasoned for the word of life, which had been declared that day;
and the other pastor and his party reasoned against it; so it divided
them asunder, and cut them in the midst. A friend came and told me, that
the Baptists were disputing one with another; and desired me to go up to
them; but I said “let them alone, the Lord will divide them; and they
that reason for truth, will be too hard for the other;” and so it was.
Samuel Fisher received the truth in the love of it, became a faithful
minister, preached Christ freely, and laboured much in the service of
the Lord, being moved to go and declare the word of life at Dunkirk and
in Holland, and in divers parts of Italy, as Leghorn, and Rome itself;
yet the Lord preserved him and his companion John Stubbs, out of their
Inquisitions.[37]

Footnote 37:

  Sewell states that Samuel Fisher and John Stubbs, when at Rome,
  conversed with some of the cardinals, and testified against Popish
  superstitions. They also spread books among the friars, some of whom
  expressed their contents to be true; but, said they, if we should
  acknowledge this publicly, we might expect to be burned for it.

  Whiting records the death of Samuel Fisher in 1665. “Other Friends,”
  he says, “were transported; and many died in Newgate, and on
  shipboard, in order to transportation, to the number of 122, in
  London, Westminster, and Southwark; particularly Samuel Fisher, &c.,
  faithful ministers and labourers in the work of the Lord, taken at
  meetings died in the White Lion prison, Southwark, 1665, in the time
  of the pestilence [plague], which began in the time of the persecution
  of Friends under the Conventicle Act, as a signal token of the Lord’s
  displeasure. It broke out first in a house next to that of the first
  man that was banished, who lived to return to London, and died at a
  great age.”

From ROMNEY I passed to DOVER, and had a meeting, where several were
convinced. Near DOVER a governor and his wife were convinced, who had
been Baptists; and the Baptists thereabouts were much offended, and grew
very envious; but the Lord’s power came over all. Luke Howard of DOVER
was convinced some time before, and became a faithful minister of
Christ.[38]

Footnote 38:

  For some account of Luke Howard, see _Piety Promoted_, Part ix. He was
  several times imprisoned; once in Dover Castle, for sixteen months,
  for going to meetings. At this time, he employed six men in his trade,
  but was obliged to shut up his shop for six months. He obtained the
  use of an entry to the prison grate, where meat was drawn up with a
  cord, and he worked a little there. He suffered another long
  confinement in 1684. Speaking of his imprisonments, he says, “I had
  perfect peace, joy, and content in it all; the Lord made it good unto
  me, both within and without.”

Returning from DOVER I went to CANTERBURY, where a few honest-hearted
people were turned to the Lord, who sat down under Christ’s teaching.
Thence I passed to CRANBROOK again, where I had a great meeting. A
friend went to the steeple-house, and was cast into prison; but the
Lord’s power was manifested, and his truth spread.

From thence I passed into SUSSEX, and lodged near HORSHAM, where there
was a great meeting, and many were convinced. Also at STEYNING we had a
great meeting in the market house, and several were convinced; for the
Lord’s power was with us. I had several meetings in the neighbourhood;
and among the rest, one was appointed at a great man’s house, and he and
his son went to fetch several priests that had threatened to come and
dispute. But none of them came; for the Lord’s power was mighty in us; a
glorious meeting we had. The man of the house and his son were vexed,
because none of the priests would come. So the hearts of people were
opened by the Spirit of God, and they were turned from the hirelings to
Christ Jesus their shepherd, who had purchased them without money, and
would feed them without money or price. Many that came, expecting to
hear a dispute, were convinced; amongst whom Nicholas Beard was one.[39]

Footnote 39:

  Nicholas Beard was an early seeker of the Lord in his youth, and would
  often travel many miles to hear the best reputed teachers of the
  times. He became a faithful minister of Christ, and a large sufferer
  for his sake. For one year’s tithes he had taken from him twelve oxen,
  six cows, and one bull, which were sold for £111 5s., but worth more.
  For worshipping God, and refusing to swear or bear arms, he was
  prosecuted on the statute for £20 a month, and underwent imprisonment
  several years, and loss of goods to more than £1,000. Yet it pleased
  the Lord to support and bless him and a large family, so that on his
  deathbed he was heard to say, “O Lord, my soul blesseth thee, and all
  that is within me magnifieth thy holy name!” He often desired to
  depart and be with Christ, and died in great peace, in 1702, aged
  eighty, a minister about thirty years.

Thus the Lord’s power came over all, and his day many came to see. There
were abundance of Ranters in those parts, and professors that had been
so loose in their lives, that they began to be weary of it and had
thought to go into Scotland to live privately. But the Lord’s net caught
them, and their understandings were opened by his light, Spirit, and
power, through which they came to receive the truth, and to be settled
upon the Lord; and so became very sober men, and good friends in the
truth. Great blessing and praising of the Lord there was amongst them,
and great admiration in the country.

Out of SUSSEX I travelled to READING, where I found a few that were
convinced of the way of the Lord. There I stayed till First-day, and had
a meeting in George Lamboll’s orchard; and a great part of the town came
to it. A glorious meeting it proved; a great convincement there was, and
the people were mightily satisfied. Thither came two of Judge Fell’s
daughters to me, and George Bishop, of BRISTOL, with his sword by his
side, for he was a captain.[40] After the meeting many Baptists and
Ranters came privately, reasoning and discoursing; but the Lord’s power
came over them. The Ranters pleaded, that God made the Devil; I denied
it, and told them, “I was come into the power of God, the seed Christ,
which was before the Devil was, and bruised the head of him; and he
became a Devil by going out of truth, and so became a murderer and a
destroyer. So I showed them that God did not make the Devil; for God is
a God of truth, and he made all things good, and blessed them; but God
did not bless the Devil. And the Devil is bad, and was a liar and a
murderer from the beginning, and spoke of himself and not from God.” And
so the truth stopped them, and bound them, and came over all the highest
notions in the nation, and confounded them. For by the power of the Lord
God I was manifest, and sought to be made manifest to the Spirit of God
in all; that by it (which they vexed, and quenched, and grieved,) they
might be turned to God; as many were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ by
the Holy Spirit, and were come to sit under his teaching.

Footnote 40:

  This Captain Bishop, who is mentioned as wearing his sword, soon
  discontinued it, being convinced, and joining Friends. He was the
  author of _An Account of the Persecution in New England_, and he
  issued a prophetic warning to the King and Parliament, in 1664, for
  banishing Friends, which was fulfilled. See _Sewell’s History_; Index.

After this meeting at READING I passed up to LONDON, where I stayed a
while, and had large meetings, then into ESSEX, and came to COGGESHALL,
where was a meeting of about two thousand people, as it was supposed,
which lasted several hours, and a glorious meeting it was; for the word
of life was freely declared, and people were turned to the Lord Jesus
Christ, their teacher and their Saviour, the way, the truth, and the
life.

On the sixth day of that week I had a meeting near COLCHESTER, to which
many professors and the Independent teachers came. After I had done
speaking, and was stepped down from the place on which I stood, one of
the Independent teachers began to make a jangling; which Amor Stoddart
perceiving, said to me, Stand up again, George, for I was going away,
and did not at first hear them. But when I heard the jangling
Independent, I stood up again; and after a while the Lord’s power came
over him and his company; and they were confounded, and the Lord’s truth
went over all. A great flock of sheep hath the Lord Jesus Christ in that
country, that feed in his pastures of life. On the First-day following
we had a very large meeting, near COLCHESTER, wherein the Lord’s power
was eminently manifested, and the people were very well satisfied; for
they were turned to Christ’s free teaching, and received it gladly. Many
of these people had been of the stock of the martyrs.

As I passed through COLCHESTER, I went to visit James Parnel in prison,
but the cruel jailer would hardly let us come in, or stay with him. Very
cruel they were to him; the jailer’s wife threatened to have his blood;
and in that jail they destroyed him, as the reader may see in a book
printed soon after his death, giving an account of his life and death;
and also in an epistle printed with his collected books and writings.

From COLCHESTER I went to IPSWICH, where we had a little meeting, and
very rude; but the Lord’s power came over them. After the meeting I
said, “if any had a desire to hear further, they might come to the inn;”
and there came in a company of rude butchers, that had abused Friends;
but the Lord’s power so chained them that they could not do mischief.
Then I wrote a paper, and gave it forth to the town, “warning them of
the day of the Lord, that they might repent of the evils they lived in;
directing them to Christ, their teacher, and way; and exhorting them to
forsake their hireling teachers.”

We passed from IPSWICH to MENDLESHAM, in SUFFOLK, where Robert Duncan
lived. There we had a large quiet meeting, and the Lord’s power was
preciously felt amongst us. Then we passed to a meeting at Captain
Lawrence’s in NORFOLK; where, it was supposed, were above a thousand
people; and all was quiet. Many persons of note were present, and a
great convincement there was; for they were turned to Christ, their way
and their teacher, and many of them received him, and sat down under
him, their vine. Here we parted with Amor Stoddart and some other
Friends, who intended to meet us again in HUNTINGDONSHIRE.

About two in the morning we took horse for NORWICH, where Christopher
Atkins had run out, and brought dishonour upon the blessed truth and
name of the Lord. But he had been denied by Friends; and afterwards he
gave forth a paper of condemnation of his sin and evil. We came to
YARMOUTH, and there stayed a while; where there was a Friend, Thomas
Bond, in prison for the truth of Christ. There we had some service; and
some were turned to the Lord in that town. From thence we rode to
another town, about twenty miles off, where were many tender people; and
I was moved of the Lord to speak to them, as I sat on my horse, in
several places as I passed along.

We went to another town about five miles from thence, and set up our
horses at an inn, Richard Hubberthorn and I having travelled five and
forty miles that day. There were some friendly people in the town; and
we had a tender, broken meeting amongst them, in the Lord’s power, to
his praise. We bid the hostler have our horses ready by three in the
morning; for we intended to ride to LYNN, about three and thirty miles,
next morning. But when we were in bed at our inn, about eleven at night,
the constable and officers came, with a great rabble of people, into the
inn, and said they were come with a hue and cry from a justice of peace,
that lived near the town about five miles off, where I had spoken to the
people in the streets, as I rode along, to search for two horsemen, that
rode upon gray horses, and in gray clothes; a house having been broken
up on the Seventh-day before at night. We told them “we were honest,
innocent men, and abhorred such things;” yet they apprehended us, and
set a guard with halberts and pikes upon us that night; making some of
those friendly people, with others, to watch us. Next morning we were up
betimes, and the constable with his guard carried us before a justice of
peace about five miles off. We took two or three of the sufficient men
of the town with us, who had been with us at the great meeting at
Captain Lawrence’s, and could testify that we lay both the Seventh-day
night, and the First-day night, at Captain Lawrence’s; and it was the
Seventh-day night that they said the house was broken up.

The reader is to be informed, that during the time that I was a prisoner
at the Mermaid at CHARING CROSS, this Captain Lawrence brought several
Independent justices to see me there, with whom I had much discourse;
which they took offence at. For they pleaded for imperfection, and to
sin as long as they lived; but did not like to hear of Christ teaching
his people himself, and making people as clear, whilst here upon the
earth, as Adam and Eve were before they fell. These justices had plotted
together this mischief against me in the country, pretending a house was
broken up; that they might send their hue and cry after me. They were
vexed also, and troubled, to hear of the great meeting at John
Lawrence’s aforesaid; for a colonel was convinced there that day, who
lived and died in the truth. But Providence so ordered, that the
constable carried us to a justice about five miles onward in our way
towards LYNN, who was not an Independent justice, as the rest were.

When we were brought before him, he began to be angry, because we did
not put off our hats to him. I told him, I had been before the
Protector, and he was not offended at my hat; and why should he be
offended at it, who was but one of his servants? Then he read the hue
and cry; and I told him, “that that night, wherein the house was said to
be broken up, we were at Captain Lawrence’s house; and that we had
several men present who could testify the truth thereof.” Thereupon the
justice, having examined us and them said “he believed we were not the
men that had broken the house; but he was sorry,” he said, “that he had
no more against us.” We told him, “he ought not to be sorry for not
having evil against us; but rather to be glad; for to rejoice, when he
got evil against people, as for housebreaking, or the like, was not a
good mind in him.” It was a good while yet, before he could resolve,
whether to let us go, or send us to prison; and the wicked constable
stirred him up against us, telling him, “we had good horses, and that if
it pleased him, he would carry us to NORWICH jail.” But we took hold of
the justice’s confession, that “he believed we were not the men that had
broken the house;” and after we had admonished him to fear the Lord in
his day, the Lord’s power came over him, so that he let us go; so their
snare was broken. A great people were afterwards gathered to the Lord in
that town, where I was moved to speak to them in the street; and from
whence the hue and cry came.

Being set at liberty, we travelled to LYNN; where we arrived about three
in the afternoon. Having set up our horses, we met with Joseph Fuce,[41]
who was an ensign; and we wished him to speak to as many of the people
of the town as he could that feared God; and to the captains and
officers to come together; which he did. We had a very glorious meeting
amongst them, and turned them to the Spirit of God, by which they might
know God and Christ, and understand the Scriptures; and so learn of God
and of Christ, as the prophets and apostles did. Many were convinced
there; and a fine meeting there is, of them that are come off from the
hirelings’ teaching, and sit under the teaching of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Footnote 41:

  Joseph Fuce was one of those faithful ministers who died in White Lion
  prison, Southwark, in 1665, during the time of the plague.

LYNN being then a garrison, we desired Joseph Fuce to get us the gate
opened by three next morning, for we had forty miles to ride next day.
By that means getting out early, we came next day by eleven or twelve to
SUTTON, near the Isle of Ely, where Amor Stoddart, and the Friends with
him, met us again. A multitude of people was gathered there, and no less
than four priests. The priest of the town made a great jangle; but the
Lord’s power so confounded him, that he went away: the other three
stayed; and one of them was convinced. One of the other two, whilst I
was speaking, came to lean upon me; but I bid him sit down, seeing he
was so slothful. A great convincement there was that day; and many
hundreds were turned from the darkness to the light, from the power of
Satan unto God, and from the spirit of error to the Spirit of truth, to
be led thereby into all truth. People came to this meeting from
HUNTINGDON, and beyond; and the mayor’s wife of CAMBRIDGE was there
also. A glorious meeting it was, and many were settled under Christ’s
teaching, and knew him, their Shepherd, to feed them; for the word of
life was freely declared, and gladly received by them. The meeting ended
in the power of the Lord, and in peace; and after it I walked out and
went into a garden; where I had not been long, before a Friend came to
me, and told me several justices were come to break up the meeting. But
many of the people were gone away; so they missed of their design: and
after they had stayed a while, they went away also, in a fret.

That evening I passed to CAMBRIDGE. When I came into the town, the
scholars hearing of me, were up, and were exceedingly rude. I kept on my
horse’s back, and rode through them in the Lord’s power; but they
unhorsed Amor Stoddart before he could get to the inn. When we were in
the inn, they were so rude in the courts, and in the streets, that
miners, colliers, and carters could never be ruder. The people of the
house asked us “what we would have for supper.” “Supper!” said I, “were
it not that the Lord’s power is over them, these rude scholars look as
if they would pluck us in pieces, and make a supper of us.” They knew I
was so against the trade of preaching, which they were there as
apprentices to learn, that they raged as much as ever Diana’s craftsmen
did against Paul. At this place John Crook met us. When it was within
night, the mayor of the town, being friendly, came and fetched me to his
house; and as we walked through the streets, there was a bustle in the
town; but they did not know me, it being darkish. They were in a rage,
not only against me, but against the mayor also; so that he was almost
afraid to walk the streets with me, for the tumult. We sent for the
friendly people, and had a fine meeting there in the power of God: and I
stayed there all night. Next morning, having ordered our horses to be
ready by six, we passed peaceably out of town; and the destroyers were
disappointed; for they thought I would have stayed longer, and intended
to do us mischief; but our passing away early in the morning frustrated
their evil purposes against us.

Then we rode to BISHOP-STORTFORD, where some were convinced: and so to
HERTFORD, where also there were some convinced; and where there is now a
large meeting. From thence we returned to LONDON, where Friends received
us gladly; the Lord’s power having carried us through many snares and
dangers. Great service we had for the Lord; for many hundreds were
brought to sit under the teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, their
Saviour, and to praise the Lord through him. James Naylor also was come
up to London; and Richard Hubberthorn and I stayed some time in the
city, visiting Friends and answering gainsayers; for we had great
disputes with professors of all sorts. Many reproaches they cast upon
truth; and lying slanderous books they gave forth against us: but we
answered them all, cleared God’s truth, and set it over them; and the
Lord’s power was over all.

Amongst other services for the Lord, which then lay upon me in the city,
I was moved to give forth a paper which is as follows:—

          _To Those that Made a Scorn of Trembling and Quaking._

  “The word of the Lord to all you that scorn trembling, and quaking;
  who scoff at, scorn, stone, and belch forth oaths against, those who
  are trembling and quaking; threatening them, and beating them.
  Strangers ye are to all the apostles and prophets; and are of the
  generation that stoned them, and mocked them in those ages. Ye are the
  scoffers of whom they spoke, that are come in the last times. Be ye
  witnesses against yourselves. To the light in all your consciences I
  speak, that with it you may see yourselves to be out of the life of
  the holy men of God.

  “Moses, who was judge over all Israel, trembled, feared, and quaked:
  when the Lord said unto him, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of
  Isaac, and the God of Jacob, then Moses trembled, and durst not
  behold.’ This, which makes to tremble now, ye teachers and people
  scoff at, and scorn them in your streets who witness the power of the
  Lord. Moses forsook the pleasures of the world, which he might have
  enjoyed for a season. He might have been called the son of Pharaoh’s
  daughter; he refused it, and forsook Pharaoh’s house; yet was no
  vagabond. David, a king, trembled; he was mocked; they made songs on
  him; they wagged their heads at him. Will you profess David’s words,
  and Moses’s words, who are in the generation of your fathers, mockers,
  scoffers, wonderers, and despisers, who are to perish? O blush! be
  ashamed of all your profession, and be confounded! Job trembled, his
  flesh trembled, and they mocked him: so do you now mock them in whom
  the same power of God is made manifest; and yet you profess Job’s
  words. O deceitful hypocrites! will ye not own Scripture? O shame!
  never profess Scripture words, and deny the power, which, according to
  Scripture, makes the keepers of the house to tremble, and the strong
  man to bow himself. These things both priests, magistrates, and people
  scoff at; but with the power ye are judged, and by the power and life
  condemned.

  “The prophet Jeremiah trembled, he shook, his bones quaked, he reeled
  to and fro, like a drunken man, when he saw the deceits of the priests
  and prophets, who were turned from the way of God; they were not
  ashamed, neither could they blush. Such were gone from the light; and
  such were they that ruled over the people. But he was brought to cry,
  O foolish people! that had eyes, and could not see; that had ears, and
  could not hear; that did not fear the Lord, and tremble at his
  presence, who placed the sands for bounds to the sea, by a perpetual
  decree, that the waves thereof cannot pass! And he said, ‘A horrible
  thing is committed in the land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the
  priests bear rule by their means. Shall not I visit for these things,
  saith the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged upon such a nation as
  this?’ They were such as did not tremble at the word of the Lord;
  therefore he called them a foolish people. Hear all ye the word of the
  Lord, ye foolish people, who scorn trembling and quaking. Give over
  professing the prophet Jeremiah’s words, and making a trade of them;
  for with his words you are judged to be among the scoffers, scorners,
  and stockers. For he was stocked by your generation; and you now stock
  them that tremble at the word of the Lord, at the power of the mighty
  God, which raises up the seed of God, and throws down the earth which
  hath kept it down. So, you who are in the fall where death reigneth,
  who are enemies of the truth, despising the power of God, as those of
  your generation ever did, woe and misery is your portion, except you
  speedily repent.

  “Isaiah saith, ‘Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
  word.’ Again, ‘To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and
  of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.’ Isa. lxv. 2. ‘Your
  brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said,
  Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they
  shall be ashamed.’ Isa. lxvi. 5. Now all ye scoffers and scorners,
  that despise trembling, you regard not the word of the Lord; they are
  not regarded by you, that tremble at the word; who are regarded by the
  Lord: therefore you are contrary to Isaiah’s words. Profess him and
  his words no more, for shame, nor make a trade of his words, ye that
  seek for your gain from your quarter, ye greedy, dumb dogs, that never
  have enough; ye are they that despise trembling; ye are such as Isaiah
  cried against, who himself witnessed trembling. Here therefore be ye
  witnesses against yourselves, that with the light in your consciences
  ye may see ye are out of the prophet Isaiah’s spirit, and are haters
  of them that tremble, whom the Lord regards; such you regard not, but
  hate and persecute, mock and rail against them. It is manifest that
  you walk in the steps of your forefathers, that persecuted the
  prophets.

  “Habakkuk, the prophet of the Lord, trembled. And Joel, the prophet of
  the Lord, said, ‘Blow the trumpet in Zion, and let all the inhabitants
  of the earth tremble: the people shall tremble, and all faces shall
  gather blackness, and the people shall be much pained.’ And now this
  trembling is witnessed by the power of the Lord. This power of the
  Lord is come; the trumpet is sounding; the earth is shaking, the
  inhabitants of the earth are trembling; the dead are arising, and the
  living are praising God; the world is raging, and the scoffers are
  scorning; and they that witness trembling and quaking wrought in them
  by the power of the Lord, can scarcely pass up and down the streets,
  but with stones and blows, fists and sticks, or dogs set at them; or
  they are pursued with mockings and reproaches. Thus you vent forth
  your malice against them that witness the power of the Lord, as the
  prophets did; who are come to the broken heart and contrite spirit,
  who tremble at the word of the Lord, and whom the Lord regards: these
  you stone and stock, and set your dogs at; these you scoff and scorn,
  these you revile and reproach; but these reproaches are our riches;
  praised be the Lord who hath given us power over them. If you see one,
  as Habakkuk, whose ‘lips quivered,’ whose ‘belly shook,’ who said,
  ‘rottenness was entered into his bones,’ and who ‘trembled in
  himself;’ if you see such a one in this condition now, ye say, he is
  bewitched. Here again you show yourselves strangers to that power, to
  that life, that was in the prophet: therefore, for shame, never make a
  profession of his words, nor a trade of his words; nor of Joel’s, who
  witnessed trembling, which ye scorn and scoff at. Ye proud scoffers
  and scorners, misery, misery is your end, except you speedily repent.

  “Daniel, a servant of the most high God, trembled; his strength and
  his breath were gone; he was imprisoned, he was hated, he was
  persecuted. They laid baits and snares for him, in whom the Holy
  Spirit of God was. Now for shame, you that make a profession of
  Daniel’s words, give over your profession; priests and people, who
  scorn and scoff at trembling, with the light you are seen to be out of
  Daniel’s life, and by the same power you are judged, at which you
  scorn and scoff. Here again be ye witnesses against yourselves, that
  ye are scorners and scoffers against the truth; and with the Scripture
  ye are judged to be contrary to the life of the holy men of God.

  “Paul, a minister of God, made, by the will of God, a messenger of the
  Lord Jesus, a vessel of the Lord, to carry his name abroad into
  several nations, trembled: and when the dark, blind world, having got
  some of his words and epistles, you teachers make a trade of them, and
  obtain great sums of money by it, and so destroy souls for dishonest
  gain: making a trade of his words, and of the rest of the apostles’
  and prophets’, and of Christ’s words, but denying the Spirit and life
  that they were guided by; and that power which shook the flesh and the
  earth, which the apostle witnessed, who said, when he came among the
  Corinthians, that ‘he was with them in weakness, and in fear, and in
  much trembling,’ that their faith might not stand in the wisdom of
  men, but in the power of God; in that power which made him to tremble.
  This power it is that the world, and all the scoffing teachers, scoff
  at and scorn in your towns, in your villages, in your assemblies, in
  your ale-houses. For shame, lay aside all your profession of the
  apostle’s words and conditions! Some of them that scoff at this power,
  call it the power of the devil. Some persecute, stone and stock,
  imprison and whip them, in whom that power is made manifest, and load
  them with reproaches, as not worthy to walk on the earth; hated and
  persecuted, as the off-scouring of all things. Here you may see you
  are in the steps of your forefathers, who persecuted the apostles, and
  acted so against them, stocked them, mocked them, imprisoned them,
  stoned them, whipped them, haled them out of the synagogues,
  reproached them, and shamefully entreated them. Do not you here fulfil
  the Scripture, and Christ’s saying, who said, ‘If they kill you, they
  will think they do God service?’ Yet you make a profession of Christ’s
  words, of the prophets’ and apostles’ words, and call yourselves
  churches, and ministers of the gospel. I charge you, in the presence
  of the living God, to be silent who act such things! Mind the light in
  your consciences, ye scoffers and scorners, which Christ hath
  enlightened you withal: that with it ye may see yourselves, what ye
  act, and what ye have acted; for they who act such things shall not
  inherit the kingdom of God: all such things are by the light
  condemned.

  “You who have come to witness trembling and quaking, the powers of the
  earth to be shaken, the lustful nature to be destroyed, the scorning
  and scoffing nature judged by the light; wait in it to receive power
  from him who shakes the earth. That power we own, and our faith stands
  in it, which all the world scoffs at; the lofty ones, the proud, the
  presumptuous, who live in presumption, and yet make a profession of
  the Scriptures, as your fathers the Pharisees did, who were painted
  sepulchres and serpents; and as the scribes did, who had the chiefest
  place in the assemblies, stood praying in the synagogues, and were
  called of men masters, which Christ cried woe against. These are not
  come so far as the trembling of devils, who believed and trembled. Let
  that judge you. The light and life of the Scripture is seen and made
  manifest, and with it all you scoffers and scorners, all you
  persecutors and railers are seen.

  “Take warning, all ye powers of the earth, how ye persecute them whom
  the world nickname and call Quakers, who dwell in the eternal power of
  God; lest the hand of the Lord be turned against you, and ye be all
  cut off. To you this is the word of God. Fear and tremble, and take
  warning! for this is the man whom the Lord doth regard, who trembles
  at his word; whom you, who are of the world, scoff and scorn, stock,
  persecute, and imprison. Here ye may see ye are contrary to God and to
  the prophets; and are such as hate what the Lord regards; which we,
  whom the world scorns and call Quakers, own. We exalt and honour that
  power, that makes the devils tremble, shakes the earth, and throws
  down the loftiness and the haughtiness of man; which makes the beasts
  of the field to tremble, and the earth to reel to and fro; which
  cleaves the earth asunder, and overturneth the world. This power we
  own, and honour, and preach; but all scoffers and persecutors, railers
  and scorners, stockers and whippers, we deny by that power which
  throweth down all that nature; seeing that all who act such things,
  without repentance, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, but are for
  destruction.

  “Rejoice, all ye righteous ones, who are persecuted for righteousness’
  sake; for great is your reward in heaven. Rejoice ye that suffer for
  well doing; for ye shall not lose your reward. Wait in the light, that
  you may grow up in the life that gave forth the Scriptures; that with
  it you may see the saints’ conditions, and all that which they
  testified against; and there with it ye will see the state of those
  that reproached and scoffed at them; that mocked and persecuted them;
  that whipped and stocked them, and haled them out of the synagogues
  before magistrates. To you, who are in the same light and life, the
  same things do they now; that they may fill up the measure of their
  fathers. With the light now they are seen, where the light, and life,
  and power of God is made manifest; for as they did unto them, so they
  will do unto you. Here is our joy; the Scripture is fulfilled, and
  fulfilling; and with the light, which was before the world was, which
  is now made manifest in the children of light, they see the world, and
  comprehend it, and the actions of it; for he that loves the world, and
  turns from the light, is an enemy to God; he turneth into wickedness;
  for the whole world lieth in wickedness. He who turns from the light,
  turns into the works of evil, which the light of Christ testifies
  against; and by this light, where it is made manifest, all the works
  of the world are seen and made manifest.”

                                                                G.F.

  This is to go abroad among the scattered
       ones, and among the world.

Great was the rage and enmity of professors, as well as profane, against
the truth and people of God at this time; and great the contempt and
disdain they showed of Friends’ plainness. Wherefore I was moved to
write the following, and sent it forth:—

     _An Epistle to Churches gathered into outward forms, upon the
                                earth._

  “All ye churches gathered into outward forms upon the earth, the Son
  of God is come to reign; he will tread and trample, will shake and
  make you quiver, you that are found out of his light, without his life
  and power. His day hath appeared; mortar and clay will you be found.
  Breaking, shaking, and quaking are coming among you! your high
  building is to be laid desolate; your professed liberty shall be your
  bondage; the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. Tremble, ye
  hypocrites, ye notionists! the fenced cities shall be laid desolate,
  the fruitful fields shall become a wilderness; your false joy shall
  become your heaviness; the time of weeping and desolation draweth
  nigh! Come, ye witty ones, see how ye can stand before the Almighty,
  who is now come to plead with you; you will fall like leaves, and
  wither like weeds! Come, you that have boasted of my name, saith the
  Lord, and have gloried in the flesh, ye shall fade like a flower; who
  have slain my witness yet boast of my words, which have been as a song
  unto you. Come, ye novelists, who love novelties, changeable suits of
  apparel, who are in the fashions, outward and inward, putting on one
  thing this day, and another the other day. ‘I will strip thee,’ saith
  the Lord, ‘I will make thee bare, I will make thee naked, and thou
  shalt know that I am the Lord.’

  “‘What! hast thou professed the prophets’ words? hast thou professed
  the apostles’ words, and my Son’s words; hast thou covered thyself
  with their expressions? thinkest thou not that I see thee out of my
  life? thinkest thou, thou witty one, to hide thyself where none can
  see thee? thinkest thou, if thou fliest to the uttermost parts of the
  earth, that I am not there? Is not the earth mine, and the fulness of
  it, saith the Lord?’ Come, all ye that have trusted in your own
  conceited notions, and knowledge, and wisdom, who were never yet out
  of the earth, and the lusts of it; never yet got the load of thick
  clay off you; never were out of the drunken spirit, whose imperfection
  appears, which must be come upon as a potter’s vessel; broken
  cisterns; ye that have been made wise in your own conceit, wise in
  your own eyes, in which pride hath lifted you up, and not the
  humility; you must be abased. You have run on, every one after his own
  invention; every man hath done the thing that was right in his own
  eyes, that which pleased himself. This hath been the course of people
  upon earth. Ye have run on without a king, without Christ, the light
  of the world, which hath enlightened every one that is come into the
  world. But now is truth risen, now are your fruits withering.

  “And you that are fortified, and have fortified your strong houses,
  called your churches, make ye your cords strong, the Lord will break
  you asunder, ye that are gathering in, and ye that are gathered. For
  the Lord is risen to scatter you; his witness is risen in the hearts
  of his people, they will not be fed with dead words, nor with that
  which dies of itself; nor will they be satisfied with the husks which
  the swine feed upon. All ye priests in the nation, and teachers, that
  now stand against the light, your envy shows that ye are in Cain’s
  way; your greediness shows that ye are in Balaam’s way; your standing
  against the light which hath enlightened every man that cometh into
  the world, doth manifest that you are in Korah’s way, that spoke the
  great high words of vanity; ye whose consciences are seared as with a
  hot iron, whose judgment doth not linger, whose damnation doth not
  slumber, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies;
  who are the evil beasts spoken of, which have destroyed many families,
  taken away their cattle, their horses, their goods, even their
  household goods; destroyed many poor men, even whole families, taking
  their whole estates from them whom you do no work for. O! the grievous
  actions that are done by you, the ministers of unrighteousness; whose
  fruits declare to the whole nation that you are the devil’s
  messengers! your actions declare it; your taking tithes,
  augmentations, treble damages, Midsummer-dues (as ye call them), of
  them ye do no work for, nor minister to.

  “All ye powers of the earth, beware of holding such up as are
  unrighteous. Let not the words of the unrighteous overcome you, lest
  God, the righteous judge of heaven and earth, take hold upon you;
  whose judgment is according to that of God in you, which will let you
  see when you transgress. Come you proud and lofty ones, who have not
  considered the handy-works of the Lord, but have destroyed them; nor
  have regarded the way of the Lord, but have had plenty of the
  creatures, and have therewith fattened yourselves, and forgotten the
  Lord and his way: O let shame cover your faces here upon earth! Come
  ye that are given to pleasures, and spend your time in sports, and
  idleness, and fulness; your fruits declare the sins of Sodom; yet you
  will talk of my name, and of my saints’ words. ‘But I behold you afar
  off,’ saith the Lord; you are proud and lofty; you are evil patterns,
  bad examples, full, rich, and idle; who say others are idle, that
  cannot maintain your lusts. O! the unrighteous balances that are among
  people! O! the iniquity in measuring! O! the oppression in ruling and
  governing! Because of these things my hand shall come upon you, saith
  the Lord. For the oppression is entered into the ears of the Lord, who
  gives rest to the wearied, to the burthened, to the oppressed; who
  feeds the hungry, and clothes the naked; who brings the mighty from
  their seats, beats the lofty to the ground, and makes the haughty
  bend.

  “Come, saith the Lord, ye mockers, scorners, and rebellious ones,
  light and wild people, vain and heady; you have had your day of joy,
  you have scoffed, you have mocked and derided my messengers and my
  ambassadors, who have preached in your streets, and cried in your
  synagogues and temples; a day of trembling and lamentation shall come
  upon you, when you are not aware. I will take away your pride and your
  height; I will shake you as a leaf, and bring you to be as men
  distracted. I will distract you, and make you that you shall not trust
  one another in the earth, who have joined hand in hand against my
  servants in the truth. I will smite you with terrors, and bring fear
  upon you; the cup of my indignation and fury shall you drink. Where
  will you appear when repentance is hid from your eyes, when profane
  Esau, your father, is set before you, and Ishmael and Cain, wild and
  envious, whose fruits declare the stock?

  “Come, ye proud priests, who have eaten up the fat of the nation, who
  by violence have taken other men’s goods, whose envy hath slain many,
  whose wickedness and darkness hath abounded, and whose unrighteousness
  daily appears; your fruits every day declare it, in summoning up by
  writs and subpœnas from most parts of the nation for wages and
  tithes, such as you do no work for. O abominable unrighteousness! how
  is the state of man lost, that they do not take these things to heart
  to feel them! what havoc is made in most parts of the nation with
  such! And all ye priests and teachers, who are railing and brawling in
  the pulpit, setting people at variance one against another, haters and
  hateful, provoking people to hate one another, here is the seed of
  enmity seen, which you have sown and are sowing, whose seed must he
  bruised by the seed of the woman, which above your heads is set.”

                                                               G. F.

This year came out the oath of abjuration, by which many Friends
suffered; and several went to speak to the Protector about it; but he
began to harden. And sufferings increasing upon Friends, by reason that
envious magistrates made use of that oath as a snare to catch Friends
in, who, they knew, could not swear at all; I was moved to write to the
Protector, as follows:—

  “The magistrate is not to bear the sword in vain, who ought to be a
  terror to evil-doers; but as the magistrate that doth bear the sword
  in vain, is not a terror to evil-doers, so he is not a praise to them
  that do well. Now hath God raised up a people by his power, whom
  people, priests, and magistrates, who are out of the fear of God,
  scornfully call Quakers, who cry against drunkenness (for drunkards
  destroy God’s creatures), and against oaths (for because of oaths the
  land mourns), and these drunkards and swearers, to whom the
  magistrate’s sword should be a terror, are, we see, at liberty; but
  for crying against such, many are cast into prison; as also for
  testifying against their pride and filthiness, their deceitful
  merchandise in markets, their cozening and their cheating, their
  excess and naughtiness, their playing at bowls and shuffle boards, at
  cards and at dice, and their other vain and wanton pleasures. They who
  live in pleasures are dead while they live; and they who live in
  wantonness kill the just. This we know by the Spirit of God, which
  gave forth the Scriptures, which the Father has given to us, and hath
  placed his righteous law in our hearts; which law is a terror to
  evil-doers, and answers that which is of God in every man’s
  conscience. They who act contrary to the measure of God’s Spirit in
  every man’s conscience, cast the law of God behind their backs, and
  walk despitefully against the Spirit of grace. The magistrate’s sword,
  we see, is borne in vain, whilst the evil-doers are at liberty to do
  evil; and they that cry against such, are for so doing punished by the
  magistrate, who hath turned his sword backward against the Lord. Now
  the wicked one fenceth himself, and persecutes the innocent as
  vagabonds and wanderers, for crying against sin, and against
  unrighteousness and ungodliness openly, in the markets and in the
  highways; or as railers, because they tell them what judgment will
  come upon them that follow such practices. Here they that depart from
  iniquity are become a prey, and few lay it to heart. But God will
  thrash the mountains, beat the hills, cleave the rocks, and cast into
  his press, which is trodden without the city, and will bathe his sword
  in the blood of the wicked and unrighteous. You that have drunk the
  cup of abominations, a hard cup have you had to drink; you are the
  enemies of God, and of you he will be avenged.

  “Now ye, in whom something of God is remaining, consider; If the sword
  was not borne in vain, but turned against the evil-doers, then the
  righteous would not suffer, and be cast into holes, dungeons, corners,
  prisons, and houses of correction, as peace-breakers, for testifying
  against sin openly, as they are commanded of the Lord, and against the
  covetousness of the priests, and their false worships; who exact money
  of poor people, whom they do no work for. O! where will you appear in
  the day of the Lord? or how will you stand in the day of his righteous
  judgment? How many jails and houses of correction are now made places
  to put the lambs of Christ in, for following him, and obeying his
  commands, which are too numerous to mention. The royal law of Christ,
  ‘to do as ye would be done by,’ is trodden down under foot; so that
  men can profess him in words, but crucify him wheresoever he appears,
  and cast him into prison, as the talkers of him always did in the
  generations and ages past. The labourers, whom God, the master of the
  harvest, hath sent into his vineyard, do the chief of the priests, and
  the rulers now take counsel together against, to cast them into
  prison: and here are the fruits of priests, and people, and rulers,
  without the fear of God. The day is come and coming, that every man’s
  work doth appear and shall appear; glory be to the Lord God for ever.
  So see, and consider the days you have spent, and do spend; for this
  is your day of visitation. Many have suffered great fines, because
  they could not swear, but obey Christ’s doctrine, who saith, ‘Swear
  not at all:’ and are made a prey upon for abiding in the command of
  Christ. Many are cast into prison because they cannot take the oath of
  abjuration, though they denied all that is abjured in it; and by that
  means many of the messengers and ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ
  are cast into prison because they will not swear, nor go out of
  Christ’s command.

  “Therefore, O man, consider; to the measure of the life of God in thee
  I speak. Many also lie in jails, because they cannot pay the priest’s
  tithes; many have their goods spoiled, and treble damages taken of
  them; and many are whipped and beaten in the house of correction,
  without breach of any law. These things are done in thy name, in order
  to protect them in these actions. If men fearing God bore the sword,
  if covetousness were hated, and men of courage for God were set up,
  then they would be a terror to evil-doers, and a praise to them that
  do well; and not cause them to suffer. Here equity would be heard in
  our land, and righteousness would stand up and take place; which
  giveth not place to the unrighteous, but judgeth it. To the measure of
  God’s Spirit in thee I speak, that thou mayest consider, and come to
  rule for God; that thou mayest answer that which is of God in every
  man’s conscience; for this is that, which bringeth to honour all men
  in the Lord. Therefore consider for whom thou dost rule, that thou
  mayest come to receive power from God to rule for him; and all that is
  contrary to God may by his light be condemned.

  “From a lover of thy soul, who desires thy eternal good.”

                                                               G. F.

But sufferings and imprisonments continuing and increasing, and the
Protector (under whose name they were inflicted,) hardening himself
against the complaints that were made to him, I was moved to issue the
following amongst Friends, to bring the weight of their sufferings more
heavy upon the heads of the persecutors:—

  “Who is moved by the power of the Lord to offer himself to the justice
  for his brother or sister, that lies in prison, and to go lie there in
  their stead, that his brother or sister may come out of prison, and so
  offer his life for his brother or sister? Where any lie in prison for
  tithes, witnessing the priesthood changed, that took tithes, and the
  unchangeable priesthood come; if any brother in the light, who
  witnesseth a change of the old priesthood that took tithes, and a
  disannulling of the commandment for tithes, be moved of the Lord to go
  to the priest or impropriator, to offer himself to lie in prison for
  his brother, and to lay down his life, that he may come forth, he may
  cheerfully do it, and heap up coals of fire upon the head of the
  adversary of God. Likewise where any suffer for the truth by them who
  are in the untruth, if any Friends be moved of the Lord to go to the
  magistrate, judge, general, or protector, and offer up themselves to
  lay down their lives for the brethren; as Christ hath laid down his
  life for you, so lay down your lives one for another. Here you may go
  over the heads of the persecutors, and reach the witness of God in
  all. And this shall rest a judgment upon them all for ever, and be
  witnessed to by that which is of God in their consciences. Given forth
  from the Spirit of the Lord through

                                                              G. F.”

Besides this, I wrote also a short epistle to Friends, as an
encouragement to them in their several exercises; which was as follows:—

        “MY DEAR FRIENDS,

  “In the power of the everlasting God, which comprehends the power of
  darkness, and all temptation, and that which comes out of it, in this
  power of God dwell. It will bring and keep you to the Word in the
  beginning; it will keep you up to the life, to feed thereupon, in
  which you are over the power of darkness, and in which you will find
  and feel dominion and life. And that will let you see, before the
  tempter was, and over him; and into that the tempter cannot come; for
  the power and truth he is out of. Therefore in that life dwell, in
  which you will know dominion; and let your faith be in the power, and
  over the weakness and temptations, and look not at them: but in the
  light and power of God look at the Lord’s strength, which will be made
  perfect in your weakest state. In all temptations look at the grace of
  God to bring your salvation, which is your teacher to teach you: for
  when you look or hearken to the temptations, you go from your teacher,
  the grace of God; and so are darkened in going from that teacher, the
  grace of God, which is sufficient in all temptations, to lead out of
  them, and to keep over them.”

                                                               G. F.




                              CHAPTER IX.

1655-1656.—Friends slandered by Presbyterians and Independents, suffer
    much from them and the Baptists for refusing to pay tithes—the
    priests hunt after a fallen benefice like crows after carrion—great
    miracles wrought through several—an Independent preacher convinced,
    but relapses—address to the convinced in Ireland—a sick woman at
    Baldock restored—George Fox parts and reconciles two furious
    combatants—to the seven parishes at the Land’s End, recommending
    attention to the Inward Light—George Fox parts with James Naylor,
    and has a presentiment of his fall—Major Ceely places George Fox and
    Edward Pyot under arrest—they are sent to Launceston jail—put into
    Doomsdale, and suffer a long and cruel imprisonment—a paper against
    swearing—Peter Ceely’s mittimus—George Fox has great service in
    jail—many are convinced, and opposers are confounded—experiences
    some remarkable preservations—Edward Pyot writes an excellent letter
    to Judge Glynne on the liberty of the subject, and on the injustice
    and illegality of their imprisonment—Truth spreads in the west by
    the very means taken to prevent it—exhortation and warning to
    magistrates—answer to the Exeter general warrant for taking up and
    imprisoning Friends—exhortation to Friends in the ministry—warning
    to priests and professors—cruel jailer imprisoned in Doomsdale, and
    further judgments upon him follow—a Friend offers to lie in prison
    instead of George Fox—Edward Pyot to Major-General Desborough, in
    answer to his conditional offer of liberty—George Fox to the same—he
    and his Friends are soon after liberated.


After clearing myself of those services for the Lord, which lay upon me
in LONDON, I passed into BEDFORDSHIRE and NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. At
WELLINGBOROUGH, I had a great meeting, in which the Lord’s everlasting
power and truth was over all; and many in that country were turned to
the Lord. Great rage was amongst the professors, for the wicked priests,
Presbyterians, and Independents, falsely reported “that we carried
bottles about with us, which we gave people to drink of; which made them
follow us:” but the Power, and Spirit, and Truth of God kept Friends
over the rage of the people. Great spoiling also there was of Friends’
goods for tithes, by the Independent and Presbyterian priests, and some
Baptist priests, that had got into the steeple-houses.

From WELLINGBOROUGH I went into LEICESTERSHIRE, where Colonel Hacker had
threatened that if I came there he would imprison me again, though the
Protector had set me at liberty: but when I was come to WHETSTONE, (the
meeting from which he took me before,) all was quiet there. Colonel
Hacker’s wife, and his marshal came to the meeting, and were convinced:
for the glorious powerful day of the Lord was exalted over all, and many
were convinced that day. There were at that meeting two justices of the
peace, that came out of Wales, whose names were Peter Price and Walter
Jenkin; who came both to be ministers of Christ.

I went from thence to SILEBY, to William Smith’s, where was a great
meeting, to which several Baptists came; one of them, a Baptist teacher,
was convinced, and came to sit under the Lord’s teaching by his Spirit
and power. This Baptist said, he had baptized thirty in a day.

From thence I went to DRAYTON, my native town, where so many priests and
professors had formerly gathered together against me; but now not a
priest or professor appeared. I asked some of my relations where all the
priests and professors were? They said, the priest of NUN-EATON was
dead, and eight or nine of them were seeking to get his benefice. “They
will let you alone now,” said they, “for they are like a company of
crows, when a sheep is dead, they all gather together to pull out the
puddings; so do the priests for a fallen benefice.” These were some of
their own hearers that said so of them; but they had spent their venom
against me, and the Lord delivered me by his power out of their snares.

Then I went to BADDESLEY, where was a great meeting. Many came far to
it; and were convinced and turned to the Lord; who came under Christ’s
teaching, and were settled upon him, their foundation and their rock.

From thence I passed into NOTTINGHAMSHIRE, and had large meetings there;
and into DERBYSHIRE, where the Lord’s power came over all; and many were
turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, and
came to receive the Holy Ghost. Great miracles were wrought in many
places by the power of the Lord through several.

In DERBYSHIRE James Naylor met me, and told me, seven or eight priests
had challenged him to a dispute. I had a travail in my spirit for him,
and the Lord answered me, and I was moved to bid him go on, and God
Almighty would be with him, and give him the victory in His power. And
the Lord did so; insomuch that the people saw the priests were foiled,
and they cried, “a Nailer, a Nailer hath confuted them all.” After the
dispute, he came to me again, praising the Lord. Thus was the Lord’s day
proclaimed and set over all their heads, and people began to see the
apostacy and slavery they had been under to their hireling teachers for
means; and they came to know their teacher, the Lord Jesus, who had
purchased them, and made their peace between God and them. While we were
here, Friends came out of YORKSHIRE to see us, and were glad of the
prosperity of truth.

After this I passed into WARWICKSHIRE, through Friends, visiting their
meetings; and so into WORCESTERSHIRE. I had a meeting at BIRMINGHAM, as
I went, where several were convinced and turned to the Lord. At length I
came to one Cole’s house in WORCESTERSHIRE, near CHATTAN. This Cole had
given an Independent preacher a meeting-place, and the Independent came
to be convinced, and after he was convinced he laid aside his preaching;
whereupon the old man—— Cole gave him a hundred pounds a-year. I had a
meeting there, and a very great one it was, insomuch that the
meeting-place would not hold the people: and many were turned to the
Lord that day. Afterwards, when the time of trials came, this
Independent did not stand to that which had convinced him, but turned
back, whereupon the old man took away his hundred pounds a-year from him
again. But Cole himself died in God’s truth.

I heard that at EVESHAM the magistrates had cast several Friends into
prison; and that, hearing of my coming, they made a pair of high stocks.
I sent for Edward Pittaway, a Friend that lived near EVESHAM, and asked
him the truth of the thing; and he said it was so. I went that night
with him to EVESHAM, and in the evening we had a large, precious
meeting, wherein Friends and people were refreshed with the word of
life, and with the power of the Lord. Next morning I rode to one of the
prisons, and visited Friends there, and encouraged them. Then I rode to
the other prison, where there were several prisoners; and amongst them
was Humphrey Smith,[42] who had been a priest, but was now become a free
minister of Christ. When I had visited the Friends at both prisons, and
was turned away from the prison to go out of town, I espied the
magistrates coming to seize me. But the Lord frustrated their intent,
the innocent escaped their snare, and God’s blessed power came over them
all. But exceedingly rude and envious were the priests and professors
about this time in those parts.

Footnote 42:

  Humphrey Smith became an able gospel minister, turning many to
  righteousness. He had a vision of the destruction of London by fire,
  six years before it happened, which vision he made known as a warning
  to the people to repent. (See _Piety Promoted_, vol. i. p. 39 and his
  published works). He had also a clear foresight of his own sufferings
  and death thereby. He died a prisoner for the testimony of Jesus in
  Winchester jail, in 1663, where he fell ill after a year’s
  imprisonment. Whilst he was very ill in prison, he said, “My heart is
  filled with the power of God;” and then added, “It is good for a man
  at such a time as this, to have the Lord to be his friend.” Near his
  departure, he prayed earnestly, saying, “Hear me, O Lord, uphold and
  preserve me. I know that my Redeemer liveth: Thou art strong and
  mighty, O Lord;” and prayed “that the Lord would deliver His people
  from their cruel oppressors”; and for those who had been convinced by
  him, “that the Lord would be their teacher.”

I went from EVESHAM to WORCESTER, and had a precious meeting there, and
quiet. But after it, as we came down the street towards our inn, some of
the professors fell to discourse with Friends, and were like to have
made a tumult in the city. As we went into the inn, they all cluttered
into the yard; but I went among them, and got them quieted. Next day I
walked into the town, and had much discourse with some of the
professors, concerning Christ and the way of truth. One of them denied
that Christ was of Abraham, according to the flesh, and that he was
declared to be the Son of God, according to the Spirit; but I proved
from Rom. i. that he was of the seed of Abraham, being made of the seed
of David according to the flesh; and that according to the Spirit he was
declared to be the Son of God. Afterwards I wrote a paper concerning it.

From WORCESTER we went to TEWKESBURY, where in the evening we had a
great meeting; to which came the priest of the town with a great rabble
of rude people. He boasted, that he would see whether he or I should
have the victory. “I turned the people to the divine light, which
Christ, the heavenly and spiritual man, enlighteneth them withal; that
with that light they might see their sins, and that they were in death
and darkness, and without God in the world; and that with the same light
they might also see Christ from whom it comes, their Saviour and
Redeemer, who shed his blood and died for them, and who is the way to
God, the truth, and the life.” Here the priest began to rage against the
Light, and denied it; for neither priest nor professor could endure to
hear the Light spoken of. So the priest having railed at the Light went
away, and left his rude company amongst us; but the Lord’s power came
over them, though mischief was in their hearts.

Leaving TEWKESBURY, we came to WARWICK, where in the evening we had a
meeting at a widow’s house, with many sober people. A precious meeting
we had in the Lord’s power, and several were convinced and turned to the
Lord. After it, as I was walking out, a Baptist in the company began to
jangle; and the bailiff of the town with his officers came in, and said,
“What do these people here at this time of night?” So he secured John
Crook, Amor Stoddart, Gerrard Roberts,[43] and myself, but we had leave
to go to our inn, and to be forth-coming in the morning. Next morning
many rude people came to the inn, and into our chambers, desperate
fellows; but the Lord’s power gave us dominion over them. Gerrard
Roberts and John Crook went up to the bailiff to speak with him, and to
know what he had to say to us. He said we might go our ways, for he had
little to say to us. As we rode out of town, it lay upon me to ride to
his house to let him know, “that the Protector having given forth an
instrument of government, in which liberty of conscience was granted, it
was very strange that, contrary to that instrument of government, he
would trouble peaceable people that feared God.” The Friends went with
me, but the rude people gathered about us with stones; and one of them
took hold of my horse’s bridle and broke it; but the horse drawing back
threw him under him. Though the bailiff saw this, yet he did not stop,
nor so much as rebuke the rude multitude, so that it was much we were
not slain or hurt in the streets; for the people threw stones, and
struck at us, as we rode along the town.

Footnote 43:

  Gerrard Roberts, a merchant of London, was one of the most active
  members of the Society in making the needful arrangements for the
  visits of its ministers to foreign parts.

When we were quite out of the town, I told Friends, “it was upon me from
the Lord, that I must go back into it again; and if anyone of them felt
anything upon him from the Lord, he might follow me, and the rest that
did not, might go on to DUN-COW.” So I passed up through the market in
the dreadful power of God, declaring the word of life to them, and John
Crook followed me. Some struck at me; but the Lord’s power was over
them, and gave me dominion over all. I showed them their unworthiness of
the name of Christians, and the unworthiness of their teachers who had
not brought them into more sobriety; and what a shame they were to
Christianity!

Having cleared myself, I turned back out of the town again, and passed
to COVENTRY; where we found the people closed up with darkness. I went
to a professor’s house that I had formerly been at, and he was drunk,
which grieved my soul so, that I did not go into any house in the town;
but rode into some of the streets, and into the market-place. I felt the
power of the Lord God was over the town.

Then I went on to DUN-COW, and had a meeting there in the evening, and
some were turned to the Lord by his Spirit, as also at WARWICK and
TEWKESBURY. We lay at DUN-COW that night, and there we met with John
Camm, a faithful minister of the everlasting gospel. In the morning
there gathered a rude company of priests and people, who behaved more
like beasts than men; for some of them came riding on horseback into the
room where we were; but the Lord gave us dominion over them.

From thence we passed into LEICESTERSHIRE, where we had a great meeting
at the place where I had been taken formerly; and after that we came to
BADDESLEY in WARWICKSHIRE. Here William Edmundson,[44] a Friend who
lived in Ireland, having some drawings upon his spirit to come over into
England to see me, met with me; by whom I wrote to the few Friends then
convinced in the north of Ireland, as follows:—

        “FRIENDS,

  “In that which convinced you, wait; that you may have that removed you
  are convinced of. And all my dear Friends, dwell in the life, and
  love, and power, and wisdom of God, in unity one with another, and
  with God; and the peace and wisdom of God fill all your hearts, that
  nothing may rule in you but the life, which stands in the Lord God.”

                                                               G. F.

Footnote 44:

  William Edmundson was the first person who publicly espoused the
  principles of Friends in Ireland. He was some time a soldier in
  Cromwell’s army, but the strivings of the Holy Spirit drew him out of
  the corruptions of the world, to a nearer acquaintance with God. He
  left the army, and joined the people called Quakers, though they were
  much spoken against. His life and property were given up to the
  service of the gospel, and many were his trials and sufferings on its
  account, which he bore with exemplary patience. During the civil wars,
  he had on one occasion twenty of his cows driven away from him. His
  house was also beset by some hundreds of banditti, and the shots they
  fired into the house were heard at two miles’ distance. After it was
  plundered and burned, himself and two sons were led away prisoners,
  bareheaded, and barefooted, and nearly naked, except they gave William
  Edmundson an old blanket of his own to wrap about him.

  After a toilsome night, journeying through bushes, rough stones, mire,
  and water knee-deep, they were taken to a wood, and after a mock show
  of justice, condemned to death; the young men to be hanged, and their
  father, in compliment to his courage, to be shot. Though death was no
  terror to this pious man, he expostulated with his persecutors;
  reminding them of his services in behalf of their countryfolk. Several
  of them confessed they knew him to be an honest man; yet justice and
  mercy were disregarded, and they prepared to execute their purpose.
  The youths were hoodwinked, in order to hang them; and two firelocks
  made ready to shoot their father, whom they were about to hoodwink
  also; but he told them they need not, for he could look them in the
  face, and was not afraid to die.

  At this juncture arrived a lieutenant, a brother of one whose life
  William Edmundson had saved, when the English soldiers were about to
  hang him. Thus the Lord interposed and would not suffer them to take
  their lives. The officer released the prisoners from death, but did
  not restore them to liberty, taking them to Athlone, not from a
  grateful sense of remembered services, but from a hope of preferment
  thereby. On entering the town, the high sheriff, soldiers, and rabble,
  gave them abusive language; and their lives were endangered, had not a
  lieutenant of the Irish army who recognised William Edmundson,
  declared aloud his knowledge of him, and of his worth, and thus
  quieted the tumult. They were then brought to the Irish colonel,
  before whom he appeared, wrapped in his blanket. Though the colonel
  was personally acquainted with him, he did not, in these
  circumstances, know him; but when he said, I am old William Edmundson,
  the colonel rose, and with tears in his eyes, expressed his sorrow to
  see him in that condition. After reprimanding the lieutenant, he
  committed them to the care of one of his captains, sent them food and
  money, and they met with better treatment.

  Great sufferings was it the lot of this faithful man to endure; who
  was unwearied in his Master’s service for upwards of fifty years of
  his life, counting nothing too near or dear to part with, or too great
  to suffer, if he could but win Christ and the souls of his fellow-men.
  Yet in these and many other great exercises and straits, the Lord’s
  arm and generous providence, says he, have preserved and supported me.
  He spared not himself, even to old age, in performing travels and
  services as a gospel minister, beyond the ordinary course of nature,
  often saying the Lord was his song and his strength, and had carried
  him through many and various exercises and perils. As a fixed star in
  the firmament of God’s power did he continue to hold his integrity to
  the last, being enabled to say, “O death! where is thy sting? O grave!
  where is thy victory?”

When these few lines were read amongst the Friends in Ireland at their
meeting, the power of the Lord came upon all in the room.

From Baddesley we passed to SWANINGTON and HIGHAM, and so into
Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, having great meetings; and many were
turned to the Lord by his power and Spirit. When we came to BALDOCK in
Hertfordshire, I asked, if there was nothing in that town, no
profession; and it was answered me, there were some Baptists and a
Baptist woman sick. John Rush of Bedfordshire went with me to visit her.
When we came in, there were many tender people about her. They told me
she was not a woman for this world, but if I had anything to comfort her
concerning the world to come, I might speak to her. I was moved of the
Lord God to speak to her; and the Lord raised her up again to the
astonishment of the town and country. This Baptist woman and her
husband, whose name was Baldock, came to be convinced, and many hundreds
of people have met at their house since. Great meetings and
convincements were in those parts afterwards; many received the word of
life, and sat down under the teaching of Christ, their Saviour.

When we had visited this sick woman, we returned to our inn, where were
two desperate fellows fighting so furiously, that none durst come nigh
to part them. But I was moved, in the Lord’s power, to go to them; and
when I had loosed their hands, I held one of them by one hand, and the
other by the other, showed them the evil of their doings, and reconciled
them one to the other, and they were so loving and thankful to me, that
people admired at it.[45]

Footnote 45:

  The circumstance above related is reminding of a somewhat similar one
  recorded of Edward Burrough.

  “At London,” says Sewell the historian, “there is a custom in
  summer-time, when the evening approaches, and tradesmen leave off
  working, that many lusty fellows meet in the fields, to try their
  skill and strength in wrestling, where generally a multitude of people
  stand gazing in a ring.

  “Now it so fell out, that Edward Burrough passed by the place where
  they were wrestling, and standing still among the spectators, saw how
  a strong and dexterous fellow had already thrown three others, and was
  waiting for a fourth champion, if any durst venture to enter the
  lists. At length, none being bold enough to try, Edward Burrough
  stepped into the ring, which was commonly made up of all sorts of
  people; and having looked upon the wrestler with a serious
  countenance, the man was not a little surprised, instead of an airy
  antagonist, to meet with a grave and awful young man; and all stood
  amazed as it were at this sight, eagerly expecting what would be the
  issue of this combat. But it was quite another fight Edward Burrough
  aimed at. For having already fought against spiritual wickedness, that
  had once prevailed over him, and having overcome in measure, by the
  grace of God, he now endeavoured also to fight against it in others,
  and to turn them from the evil of their ways. With this intention, he
  began very seriously to speak to the bystanders, and that with such a
  heart-piercing power, that he was heard by the mixed multitude, with
  no less attention than admiration; for his speech tended to turn them
  from darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan unto God. To
  effect this, he laboured with convincing words, showing how God had
  not left himself without a witness, but had given to man a measure of
  his grace, and enlightened every one with the light of Christ.

  “Thus zealously he preached; and though many might look upon this as a
  novelty, yet it was of such effect, that some were convinced of the
  truth; for Burrough was a breaker of stony hearts, and therefore by a
  certain author not unjustly called ‘a son of thunder;’ though he
  omitted not in due season to speak a word of consolation to those that
  were of a broken heart, and of a contrite spirit.”

From thence I passed to MARKET-STREET, where God had a people, and
through ALBAN’S to LONDON, where Friends were glad of the prosperity of
truth, and the manifestation of the Lord’s glorious power which had
delivered us, and carried us through many dangers and difficulties. I
also rejoiced to find truth prosper in the city, and all things well
amongst friends there. Only there was one John Toldervey, who had been
convinced of truth, and run out from it, and the envious priests took
occasion from thence to write a wicked book against Friends, which they
stuffed with many lies, to render truth and Friends odious. They
entitled their book, “_The Foot out of the Snare_.” But this poor man
came to see his folly and returned, condemned his backsliding, answered
the priest’s book, and exposed all their lies and wickedness. Thus the
Lord’s power came over them, and his everlasting Seed reigned, and
reigns to this day.

Now after I had tarried some time in London, and had visited Friends in
their meetings, I went out of town, leaving James Naylor in the city. As
I passed from him I cast my eyes upon him, and a fear struck me
concerning him; but I went away, and rode down to RYEGATE in Surrey,
where I had a little meeting. There the Friends told me of one Thomas
Moore, a justice of peace, that lived not far from Ryegate, a friendly,
moderate man; I went to visit him at his house, and he came to be a
serviceable man in truth.

We passed on to Thomas Patching’s, of Binscombe in Godalming, where we
had a meeting, to which several Friends came from London, and John
Bolton and his wife came on foot in frost and snow. After this we went
towards HORSHAM-PARK; and having visited Friends, passed on to ARUNDEL
and CHICHESTER, where we had meetings. At Chichester many professors
came in, and made some jangling, but the Lord’s power was over them. The
woman of the house where the meeting was, though convinced of truth, yet
not keeping her mind close to that which convinced her, fell in love
with a man of the world, who was there that time. When I knew it, I took
her aside, and was moved to speak to her, and to pray for her; but a
light thing got up in her mind, and she slighted it. Afterwards she
married the man, and soon after went distracted; for he was greatly in
debt, and she greatly disappointed. Then was I sent for to her, and the
Lord was entreated, raised her up again, and settled her mind by his
power. Afterwards her husband died; and she acknowledged the just
judgments of God were come upon her, for slighting the exhortation and
counsel I had given her.

After we left Chichester, we travelled to PORTSMOUTH. There the soldiers
had us to the governor’s house. After some examination, the Lord’s power
came over them, and we were set at liberty, and had a meeting in the
town. After which we came to RINGWOOD, where in the evening we had a
meeting, at which several were convinced, and turned to the Spirit of
the Lord, and to the teaching of Christ Jesus, their Saviour.

From Ringwood we came to POOLE; and having set up our horses at an inn,
we sent into the town to inquire for such as feared the Lord, and such
as were worthy; and had a meeting with several sober people. William
Baily, a Baptist teacher, was convinced there at that time.[46] The
people received the truth in the inward parts, and were turned to the
Lord Jesus Christ, their rock and foundation, their teacher and Saviour;
and there is become a great gathering in the name of Jesus of a very
tender people, who continue under Christ’s teaching.

Footnote 46:

  William Bailey (or Bayley), whose writings were published in one
  volume, 4to, in 1676, and of whom there is a brief account in _Piety
  Promoted_, vol. i., p. 83, is stated to have been “mighty in the
  Scriptures,” and not only a believer and preacher of the word of
  faith, but a sufferer for the same. On one occasion, he was thrown
  down and dragged upon the ground by the hair of his head, his
  persecutors endeavouring to rend and break asunder his jaws, so that
  the ground whereon he lay was besmeared with his blood. As if this
  butchering had not been enough to make him a sacrifice, a heavy man
  stamped on his breast with his feet, endeavouring to beat the breath
  out of his body. When this persecutor had done his pleasure, he told
  the jailer to take him away and put him in some nasty hole, for his
  entertainment and cure.

  William Bailey, being master of a ship, often crossed the mighty
  waters for the maintenance of his family, and many beyond the seas
  were comforted by his ministry. He was taken ill at sea on his return
  from visiting Friends in Barbadoes, and died on board the _Samuel_ of
  London, in latitude 46° 36´ N. He died in great peace, as if he had
  fallen asleep, exhorting those around him to fear God.

We went also to SOUTHAMPTON and had a meeting; several were convinced
there also. Edward Pyot of Bristol travelled with me all this western
journey.

From thence we went to DORCHESTER, and alighted at an inn, a Baptist’s
house; we sent into the town to the Baptists, to let us have their
meeting-house to meet in, and to invite the sober people to the meeting;
but they denied it us. We sent to them again, to know why they would
deny us their meeting-house; so the thing was noised in the town. Then
we sent them word, if they would not let us come to their house, they,
or any people that feared God, might come to our inn, if they pleased.
They were in a great rage; and their teacher and many of them came up,
and slapped their Bibles on the table. I asked them, why they were so
angry; were they angry with the Bible? But they fell into a discourse
about their water-baptism. I asked them, whether they could say, they
were sent of God to baptise people, as John was; and whether they had
the same Spirit and power that the apostles had? They said, they had
not. Then I asked them, how many powers there are; whether there are any
more than the power of God, and the power of the devil? They said, there
was not any other power than those two. Then said I, “if you have not
the power of God that the apostles had, then you act by the power of the
devil.” Many sober people were present, who said, “they have thrown
themselves on their backs.” Many substantial people were convinced that
night; a precious service we had there for the Lord, and his power came
over all. Next morning, as we were passing away, the Baptists, being in
a rage, began to shake the dust off their feet after us. “What,” said I,
“in the power of darkness! We, who are in the power of God, shake off
the dust of our feet against you.”

Leaving Dorchester, we came to WEYMOUTH; where also we enquired after
the sober people; and about fourscore of them gathered together at a
priest’s house. Most of them received the word of life, and were turned
to their teacher Christ Jesus, who had enlightened them with his divine
light, by which they might see their sins, and him who saveth from sin.
A blessed meeting we had with them of several hours, and they received
the truth in the love of it, with gladness of heart. The state of their
teachers and the apostacy was opened to them; and the state of the
apostles, and of the church in their days; and the state of the law, and
of the prophets before Christ, and how Christ came to fulfil them; how
he was their teacher in the apostles’ days, and how he was come now to
teach his people himself by his power and Spirit. All was quiet, the
meeting broke up peaceably, and the people were very loving; and a
meeting is continued in that town to this day. Many are added to them;
and some that had been Ranters came to own the truth, and to live very
soberly.

There was a captain of horse in the town, who sent to me, and would fain
have had me to stay longer; but I was not to stay. He and his man rode
out of town with me about seven miles, Edward Pyot also being with me.
This captain was the fattest, merriest man, the most cheerful, and the
most given to laughter, that ever I met with; insomuch that I was
several times moved to speak in the dreadful power of the Lord to him;
and yet it was become so customary to him, that he would presently laugh
at anything he saw. But I still admonished him to come to sobriety,
sincerity, and the fear of the Lord. We staid at an inn that night; and
in the morning I was moved to speak to him again, when he parted from
us. Next time I saw him, he told me, that when I spoke to him at
parting, the power of the Lord so struck him, that before he got home he
was serious enough, and had discontinued his laughing. He afterwards was
convinced, and became a serious and good man, and died in the truth.

Parting from him we went to HONITON; and at our inn inquired what people
there were in the town that feared God, and sent for them. There came to
us some of the Particular Baptists, with whom we had much reasoning. I
told them, “they held their doctrine of particular election in Esau’s,
Cain’s, and Ishmael’s nature; not in Jacob, the second birth; but they
must be born again, before they could enter the kingdom of God. And that
as the promise of God was to the Seed, not as many, but as one, which is
Christ; so the election stands _in Christ_; and they must be such as
walk in his light, grace, Spirit, and truth.”

From thence we passed to TOPSHAM, and stayed over the First-day; but the
innkeeper and his people were rude. Next morning we gave forth some
queries to the priests and professors; whereupon some rude professors
came into our inn; and had we not gone when we did, they would have
stopped us. I wore a girdle, which through forgetfulness I left behind
me at the inn, and afterwards sent to the innkeeper for, but he would
not let me have it again. Afterwards, when he was tormented in his mind
about it, he took it and burnt it, lest he should be bewitched by it, as
he said; yet when he had burnt it, he was more tormented than before.
Some, notwithstanding the rudeness of the place, were convinced; and a
meeting was afterwards settled in that town, which has continued ever
since.

After this we passed to TOTNESS, a dark town. We lodged at an inn, and
at night Edward Pyot was sick, but the Lord’s power healed him, so that
next day we got to KINGSBRIDGE, and at our inn inquired for the sober
people of the town. They directed us to Nicholas Tripe and his wife, and
we went to their house. They sent for the priest, with whom we had some
discourse; but he being confounded, quickly left us. Nicholas Tripe and
his wife were convinced; and there is since a good meeting of Friends in
that country. In the evening we returned to our inn; and there being
many people drinking in the house, I was moved of the Lord to go amongst
them, and to direct them to the light, which Christ, the heavenly Man,
had enlightened them withal; by which they might see all their evil
ways, words, and deeds, and by the same light they might also see Jesus
Christ their Saviour. The innkeeper stood uneasy, seeing it hindered his
guests from drinking; and as soon as the last words were out of my
mouth, he snatched up the candle, and said, “Come, here is a light for
you to go into your chamber.” Next morning, when he was cool, I
represented to him “what an uncivil thing it was for him to do so;” then
warning him of the day of the Lord, we got ready and passed away.

We came next day to PLYMOUTH, and after having refreshed ourselves at
our inn, we went to Robert Cary’s house, where we had a very precious
meeting. At this meeting was one Elizabeth Trelawny, daughter to a
baronet; she being somewhat dull of hearing came close to me, and placed
her ear very near me while I spoke; and she was convinced. After the
meeting some jangling Baptists came in, but the Lord’s power came over
them, and Elizabeth Trelawney gave testimony thereto. A fine meeting was
settled there in the Lord’s power, which has continued ever since; where
many faithful Friends have been convinced.

From thence we passed into CORNWALL, and came to an inn in the parish of
MENHENIOT. At night we had a meeting at Edward Hancock’s house, to which
came one Thomas Mounce, and a priest, with many people. We made the
priest confess he was a minister made and maintained by the state; and
he was confounded and went his way; but many of the people stayed. I
directed them to the “light of Christ, by which they might see their
sins, and their Saviour Christ Jesus, the way to God, and their Mediator
to make peace between God and them; their Shepherd to feed them, and
their Prophet to teach them. I directed them also to the Spirit of God
in themselves, by which they might know the Scriptures, and be led into
all truth; by which they might know God, and in it have unity one with
another.” Many were convinced at that time, and came under Christ’s
teaching, and there are fine gatherings in the name of Jesus in those
parts at this day.

We travelled thence through PENRYN to HELSTON; but could not obtain
knowledge of any sober people, through the badness of the innkeepers. At
length we came to a village where some Baptists and sober people lived,
with whom we had some discourse; and some of them were brought to
confess, that they stumbled at the light of Christ. They would have had
us to stay with them, but we passed thence to MARKET-JEW (Marazion); and
having taken up our lodging at an inn, we went out over-night to inquire
for such as feared the Lord. Next morning the mayor and aldermen
gathered together, with the high-sheriff of the county; and they sent
first the constables to bid us come before them. We asked them for their
warrant, and they saying they had none, we told them we should not go
along with them without. Upon the return of the constables without us,
they sent their serjeants, and we asked them for their warrant. They
said, they had none; but they told us, the mayor and aldermen stayed for
us. We told them, the mayor and his company did not well to trouble us
in our inn, and we should not go with them without a warrant. So they
went away and came again; and when we asked them for their warrant, one
of them pulled his mace from under his cloak; we asked them whether this
was their custom to molest and trouble strangers in their inns and
lodgings? After some time Edward Pyot went to the mayor and aldermen,
and had much discourse with them; but the Lord’s power gave him dominion
over them all. When he had returned, several of the officers came to us,
and we laid before them the incivility and unworthiness of their conduct
towards us, who were the servants of the Lord God, thus to stop and
trouble us in our lodgings; and what an unchristian act it was. Before
we left the town I wrote a paper, to be sent to the seven parishes at
the Land’s End. A copy of which follows:—

  “The mighty day of the Lord is come, and coming, wherein all hearts
  shall be made manifest, and the secrets of everyone’s heart shall be
  revealed by the light of Jesus, who lighteth every man that cometh
  into the world, that all men through him might believe, and that the
  world might have life through him, who saith, ‘Learn of me,’ and of
  whom God saith, ‘This is my beloved Son, hear ye him.’ Christ is come
  to teach his people himself; and everyone that will not hear this
  Prophet, which God hath raised up, and which Moses spoke of, when he
  said, ‘Like unto me will God raise you up a Prophet, him shall you
  hear;’ every one (I say) that will not hear this Prophet, is to be cut
  off. They that despised Moses’s law, died under the hand of two or
  three witnesses; but how much greater punishment will come upon them
  that neglect this great salvation, Christ Jesus, who saith, ‘Learn of
  me: I am the way, the truth, and the life;’ who lighteth every man
  that cometh into the world: and by His light lets him see his evil
  ways and his evil deeds. But if you hate this light, and go on in
  evil, this light will be your condemnation. Therefore, now ye have
  time, prize it; for this is the day of your visitation, and salvation
  offered to you. Every one of you hath a light from Christ, which lets
  you see you should not lie, nor do wrong to any, nor swear, nor curse,
  nor take God’s name in vain, nor steal. It is the light that shows you
  these evil deeds; which if you love, and come unto it and follow it,
  will lead you to Christ, who is the way to the Father, from whom it
  comes; where no unrighteousness enters, nor ungodliness. If you hate
  this light, it will be your condemnation; but if you love it and come
  to it, you will come to Christ; and it will bring you off from all the
  world’s teachers and ways, to learn of Christ, and will preserve you
  from the evils of the world, and all the deceivers in it.”

                                                               G. F.

This paper a Friend who was then with me had; and when we were gone
three or four miles from Market-Jew towards the west, he meeting with a
man upon the road, gave him a copy of the paper. This man proved to be a
servant to one Peter Ceely, major in the army, and a justice of peace in
that county; and he riding before us to a place called St. Ives, showed
the paper to his master, Major Ceely. When we came to IVES, Edward
Pyot’s horse having cast a shoe, we stayed to have it set; and while he
was getting his horse shod, I walked down to the sea-side. When I
returned I found the town in an uproar; and they were hailing Edward
Pyot and the other Friend before Major Ceely. I followed them into the
justice’s house, though they did not lay hands upon me. When we came in,
the house was full of rude people; whereupon I asked whether there were
not an officer among them to keep the people civil? Major Ceely said, he
was a magistrate. I told him, “he should show forth gravity and sobriety
then, and use his authority to keep the people civil; for I never saw
any people ruder: the Indians were more like Christians than they.”
After a while they brought forth the paper aforesaid, and asked whether
I would own it? I said, yes. Then he tendered the oath of abjuration to
us; whereupon I put my hand in my pocket and drew forth the answer to
it, which had been given to the Protector. After I had given him that,
he examined us severally, one by one. He had with him a silly, young
priest, who asked us many frivolous questions; and amongst the rest he
desired to cut my hair, which then was pretty long; but I was not to cut
it though many times many were offended at it. I told them, “I had no
pride in it, and it was not of my own putting on.” At length the justice
put us under a guard of soldiers, who were hard and wild, like the
justice himself; nevertheless “we warned the people of the day of the
Lord, and declared the truth to them.” The next day he sent us, guarded
by a party of horse with swords and pistols, to REDRUTH.

On First-day the soldiers would have taken us away; but we told them it
was their Sabbath, and it was not usual to travel on that day. Several
of the town’s-people gathered about us, and whilst I held the soldiers
in discourse, Edward Pyot spoke to the people; and afterwards he held
the soldiers in discourse whilst I spoke to the people; and in the mean
time the other Friend got out the back way, and went to the
steeple-house to speak to the priest and people. The people were
exceedingly desperate, in a mighty rage against him, and abused him. The
soldiers also missing him, were in a great rage, ready to kill us; but I
declared the day of the Lord, and the word of eternal life to the people
that gathered about us. In the afternoon the soldiers were resolved to
have us away, so we took horse. When we were got to the town’s-end, I
was moved of the Lord to go back again, to speak to the old man of the
house; the soldiers drew out their pistols, and swore I should not go
back. I heeded them not, but rode back, and they rode after me. I
cleared myself to the old man and the people, and then returned with
them, and reproved them for being so rude and violent.

At night we were brought to a town called Smethick then, but since
FALMOUTH. It being the evening of the First-day, there came to our inn
the chief constable of the place, and many sober people, some of whom
began to inquire concerning us. We told them we were prisoners for
truth’s sake; and much discourse we had with them concerning the things
of God. They were very sober and loving to us. Some were convinced and
stood faithful ever after.

After the constable and these people were gone, other people came in,
who were also very civil, and went away very loving. When all were gone
we went to our chamber to go to bed, and about eleven o’clock Edward
Pyot said, “I will shut the door, it may be some may come to do us some
mischief.” Afterwards we understood that Captain Keat, who commanded the
party, had purposed to do us some mischief that night; but the door
being bolted he missed his design. Next morning Captain Keat brought a
kinsman of his, a rude, wicked man, and put him into the room, he
himself standing without. The evil-minded man walking huffing up and
down the room, I bid him fear the Lord; whereupon he ran upon me, struck
me with both his hands; and placing his leg behind me, would have fain
thrown me down, but he could not for I stood stiff and still, and let
him strike. As I looked towards the door, I saw Captain Keat look on and
see his kinsman thus beat and abuse me. Whereupon I said, “Keat, dost
thou allow this?” and he said, he did; “Is this manly or civil,” said I,
“to have us under a guard and put a man to abuse and beat us? is this
manly, civil, or christian?” I desired one of our friends to send for
the constables, and they came. Then I desired the captain to let the
constables see his warrant or order, by which he was to carry us; which
he did; and his warrant was to conduct us safe to Captain Fox, governor
of Pendennis Castle; and if the governor should not be at home, he was
to convey us to Launceston jail. I told him, he had broken his order
concerning us; for we, who were his prisoners, were to be safely
conducted, but he had brought a man to beat and abuse us; so he having
broken his order, I wished the constable to keep the warrant.
Accordingly he did, and told the soldiers they might go, for he would
take charge of the prisoners; and if it cost twenty shillings in charges
to carry us up, they should not have the warrant again. I showed the
soldiers the baseness of their carriage towards us; and they walked up
and down the house, being pitifully blank and down. The constables went
to the castle, and told the officers what they had done. The officers
showed great dislike of Captain Keat’s base carriage towards us; and
told the constables that Major-General Desborough was coming to Bodmin,
and that we should meet him; and it was likely he would free us.
Meanwhile our old guard of soldiers came by way of entreaty to us, and
promised that they would be civil to us, if we would go with them. Thus
the morning was spent till it was about eleven o’clock; and then upon
the soldiers’ entreaty, and promise to be more civil, the constables
gave them the order again, and we went with them. Great was the civility
and courtesy of the constables and people of that town towards us, who
kindly entertained us; and the Lord rewarded them with his truth; for
many of them have since been convinced thereof, and are gathered into
the name of Jesus, and sit under Christ, their teacher and Saviour.

Captain Keat, who commanded our guard, understanding that Captain Fox,
who was the governor of Pendennis Castle, was gone to meet Major-General
Desborough, did not take us thither; but went with us directly to
Bodmin. We met Major-General Desborough on the way; the captain of his
troop that rode before him, knew me, and said, “O, Mr. Fox, what do you
here?” I replied, “I am a prisoner.” “Alack,” said he, “for what?” I
told him, “I was taken up as I was travelling.” “Then,” said he, “I will
speak to my lord, and he will set you at liberty.” So he came from the
head of his troop, rode up to the coach, and spoke to the major-general.
We also told him how we were taken. He began to speak against the light
of Christ, for which I reproved him; then he told the soldiers they
might carry us to Launceston; for he could not stay to talk with us,
lest his horses should take cold.

So to BODMIN we were conveyed that night; and when we were come to our
inn, Captain Keat, who was in before us, put me into a room, and went
his way. When I was come in, there stood a man with a naked rapier in
his hand. Whereupon I turned out again, called for Captain Keat, and
said unto him, “What now, Keat, what trick hast thou played now, to put
me into a room where there is a man with his naked rapier? what is thy
end in this?” “O,” said he, “pray hold your tongue; for if you speak to
this man, we cannot all rule him, he is so devilish.” “Then,” said I,
“dost thou put me into a room where there is such a man with a naked
rapier, that thou sayest you cannot rule him? what an unworthy, base
trick is this! and to put me singly into this room from the rest of my
friends, that were my fellow prisoners with me!” Thus his plot was
discovered, and the mischief they intended was prevented. Afterwards we
got another room, where we were together all night; and in the evening
we declared the truth to the people; but they were hardened and dark
people. The soldiers also, notwithstanding their fair promises, were
very rude and wicked to us again, and sat up drinking and roaring all
night.

Next day we were brought to LAUNCESTON, where Captain Keat delivered us
to the jailer. Now was there no friend, nor friendly people near us; and
the people of the town were dark and hardened. The jailer required us to
pay seven shillings a-week for our horse-meat, and seven for our diet a
piece. But after some time several sober people came to see us, and some
of the town were convinced; and many friendly people out of several
parts of the country, came to visit us, and were convinced. Then arose a
great rage among the professors and priests against us; and they said,
this people Thou and Thee all men without respect, and they will not put
off their hats, nor bow the knee to any man: this made them fret. But,
said they, we shall see, when the assize comes, whether they will dare
to Thou and Thee the judge, and keep on their hats before him. They
expected we should be hanged at the assize. But all this was little to
us; for we saw how God would stain the world’s honour and glory, and
were commanded not to seek that honour, nor give it; but we knew the
honour that comes from God only, and sought that.

It was nine weeks from the time of our commitment to the assizes, to
which abundance of people came from far and near to hear the trial of
the Quakers. Captain Bradden lay with his troop of horse there, whose
soldiers and the sheriff’s men guarded us up to the court through the
multitude of people that filled the streets; and much ado they had to
get us through them. Besides, the doors and windows were filled with
people looking out upon us. When we were brought into the court, we
stood some time with our hats on, and all was quiet; and I was moved to
say, “Peace be amongst you!” Judge Glynne, a Welchman, then chief
justice of England, said to the jailer, “what be these you have brought
here into the court?” “Prisoners, my Lord,” said he. “Why do you not put
off your hats?” said the judge to us: we said nothing. “Put off your
hats,” said the judge again. Still we said nothing. Then said the judge,
“The court commands you to put off your hats.” Then I spoke, and said,
“Where did ever any magistrate, king, or judge, from Moses to Daniel,
command any to put off their hats, when they came before them in their
courts, either amongst the Jews, the people of God, or amongst the
heathens? and if the law of England doth command any such thing, show me
that law either written or printed.” Then the judge grew very angry, and
said, “I do not carry my law-books on my back.” “But,” said I, “tell me
where it is printed in any statute-book, that I may read it.” Then said
the judge, “Take him away, prevaricator! I’ll _jerk_ him.” So they took
us away, and put us among the thieves. Presently after he calls to the
jailer, “Bring them up again.” “Come,” said he, “where had they hats
from Moses to Daniel; come, answer me: I have you fast now,” said he. I
replied, “Thou mayest read in the third of Daniel, that the three
children were cast into the fiery furnace by Nebuchadnezzar’s command,
with their coats, their hose, and their hats on.” This plain instance
stopped him: so that not having any thing else to say to the point, he
cried again, “Take them away, jailer.” Accordingly we were taken away,
and thrust in among the thieves, where we were kept a great while; and
then, without being called again, the sheriff’s men and the troopers
made way for us (but we were almost spent) to get through the crowd of
people, and guarded us to the prison again, a multitude of people
following us, with whom we had much discourse and reasoning at the jail.
We had some good books to set forth our principles, and to inform people
of the truth: which the judge and justices hearing of, they sent Captain
Bradden for them, who came into the jail to us, and violently took our
books from us, some out of Edward Pyot’s hands, and carried them away;
so we never got them again.

In the afternoon we were had up again into the court by the jailer and
sheriff’s men, and troopers, who had a mighty toil to get us through the
crowd of people. When we were in the court, waiting to be called, I
seeing both the jurymen, and such a multitude of others swearing, it
grieved my life, that such as professed Christianity should so openly
disobey and break the command of Christ and the apostle. And I was moved
of the Lord to give forth a paper against swearing, which I had about
me, to the grand and petty juries; which was as follows:—

                         “_Concerning Swearing._

  “Take heed of giving people oaths to swear: for Christ our Lord and
  Master saith, ‘Swear not at all; but let your communications be yea
  yea, and nay nay; for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.’
  If any man was to suffer death, it must be by the hand of two or three
  witnesses; and the hands of the witnesses were to be first put upon
  him, to put him to death. And the apostle James saith, ‘My brethren,
  above all things swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by
  any other oath, lest ye fall into condemnation.’ Hence you may see,
  those that swear fall into condemnation, and are out of Christ’s and
  the apostle’s doctrine. Therefore, every one of you having a light
  from Christ, who saith, ‘I am the light of the world,’ and doth
  enlighten every man that cometh into the world; who also saith, ‘Learn
  of me,’ whose doctrine is, not to swear; and the apostle’s doctrine
  is, not to swear; ‘let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, in all
  your communications; for whatsoever is more, cometh of evil.’ Then,
  they that go into more than yea and nay, go into evil, and are out of
  the doctrine of Christ.

  “Now, if you say, ‘that the oath was the end of controversy and
  strife,’ they who are in strife, are out of Christ’s doctrine; for he
  is the covenant of peace: and they who are in it, are in the covenant
  of peace. And the apostle brings that but as an example: as, men
  swearing by the greater; and the oath was the end of controversy and
  strife among men; and said, verily, men swear by the greater: but God
  could not find a greater, but swears by himself, concerning Christ;
  who, when he was come, taught not to swear at all. So such as are in
  him, and follow him, cannot but abide in his doctrine.

  “If you say, ‘they swore under the law, and under the prophets,’
  Christ is the end of the law, and of the prophets, to every one that
  believeth for righteousness’ sake. Now mark; if you believe, ‘I am the
  light of the world, which doth enlighten every man that cometh into
  the world,’ saith Christ, by whom it was made; and every man of you
  that is come into the world is enlightened with a light that comes
  from Christ, by whom the world was made, that all of you through him
  might believe; that is the end for which he doth enlighten you. Now if
  you do believe in the light, as Christ commands, and saith, ‘believe
  in the light, that you may be children of light,’ you believe in
  Christ, and come to learn of him who is the way to the Father. This is
  the light which shows the evil actions you have all acted, the ungodly
  deeds you have committed, and all the ungodly speeches you have
  spoken; and all your oaths, cursed speaking, and ungodly actions. Now
  if you attend to this light, it will let you see all that you have
  done contrary to it; and loving it, it will turn you from your evil
  deeds, evil actions, evil ways, evil words, to Christ, who is not of
  the world; who is the light which lighteth every man that cometh into
  the world;—who testifies against the world, that the deeds thereof are
  evil. So doth the light in every man, that he hath received from him,
  testify against his works and deeds that are evil, that they are
  contrary to the light; and each shall give an account at the day of
  judgment for every idle word that is spoken. This light shall bring
  every tongue to confess, yea, and every knee to bow at the name of
  Jesus; in which light, if you believe, you shall not come into
  condemnation, but come to Christ, who is not of the world;—to him by
  whom it was made; but if you believe not in the light, this, the
  light, is your condemnation, saith Christ.”

                                                               G. F.

This paper passing among them from the jury to the justices, they
presented it to the judge; so that when we were called before the judge,
he bade the clerk give me that paper; and then asked me, “whether that
seditious paper was mine;” I told him, “If they would read it up in open
court, that I might hear it, if it was mine I would own it, and stand by
it.” He would have had me to take it, and look upon it in my own hand;
but “I again desired that it might be read, that all the country might
hear it, and judge whether there was any sedition in it or not; for if
there were I was willing to suffer for it.” At last the clerk of the
assize read it with an audible voice, that all the people might hear it:
and when he had done, I told them, “it was my paper; I would own it; and
so might they too, except they would deny the Scripture: for was not
this Scripture language, and the words and commands of Christ, and the
apostle, which all true Christians ought to obey?” Then they let fall
that subject; and the judge fell upon us about our hats again, bidding
the jailer take them off, which he did, and gave them to us; and we put
them on again. Then we asked the judge and the justices, what we had
lain in prison for these nine weeks, seeing they now objected nothing to
us but about our hats; and as for putting off our hats, I told them,
that was the honour which God would lay in the dust, though they made so
much to do about it; the honour which is of men, and which men seek one
of another, and is the mark of unbelievers. For “how can ye believe,”
saith Christ, “who receive honour one of another, and seek not the
honour that cometh from God only?” and Christ saith, “I receive not
honour from men;” and all true Christians should be of his mind.

Then the judge began to make a great speech, how he represented the lord
Protector’s person; who had made him lord chief justice of England, and
sent him to come that circuit, &c. We desired him then, that he would do
us justice for our false imprisonment, which we had suffered nine weeks
wrongfully. But instead of that, they brought in an indictment, that
they had framed against us; so strange a thing, and so full of lies,
that I thought it had been against some of the thieves; that we came “by
force and arms, and in a hostile manner into the court;” who were
brought, as aforesaid. I told them, “it was false:” and still we cried
for justice for our false imprisonment, being taken up in our journey
without cause by Major Ceely. Then Peter Ceely spoke to the judge, and
said, “May it please you, my lord, this man (pointing to me), went aside
with me, and told me how serviceable I might be for his design; that he
could raise forty thousand men at an hour’s warning, and involve the
nation in blood, and so bring in King Charles. I would have aided him
out of the country, but he would not go. If it please you, my lord, I
have a witness to swear it.” So he called upon his witness; but the
judge not being forward to examine the witness, I desired that he would
be pleased to let my mittimus be read in the face of the court and
country, in which my crime was signified, for which I was sent to
prison. The judge said, “it should not be read;” I said, “it ought to
be, seeing it concerned my liberty and my life.” The judge said again,
“It shall not be read;” but I said, “it ought to be read; for if I have
done anything worthy of death, or of bonds, let all the country know
it.” Then seeing they would not read it, I spoke to one of my
fellow-prisoners, “Thou hast a copy of it, read it up,” said I. “It
shall not be read,” said the judge; “Jailer,” said he, “take him away, I
will see whether he or I shall be master.” So I was taken away; and a
while after called for again. I still cried to have my mittimus read;
for that signified the cause of my commitment: wherefore I again spoke
to the friend, my fellow prisoner, to read it. He did read it, and the
judge, justices, and whole court were silent; for the people were eager
to hear it. It was as follows:—

_Peter Ceely, one of the Justices of the Peace of this County, to the
    Keeper of His Highness’s jail at Launceston, or his lawful Deputy in
    that behalf, Greeting_:—

  “I send you herewithal by the bearers hereof, the bodies of Edward
  Pyot of Bristol, and George Fox of Drayton-in-the-Clay, in
  Leicestershire, and William Salt of London, which they pretend to be
  the places of their habitations, who go under the notion of Quakers
  and acknowledge themselves to be such; who have spread several papers
  tending to the disturbance of the public peace, and cannot render any
  lawful cause of coming into these parts, being persons altogether
  unknown, and having no pass for their travelling up and down the
  country, and refusing to give sureties of their good behaviour,
  according to the law in that behalf provided; and refuse to take the
  oath of abjuration, &c. These are therefore, in the name of his
  Highness the lord Protector, to will and command you, that when the
  bodies of said Edward Pyot, George Fox, and William Salt, shall be
  unto you brought, you them receive, and in his highness’s prison
  aforesaid you safely keep them, until by due course of law they shall
  be delivered. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at
  your perils. Given under my hand and seal, at St. Ives, the eighteenth
  day of January, 1665.”

                                                           P. CEELY.

When it was read I spoke thus to the judge and justices: “Thou that
sayest thou art chief justice of England, and you justices know, that if
I had put in sureties, I might have gone whither I pleased; and have
carried on the design (if I had had one), which Major Ceely hath charged
me with: and if I had spoken those words to him, which he hath here
declared, judge ye, whether bail or mainprize could have been taken in
that case.” Then, turning my speech to Major Ceely, I said, “When or
where did I take thee aside? Was not thy house full of rude people, and
thou as rude as any of them at our examination: so that I asked for a
constable or some other officer, to keep the people civil? But if thou
art my accuser, why sittest thou on the bench? This is not a place for
thee to sit in; for accusers do not use to sit with the judge: thou
oughtest to come down, and stand by me, and look me in the face.
Besides, I would ask the judge and justices whether or not Major Ceely
is not guilty of this treason, which he charges against me, in
concealing it so long as he hath done? Does he understand his place
either as a soldier or a justice of the peace? For he tells you here,
that I went aside with him, and told him what a design I had in hand,
and how serviceable he might be for my design: that I could raise forty
thousand men in an hour’s time, and bring in King Charles, and involve
the nation in blood. He saith, moreover, he would have aided me out of
the country, but I would not go; and therefore he committed me to prison
for want of sureties for the good behaviour, as the mittimus declares.
Now do not you see plainly that Major Ceely is guilty of this plot and
treason that he talks of, and hath made himself a party to it, by
desiring me to go out of the country, and demanding bail of me, and not
charging me with this pretended treason till now, nor discovering it?
But I deny and abhor his words, and am innocent of his devilish design.”
So that business was let fall: for the judge saw clearly enough, that
instead of ensnaring me, he had ensnared himself.

Major Ceely then got up again and said, “If it please you, my lord, to
hear me: this man struck me, and gave me such a blow, as I never had in
my life.” At this I smiled in my heart, and said, “Major Ceely, thou art
a justice of peace, and a major of a troop of horse, and tells the judge
here in the face of the court and country, that I (who am a prisoner)
struck thee, and gave thee such a blow, as thou never hadst the like in
thy life? What! art thou not ashamed? Prithee, Major Ceely?” said I,
“where did I strike thee? and who is thy witness for that? who was by?”
He said it was in the Castle-Green, and that Captain Bradden was
standing by, when I struck him. “I desired the judge to let him produce
his witness for that, and I called again upon Major Ceely to come down
from off the bench, telling him, it was not fit that the accuser should
sit as judge over the accused.” When I called again for his witnesses,
he said Captain Bradden was his witness. Then, I said, “Speak, Captain
Bradden, didst thou see me give him such a blow, and strike him, as he
saith?” Captain Bradden made no answer; but bowed his head towards me. I
desired him to speak up, if he knew any such thing: but he only bowed
his head again. “Nay,” said I, “speak up, and let the court and country
hear, and let not bowing of the head serve the turn. If I have done so,
let the law be inflicted on me; I fear not sufferings, nor death itself,
for I am an innocent man concerning all this charge.” But Captain
Bradden never testified to it: and the judge finding those snares would
not hold, cried, “Take him away, jailer:” and then, when we were taken
away, he fined us twenty marks a-piece for not putting off our hats; and
to be kept in prison till we paid it: so he sent us back to the jail.

At night Captain Bradden came to see us, and seven or eight justices
with him, who were very civil to us, and told us, they believed neither
the judge nor any in the court gave credit to the charges which Major
Ceely had brought forward against me in the face of the country. And
Captain Bradden said, Major Ceely had an intent to take away my life if
he could have got another witness. “But,” said I, “Captain Bradden, why
didst not thou witness for me, or against me, seeing Major Ceely
produced thee for a witness, that thou saw me strike him; and when I
desired thee to speak either for me or against me, according to what
thou saw or knew, thou wouldst not speak.” “Why,” said he, “when Major
Ceely and I came by you, as you were walking in the Castle-Green, he put
off his hat to you, and said, ‘How do you do, Mr. Fox? Your servant,
Sir.’ Then you said to him, ‘Major Ceely, take heed of hypocrisy, and of
a rotten heart: for when came I to be thy master, and thou my servant?
Do servants cast their masters into prison?’ This was the great blow he
meant you gave him.” Then I called to mind that they walked by us, and
that he spoke so to me, and I to him; which hypocrisy and
rotten-heartedness he manifested openly, when he complained of this to
the judge in open court, and in the face of the country; and would have
made them all believe, that I struck him outwardly with my hand.

Now we were kept in prison, and many came from far and near, to see us;
of whom some were people of account in the world; for the report of our
trial was spread abroad, and our boldness and innocency in our answers
to the judge and court were talked of in town and country. Among others
came Humphrey Lower to visit us, a grave, sober, old man, who had been a
justice of peace; he was very sorry we should lie in prison; telling us
how serviceable we might be if we were at liberty. We reasoned with him
concerning swearing; and having acquainted him how they tendered the
oath of abjuration to us, as a snare, because they knew we could not
swear, we showed him that no people could be serviceable to God, if they
disobeyed the command of Christ; and that they that imprisoned us for
the hat-honour, which was of men, and which men sought for, prisoned the
good, and vexed and grieved the spirit of God in themselves, which
should have turned their minds to God. So we turned him to the Spirit of
God in his heart, and to the light of Christ Jesus; and he was
thoroughly convinced, and continued so to his death, and became very
serviceable, to us.[47]

Footnote 47:

  Humphrey Lower, who resided near Bodmin, in Cornwall, was an
  influential magistrate, his name appearing as such in the history of
  the county, under Charles I. He could, however, say with Paul, “What
  things were gain unto me, those I counted loss for Christ.” In 1658,
  for not attending the national worship, and refusing to enter into
  bond to appear at the assizes, on a presentment made against him by
  the constable of the parish, H. Lower was, on his non-appearance,
  committed, notwithstanding his age and high character, to Launceston
  jail, where he continued till the assizes; and then was put forth
  without examination or trial, or any satisfaction for such rough
  treatment. In 1660, he was sent for by a warrant, to appear before two
  justices at Wadebridge, when one of them, Roscarrock, tendered him the
  oath of supremacy; and for his refusing to take it, a mittimus was
  made out and subscribed by him and two other magistrates, who acted
  very unwillingly. Thereupon he was again sent to Launceston jail,
  where he remained about two weeks, and then was freed by Sir J.
  Coryton and E. Hearle. It is stated that H. Lower, when himself in the
  commission of the peace, had more obliged the said Roscarrock than any
  other man, by doing him many singular offices of justice and courtesy.
  The return was a very ungrateful one.

  G. Fox mentions large and satisfactory meetings held at his house in
  1663 and 1668, and says that he continued serviceable till his death,
  the date of which event is not recorded.

There came also to see us one Colonel Rouse, a justice of peace, with a
great company with him. He was as full of words and talk as ever I heard
any man in my life, so that there was no speaking to him. At length I
asked him, “whether he had ever been at school, and knew what belonged
to questions and answers;” (this I said to stop him.) “At school!” said
he, “Yes.” “At school!” said the soldiers; “doth he say so to our
colonel, that is a scholar?” Then said I, “If he be so, let him be
still, and receive answers to what he hath said.” Then I was moved to
speak the word of life to him in God’s dreadful power; which came so
over him that he could not open his mouth: his face swelled and was red
like a turkey; his lips moved, and he mumbled something; but the people
thought he would have fallen down. I stepped to him, and he said he was
never so in his life before: for the Lord’s power stopped the evil power
in him; so that he was almost choked. The man was ever after very loving
to Friends, and not so full of airy words to us; though he was full of
pride; but the Lord’s power came over him, and the rest that were with
him.

Another time there came an officer of the army, a very malicious, bitter
professor, whom I had known in London. He was full of his airy talk
also, and spoke slightingly of the light of Christ, and against the
truth, and against the Spirit of God being in men, as it was in the
apostles’ days; till the power of God that bound the evil in him, had
almost choked him as it did Colonel Rouse: for he was so full of evil
that he could not speak, but blubbered and stuttered. But from the time
that the Lord’s power struck him, and came over him, he was ever after
more loving to us.

The assize being over, and we settled in prison upon such a commitment,
that we were not likely to be soon released, we discontinued giving the
jailer seven shillings a-week each for our horses, and seven for
ourselves; and sent our horses out into the country. Upon which he grew
very wicked and devilish; and put us down into Doomsdale, a nasty,
stinking place, where they put murderers, after they were condemned. The
place was so noisome, that it was observed few that went in ever came
out again in health. There was no house of office in it; and the
excrements of the prisoners that from time to time had been left there,
had not been carried out (as we were told) for many years. So that it
was all like mire, and in some places to the top of the shoes in water
and urine; and he would not let us cleanse it, nor suffer us to have
beds or straw to lie on. At night some friendly people of the town
brought us a candle and a little straw, and we burnt some of it to take
away the stink. The thieves lay over our heads, and the head jailer in a
room by them, over us also. It seems the smoke went up into the jailer’s
room; which put him into such a rage, that he took the pots of
excrements of the thieves, and poured them through a hole upon our heads
in Doomsdale; whereby we were so bespattered, that we could not touch
ourselves or one another. And the stink increased upon us, so that what
with that, and what with smoke, we had nearly been choked and smothered.
We had the stink under our feet before, but now we had it on our heads
and backs also; and he having quenched our straw with the filth he
poured down, had made a great smother in the place. Moreover he railed
at us most hideously, calling us hatchet-faced dogs, and such strange
names as we had never heard. In this manner were we fain to stand all
night, for we could not sit down, the place was so full of filthy
excrements.[48] A great while he kept us in this manner, before he would
let us cleanse it, or suffer us to have any victuals brought in but what
we had through the grate. Once a girl brought us a little meat, and he
arrested her for breaking his house, and sued her in the town-court for
breaking the prison. Much trouble he put her to, whereby others were so
discouraged, that we had much to do to get water or victuals. Near this
time we sent for a young woman, Ann Downer, from London, that could
write, and take things well in short-hand, to buy and dress our meat for
us, which she was very willing to do, it being also upon her spirit to
come to us in the love of God; and she was very serviceable to us.

Footnote 48:

  We who live in the 19th century, when the impartial administration of
  justice extends to all ranks of society, and when the accommodations
  of our prisons are so vigilantly looked into, can scarcely credit that
  respectable Englishmen should be subjected to such gross abuse in
  pestilential dungeons. But the early annals of Friends abound with
  similar cases, many of them still more aggravated. Take the following
  example:—

  During the close imprisonment of Friends at Aberdeen, Patrick
  Livingstone often preached to the people through the prison windows,
  exhorting the people to fear God. This practice was highly displeasing
  to the magistrates. They, therefore, sought to prevent it, by causing
  some of them to be separated from the rest of their companions, and
  violently thrust into a close-vaulted cell, on the top of the jail,
  called the “iron-house,” where the worst of felons and murderers were
  usually confined. They had neither light nor air, except through a
  long hole in a thick wall, which had a double grating of iron on the
  outside and another within. Here they were kept night and day, in the
  heat of the summer of 1678, when the filthiness of the place, and the
  corruption of the air so closely pent-up, produced a multitude of
  worms, called _white maggots_ and _other vermin_, which swarmed about
  even upon their beds and victuals, and manifestly tended to the
  extreme danger of their health and lives.

This head-jailer, we were informed, had been a thief, and was branded in
the hand and in the shoulder: his wife, too, had been branded in the
hand. The under-jailer had been branded in the hand and shoulder; and
his wife in the hand also. Colonel Bennet, who was a Baptist teacher,
having purchased the jail and lands belonging to the castle, had placed
this head-jailer therein. The prisoners, and some wild people, talked of
spirits that haunted Doomsdale, and how many had died in it; thinking
perhaps to terrify us therewith. But I told them, that if all the
spirits and devils in hell were there, I was over them in the power of
God, and feared no such thing; for Christ, our priest, would sanctify
the walls and the house to us, he who bruised the head of the devil. The
priest was to cleanse the plague out of the walls of the house under the
law, which Christ, our priest, ended; who sanctifies both inwardly and
outwardly the walls of the house, the walls of the heart, and all things
to his people.

By this time the general quarter-sessions drew nigh; and the jailer
still carrying himself basely and wickedly towards us, we drew up our
suffering case, and sent it to the sessions at Bodmin. On reading of
which the justices gave order, “that Doomsdale door should be opened and
that we should have liberty to cleanse it, and to buy our meat in the
town.” We also sent a copy of our sufferings to the Protector, setting
forth how we were taken and committed by Major Ceely; and abused by
Captain Keat as aforesaid, and the rest in order. The Protector sent
down an order to Captain Fox, governor of Pendennis Castle, to examine
the matter about the soldiers abusing us, and striking me. There were at
that time many of the gentry of the country at the castle; and Captain
Keat’s kinsman, that struck me, was sent for before them, and much
threatened. They told him, “that if I should change my principle, I
might take the extremity of the law against him, and might recover sound
damages of him.” Captain Keat also was checked, for suffering the
prisoners under his charge to be abused. This was of great service in
the country; for afterwards Friends might have spoken in any market or
steeple-house thereabouts, and none would meddle with them.

I understood that Hugh Peters, one of the Protector’s chaplains, told
him they could not do George Fox a greater service for the spreading of
his principles in Cornwall, than to imprison him there. And indeed my
imprisonment there was of the Lord, and for his service in those parts;
for after the assizes were over, and it was known we were likely to
continue prisoners, several Friends from most parts of the nation came
into the country to visit us. Those parts of the West were very dark
countries at that time; but the Lord’s light and truth broke forth,
shone over all, and many were turned from darkness to light, and from
Satan’s power unto God. Many were moved to go to the steeple-houses; and
several were sent to prison to us; and a great convincement began in the
country. For now we had liberty to come out and to walk in the
Castle-Green; and many came to us on first-days, to whom we declared the
word of life. Great service we had among them, and many were turned to
God, up and down the country; but great rage got up in the priests and
professors against the truth and us. One of the envious professors had
collected many Scripture sentences, to prove that we ought to put off
our hats to the people; and he invited the town of Launceston to come
into the castle-yard to hear him read them: amongst other instances that
he there brought, one was, that Saul bowed to the witch of Endor. When
he had done, we got a little liberty to speak; and we showed both him
and the people, “that Saul was gone from God, and had disobeyed God,
like them, when he went to the witch of Endor: that neither the
prophets, nor Christ, nor the apostles ever taught people to bow to a
witch.” The man went away with his rude people; but some stayed with us,
and we showed them that this was not gospel instruction, to teach people
to bow to a witch. For now people began to be affected with the truth,
and the devil’s rage increased; so that we were often in great danger.

One time there came a soldier to us; and whilst one of our friends was
admonishing and exhorting him to sobriety, &c., I saw him begin to draw
his sword. Whereupon I stepped to him, and told him what a shame it was
to offer to draw his sword upon a naked man, and a prisoner; and how
unfit and unworthy he was to carry such a weapon; and that if he should
have offered such a thing to some men, they would have taken his sword
from him, and have broken it to pieces. So he was ashamed, and went his
way; and the Lord’s power preserved us.

Another time, about eleven at night, the jailer being half drunk, came
and told me he had got a man now to dispute with me (this was when we
had leave to go a little into the town.) As soon as he spoke these
words, I felt there was mischief intended to my body. All that night and
the next day, I lay down on a grass-plat to slumber, and I felt
something still about my body; and I started up and struck at it in the
power of the Lord, and yet still it was about my body. Then I arose and
walked into the Castle-Green, and the under-keeper came to me, and told
me there was a maid would speak with me in the prison. I felt a snare in
his words too, therefore I went not into the prison, but to the grate,
and looking in, I saw a man that was lately brought to prison for being
a conjurer, and he had a knife in his hand. I spoke to him, and he
threatened to cut my chaps; but being within the jail, he could not come
at me. This was the jailer’s great disputant. I went soon after into the
jailer’s house, and found him at breakfast; and he had then got his
conjurer out with him. I told the jailer his plot was discovered. Then
he got up from the table, and cast his napkin away in a rage; and I left
them and went away to my chamber; for at this time we were out of
Doomsdale. At the time the jailer had said the dispute should be, I went
down and walked in the court (the place appointed) till about eleven,
but nobody came. Then I went up to my chamber again, and after a while I
heard one call for me. I stepped to the stairs’ head, and there I saw
the jailer’s wife upon the stairs, and the conjuror at the bottom of the
stairs, holding his hand behind his back and in a great rage. I asked
him, “Man, what hast thou in thy hand behind thy back? Pluck thy hand
before thee,” said I; “let us see thy hand, and what thou hast in it.”
Then in a rage he plucked forth his hand with a naked knife in it. I
showed the jailer’s wife the wicked design of her husband and herself
against me; for this was the man they they had brought to dispute of the
things of God. But the Lord discovered their plot, and prevented their
evil design; they both raged, and the conjuror threatened. Then I was
moved to speak sharply to him in the dreadful power of the Lord, which
bound him down, so that he never after durst appear before me to speak
to me. I saw it was the Lord alone that preserved me out of their bloody
hands; for the devil had a great enmity to me, and stirred up his
instruments to seek my hurt. But the Lord prevented them; and my heart
was filled with thanksgivings and praises unto him.

Now while I was exercised with people of divers sorts, that came some
out of good will to visit us, some out of an envious, carping mind to
wrangle and dispute, and some out of curiosity to see us, Edward Pyot,
who before his convincement had been a captain in the army, and had a
good understanding in the laws and rights of the people, being sensible
of the injustice and envy of Judge Glynne to us at our trial, and
willing to lay the weight thereof upon him, and make him sensible
thereof also, wrote an epistle to him on behalf of us all, thus:—

               “_To John Glynne, Chief Justice of England._

        “FRIEND,

  “We are free men of England, free born; our rights and liberties are
  according to law, and ought to be defended by it: and therefore with
  thee, by whose hand we have so long suffered, and still suffer, let us
  reason a little plainly concerning thy proceedings against us, whether
  they have been according to law, and agreeable to thy duty and office,
  as chief minister of the law, or justice of England. And in meekness
  and lowliness abide, that the witness of God in thy conscience may be
  heard to speak and judge in this matter, for thou and we must all
  appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that everyone may receive
  according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Therefore,
  friend, in moderation and soberness, weigh what is herein laid before
  thee.

  “In the afternoon, before we were brought before thee at the assize at
  Launceston, thou didst cause many scores of our books to be violently
  taken from us by armed men without due process of law; which being
  perused to see if anything in them could be found to be laid to our
  charge, who were innocent men, and then upon our legal issue, thou
  hast detained from us to this very day. Now our books are our goods,
  and our goods are our property; and our liberty is to have and enjoy
  our property; and of our liberty and property the law is the defence,
  which saith, ‘No free man shall be disseized of his freehold,
  liberties, or free customs, &c., nor any way otherwise destroyed: and
  we shall not pass upon him, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by
  the law of the land.’ Magna Charta, cap. 29. Now friend, consider, is
  not the taking away of a man’s goods violently, by force of arms, as
  aforesaid, contrary to the law of the land? Is not the keeping of them
  so taken away, a disseizing him of his property, and a destroying of
  it and his liberty, yea, his very being, so far as the invading of the
  guard the law sets about him, is in order thereunto? Calls not the law
  this, a destroying of a man? Is there any more than one common guard
  or defence to property, liberty, and life, viz. the law? And can this
  guard be broken on the former (viz. property and liberty), and the
  latter (viz. life,) be sure? Doth not he that makes an invasion upon a
  man’s property and liberty (which he doth, who, contrary to law, which
  is the guard, acts against either,) make an invasion upon a man’s
  life; since that which is the guard of the one, is also of the other?
  If a penny, or a penny’s-worth, be taken from a man contrary to law,
  may not by the same rule all that a man hath be taken away? If the
  bond of the law be broken upon a man’s property, may it not on the
  same ground be broken upon his person? And by the same reason, as it
  is broken on one man, may it not be broken upon all, since the
  liberty, and property, and beings of all men under a government are
  relative, a communion of wealth, as the members in the body, but one
  guard and defence to all, the law? One man cannot be injured therein,
  but it redounds to all. Are not such things in order to the subversion
  and dissolution of government? Where there is no law, what is become
  of government? And of what value is the law made, when the ministers
  thereof break it at pleasure upon men’s properties, liberties, and
  persons? Canst thou clear thyself of these things, as to us? To that
  of God in thy conscience, which is just, do I speak. Hast thou acted
  like a minister, the chief minister, of the law, who hast taken our
  goods, and yet detainest them, without so much as going by lawful
  warrant, grounded upon due information, which in this our case thou
  couldst not have; for none had perused them, whereby to give thee
  information? Shouldst thou exercise violence and force of arms on
  prisoners’ goods, in their prison-chamber, instead of proceeding
  orderly and legally, which thy place calls upon thee, above any man,
  to tender, defend, and maintain against wrong, and to preserve entire
  the guard of every man’s being, liberty, life, and livelihood?
  Shouldst thou, whose duty it is to punish the wrong-doer, do wrong
  thyself? who ought to see that the law is kept and observed, break the
  law, and turn aside the due administration thereof? Surely from thee,
  considering thou art chief justice of England, other things were
  expected, both by us and by the people of this nation.

  “And when we were brought before thee, and stood upon our legal issue,
  and no accuser or accusation came in against us, as to what we had
  been wrongfully imprisoned, and in prison detained for nine weeks,
  shouldst not thou have caused us to be acquitted by proclamation?
  Saith not the law so? Oughtest thou not to have examined the cause of
  our commitment? And there not appearing a lawful cause, oughtest thou
  not to have discharged us? Is it not the substance of thy office and
  duty, to do justice according to the law and custom of England? Is not
  this the end of the administration of the law? of the general assizes?
  of the jail delivery? of the judges going the circuits? Hast not thou
  by doing otherwise, acted contrary to all these, and to Magna Charta?
  which, cap. 29, saith, ‘We shall sell to no man, we shall deny or
  defer to no man, either justice or right.’ Hast thou not both deferred
  and denied to us, who had been so long oppressed, this justice and
  right? And when of thee justice we demanded, saidst thou not, ‘If we
  would be uncovered, thou wouldst hear us, and do us justice?’—‘We
  shall sell to no man, we shall deny or defer to no man, either justice
  or right,’ saith Magna Charta, as aforesaid. Again, ‘We have commanded
  all our justices, that they shall henceforth do even law, and
  execution of right to all our subjects, rich and poor, without having
  regard to any man’s person; and without letting to do right for any
  letters or commandments, which may come to them from us, or from any
  other, or by any other cause, &c., upon pain to be at our will, body,
  lands, and goods, to do therewith as shall please us, in case they do
  contrary,’ saith Stat. 20. Edw. III. cap. 1. Again, ‘Ye shall swear
  that ye shall do even law and execution of right to all, rich and
  poor, without having regard to any person; and that ye deny to no man
  common right by the king’s letters, or other man’s, nor for any other
  cause. And in case any letter come to you contrary to the law, that ye
  do nothing by such letter, but certify the king thereof, and go forth
  to do the law notwithstanding those letters. And in case ye be from
  henceforth found in default in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall
  be at the king’s will of body, lands, and goods, thereof to be done,
  as shall please him,’ saith the oath, appointed by the statute to be
  taken by all the judges, Stat. 18. Edw. III. But none of these nor any
  other law hath such an expression or condition in it as this, viz.,
  ‘provided he will put off his hat to you, or be uncovered:’ nor doth
  the law of God so say, or that your persons be respected; but the
  contrary. From whence then comes this new law, ‘If ye will be
  uncovered I will hear you, and do you justice?’ This hearing complaint
  of wrong, this doing of justice, upon condition, wherein lies the
  equity and reasonableness of that? When were these fundamental laws
  repealed, which were the issue of much blood and war; to uphold which
  cost the miseries and blood of the late wars, that we shall now be
  heard, as to right, and have justice done us but upon condition, and
  that too such a trifling one as putting off the hat? Doth thy saying
  so, who art commanded, as aforesaid, repeal them, and make them of
  none effect, and all the miseries undergone, and the blood shed for
  them of old, and of late years? Whether it be so or not indeed, and to
  the nation, thou hast made it so to us, to whom thou hast denied the
  justice of our liberty (when we were before thee, and no accuser, nor
  accusation came in against us,) and the hearing of the wrong done to
  us, who are innocent, and the doing us right. And bonds hast thou
  cast, and continued upon us until this day, under an unreasonable and
  cruel jailer, for not performing that thy condition, for
  conscience-sake. But thinkest thou that this thine own conditional
  justice maketh void the law? or can it do so? or absolve thee before
  God or man? or acquit the penalty mentioned in the laws aforesaid?
  unto which hast thou not consented and sworn? viz., ‘And in case ye be
  from henceforth found in default, in any of the points aforesaid, ye
  shall be at the king’s will, of body, lands, and goods, thereof to be
  done as shall please him.’ And is not thy saying, ‘If ye will be
  uncovered (or put off your hats), I will hear you, and do you
  justice;’ and because we could not put them off for conscience-sake,
  thy denying us justice, and refusing to hear us, as to wrong, who had
  so unjustly suffered, a default in thee against the very essence of
  those laws, yea, and overthrow thereof, for which thing’s sake (being
  of the highest importance to the well-being of men), so just, so
  equal, so necessary, those laws were made, and all the provisions
  therein? To make a default in any one point of which provisions,
  exposeth to the said penalty. Dost not thou by this time see where
  thou art? Art thou sure thou shalt never be made to understand and
  feel the justice thereof? Is thy seat so high, and thy fence so great,
  and art thou so certain of thy time and station, above all that have
  gone before thee, whom justice hath cut down, and given them their
  due, that thou shalt never be called to an account, nor with its long
  and sure stroke be reached? Deceive not thyself, God is come nearer to
  judgment than the workers of iniquity in this age imagine; who
  persecute and evil-entreat those that witness the just and Holy One,
  for their witnessing of him who is come to reign for ever and ever.
  Saith he not, he will be a swift witness against the false swearers?
  God is not mocked.

  “Surely, friend, that must needs be a very great offence which
  deprives a man of justice, of being heard as to wrong, of the benefit
  of the law, and of those laws afore-rehearsed; to defend the justice
  and equity of which a man hath adventured his blood and all that is
  dear to him. But to stand covered (or with the hat on), in conscience
  to the command of the Lord, is made by thee such an offence (which is
  none in law), and rendered upon us (who are innocent, serving the
  living God), effectual to deny us justice, though the laws of God, and
  of man, and the oath, equity and reason, say the contrary, and on it
  pronounce such a penalty. ‘If ye will be uncovered (uncovered, saidst
  thou), I will hear you, and do you justice;’ but justice we had not,
  nor were we heard, because Jesus Christ, who is the higher power, the
  lawgiver of his people, in our consciences commanded us not to respect
  persons, whom we choose to obey rather than man. And for our obedience
  unto him hast thou cast us into prison, and continued us there till
  this very day, having showed us neither law for it, nor Scripture, nor
  instances of either, nor example of heathens nor others.

  “Friend, come down to that of God, that is just in thee, and consider,
  was ever such a thing as this heard of in this nation? what is become
  of seriousness, of true judgment, and of righteousness? An unrighteous
  man, standing before thee with his hat off, shall be heard; but an
  innocent man, appearing with his hat on in conscience to the Lord,
  shall neither be heard nor have justice. Is not this regarding of
  persons contrary to the laws aforesaid, and the oath and the law of
  God? Understand and judge: Did we not own authority and government
  oftentimes before the court? Didst not thou say in the court, thou
  wast glad to hear so much from us of our owning magistracy? Pleaded we
  not to the indictment, though it was such a new-found one as England
  never heard of before? Came we not when thou sent for us? Went we not
  when thou bade us go? And are we not still prisoners at thy command
  and at thy will? If the hat had been such an offence to thee, couldst
  not thou have caused it to be taken off, when thou heard us so often
  declare, we could not do it in conscience to the commands of the Lord,
  and that for that cause we forbore it, not in contempt of thee or of
  authority, nor in disrespect to thine, or any man’s person (for we
  said, we honoured all men in the Lord, and owned authority, which was
  a terror to evildoers, and a praise to them that do well; and our
  souls were subject to the higher powers for conscience-sake): as thou
  caused them to be taken off, and to be kept so, when thou called the
  jury to find us transgressors without a law?

  “What ado hast thou made to take away the righteousness of the
  righteous from him, and to cause us to suffer further, whom thou knew
  to have been so long wrongfully in prison contrary to law? Is not
  liberty of conscience a natural right? Had there been a law in this
  case, and we bound up in our consciences that we could not have obeyed
  it, was not liberty of conscience there to take place? For where the
  law saith not against, there needs no plea of liberty of conscience;
  but the law have we not offended, yet in thy will hast thou caused,
  and dost thou yet cause us to suffer for our consciences, where the
  law requires no such thing; and yet for liberty of conscience hath all
  the blood been spilt, and the miseries of the late wars undergone, and
  (as the Protector saith,) this government undertakes to preserve it;
  and a natural right, he saith, it is; and he that would have it, he
  saith, ought to give it. And if it be a natural right, as is
  undeniable, then to attempt to force it, or to punish a man for not
  doing contrary to it, is to act against nature; which, as it is
  unreasonable, so it is the same as to offer violence to a man’s life.
  And what an offence that is in the law thou knowest; and how, by the
  common law of England, all acts, agreements, and laws, that are
  against nature, are mere nullities; and all the judges cannot make one
  case to be law that is against nature. But put the case, had our
  standing with our hats on been an offence in law, and we wilfully, and
  in contempt, and not out of conscience had stood so (which we deny as
  aforesaid), yet that is not a ground wherefore we should be denied
  justice, or be heard as to the wrong done to us. ‘If ye will not
  offend in one case, I will do you justice in another;’ this is not the
  language of the law, or of justice, which distributes to everyone
  right; justice to whom justice is due, punishment to whom punishment
  is due. A man who does wrong may also have wrong done to him; shall he
  not have right wherein he is wronged, unless he right him whom he hath
  wronged? The law saith not so; but the wrong-doer is to suffer, and
  the sufferer of wrong to be righted. Is not to do otherwise a denying,
  letting, or stopping of even law and execution of justice, and a
  bringing under the penalties aforesaid? Mind and consider.

  “And shouldst thou have accused, when no witness appeared against us,
  as in the particulars of striking Peter Ceely, and dispersing books
  (as thou saidst) against magistracy and ministry, with which thou
  didst falsely accuse one of us? Saith not the law, ‘the judge ought
  not to be the accuser?’ much less a false accuser? And wast not thou
  such a one, in affirming, that he dispersed books against magistracy
  and ministry, when as the books were violently taken out of our
  chamber (as hath been said,) undispersed by him, or any of us? Nor
  didst thou make it appear in one particular, wherein those books thou
  didst so violently cause to be taken away, were against magistracy or
  ministry? or gave one instance, or reply, when he denied what thou
  charged therein, and spoke to thee to bring forth those books and make
  thy charge appear. Is not the sword of the magistrate of God to pass
  upon such evil-doing? And according to the administration of the law,
  ought not accusations to be by way of indictment, wherein the offence
  is to be charged, and the law expressed against which it is? Can there
  be an issue without an indictment? Or can an indictment be found
  before proof be made of the offence charged therein? And hast thou not
  herein acted contrary to the law and the administration thereof, and
  thy duty as a judge? What just cause of offence gave George Fox to
  thee, when, upon thy producing a paper concerning swearing, sent by
  him (as thou said) to the grand jury, and requiring him to say,
  whether it was his handwriting? he answered, ‘read it up before the
  country, and when he heard it read, if it were his, he would own it?’
  Is it not equal, and according to law, that what a man is charged with
  before the country, should be read in the hearing of him and of the
  country? When a paper is delivered out of a man’s hand, alterations
  may be made in it to his prejudice, which, on a sudden looking over
  it, may not presently be discerned, but by hearing it read up, may be
  better understood, whether any such alterations have been made
  therein? Couldst thou in justice have expected or required him to do
  otherwise? Considering also, that he was not insensible how much he
  had suffered already, being innocent, and what endeavours were used to
  cause him further to suffer? Was not what he said, as aforesaid, a
  plain and single answer, and sufficient in the law? Though (as hath
  been demonstrated) thou didst act contrary to law, and to thy office,
  in being his accuser therein, and producing the paper against him. And
  his liberty it was, whether he would have made thee any answer at all,
  to what thou didst exhibit, or demand, out of the due course of law;
  for to the law answer is to be made, not to thy will. Wherefore then
  wast thou so filled with rage and fury at his reply? Calmly, and in
  the fear of the Lord, consider, wherefore didst thou revile him,
  particularly with the reproachful names of juggler and prevaricator?
  Wherein did he juggle? wherein did he prevaricate? Wherefore didst
  thou use such threatening language, and such menacings to him and us,
  saying, thou wouldst _ferk_ us, with such like? Doth not the law
  forbid reviling, and rage, and fury, threatening, and menacing of
  prisoners? Soberly mind, is this to act like a judge or a man? Is not
  this transgression? Is not the sword of the magistrate of God to pass
  on this as evil-doing, which the righteous law condemns, and the
  higher power is against, which judgeth for God?

  “Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who
  is with you in the judgment. ‘Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord
  be upon you; take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity with the
  Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts,’ said
  Jehoshaphat to the judges of Judah. Pride and fury, passion and rage,
  reviling and threatening, are not the Lord’s; these, and the principle
  out of which they spring, are for judgment, and must come under the
  sword of the magistrate of God; and it is of an ill savour, especially
  such an expression, as to threaten to _ferk_ us. Is not such a saying
  more becoming a schoolmaster with his rod and ferula in his hand, than
  thee, who art the chief justice of the nation, who sittest in the
  highest seat of judgment, who ought to give a good example, and so to
  judge that others may hear and fear? Weigh it soberly and consider,
  doth not threatening language demonstrate an inequality, and
  partiality in him, who sits as judge? Is it not a deterring of a
  prisoner from standing to, and pleading the innocency of his cause?
  Provides not the law against it? Saith it not, that irons and all
  other bonds shall be taken from the prisoner, that he may plead
  without fear, and with such freedom of spirit, as if he were not a
  prisoner? But when he, who is to judge according to the law, shall
  beforehand threaten and menace the prisoner contrary to the law, how
  can the mind of the prisoner be free to plead his innocency before
  him? or expect equal judgment from him who, before he hears him,
  threatens what he will do unto him? Is not this the case between thee
  and us? Is not this the measure we have received at thy hands? Hast
  thou herein dealt according to law? or to thy duty? or as thou wouldst
  be done unto? Let that of God in thy conscience judge.

  “And didst thou not say, there was a law for putting off the hat, and
  that thou wouldst show a law? and didst not thou often so express
  thyself? But didst thou produce any law, or show where that law might
  be found? or any judicial precedent, or in what king’s reign, when we
  so often desired it of thee, having never heard of, nor known any such
  law, by which thou didst judge us? Was not what we demanded of thee
  reasonable and just? Was that a savoury answer, and according to law,
  which thou gave us, viz., ‘I am not to carry the law-books at my back,
  up and down the country; I am not to instruct you?’ Was ever such an
  expression heard before these days to come out of a judge’s mouth? Is
  he not to be of counsel in the law for the prisoner, and to instruct
  him therein? Is it not for this cause that the prisoner, in many
  cases, is not allowed counsel by the law? In all courts of justice in
  this nation, has it not been known so to have been? And to the
  prisoner has not this been often declared when he demanded counsel,
  alleging his ignorance in the law, by reason of which his cause might
  miscarry, though it were righteous, viz., ‘the court is of counsel for
  you’? Ought not he that judgeth in the law, to be expert in the law?
  Couldst thou not tell by what act of parliament it was made, or by
  what judicial precedent, or in what king’s reign, or when it was
  adjudged so by the common law (which are all the grounds the law of
  England has), had there been such a law, though the words of the law
  thou couldst not remember? Surely, to inform the prisoner when he
  desired it, especially as to a law which was never heard of, by which
  he proceeds to judge him, that he may know what law it is by which he
  is to be judged, becomes him who judgeth for God; for so the law was
  read to the Jews by which they were to be judged, yea, every
  Sabbath-day; this was the commandment of the Lord. But instead thereof
  to say, ‘I am not to carry the law-books at my back up and down the
  country; I am not to instruct you:’ to say, ‘there is a law,’ and to
  say, ‘thou wilt show it,’ and yet not to show it, nor to tell where it
  is to be found; consider whether it be consistent with truth or
  justice?

  “Have not thy whole proceedings against us made it evidently appear,
  that thy desire was to cause us to suffer, not to deliver us, who,
  being innocent, suffered; to have us aspersed and reproached before
  the country, not to have our innocency cleared and vindicated? Doth
  not thy taking away our books as aforesaid, and perusing them in such
  haste before our trial, and accusing us with something, which thou
  said was contained in them, make it to appear, that matter was sought
  out of them, wherewithal to charge us, when the Et Cetera warrant
  would not stand in law, by which we stood committed, and were then
  upon our delivery, according to due course of law? Doth it not further
  appear, by thy refusing to take from our hands a copy of the strange
  Et Cetera warrant, by which we were committed, and of the paper for
  which we were apprehended, to read it or cause it to be read, that so
  our long sufferings by reason of both might be looked into, and
  weighed in the law, whether just or righteous, and the country might
  as well see our innocency and sufferings without a cause, and the
  manner of dealing with us as to hear such reports as went of us, as
  great offenders, when we called upon thee often so to do, and which
  thou ought to have done, and said, thou would do, but did it not; or
  so much as take notice before the country that we had been falsely
  imprisoned, and had wrongfully suffered? But what might asperse and
  charge us, thou brought in thyself, contrary to law, and called to
  have us charged therewith. Is not this further manifest, in that thou
  didst cause us on a sudden to be withdrawn, and the petty jury to be
  called in with their verdict, whereupon Peter Ceely’s falsely accusing
  George Fox with telling him privately of a design, and persuading him
  to join therein, it was by G. Fox made so clear to be a manifest
  falsehood, and so plainly to be perceived, that the cause of our
  sufferings was not any evil we had done, or law that we had
  transgressed, but malice and wickedness?

  “And is it not abundantly clear from thy not permitting us to answer,
  and clear ourselves of the many foul slanders charged upon us in the
  new-found indictment, of which no proof was made; but when we were
  answering thereunto, and clearing ourselves thereof, thou didst stop
  us, saying, ‘thou minded not those things, but only the putting off
  the hat’ when as, before the country, the new-found indictment,
  charged us with those things, and the petty jury brought in their
  verdict, ‘guilty of the trespasses and contempts mentioned therein;’
  of which (except as to the hat) not one witness or evidence was
  produced; and as to the hat, not any law, or judicial precedent, upon
  the transgression of which all legal indictments are only to be
  grounded? Now the law seeks not for causes whereby to make the
  innocent suffer, but helps him to right who suffers wrong, relieves
  the oppressed, and searches out the matter, whether that, of which a
  man stands accused, be so or not, seeking judgment, and hastening
  righteousness; and it saith, ‘the innocent and the righteous slay thou
  not.’ But whether thou hast done so to us, or the contrary, let the
  witness of God in thee search and judge, as these thy fruits do also
  make manifest.

  “And, friend, consider how abominably wicked, and how highly to be
  abhorred, denied, and witnessed against, and how contrary to the laws
  such a proceeding is, to charge a man with many offences in an
  indictment, which they who draw the indictment, they who prosecute,
  and they who find the bill, know to be false, and to be inserted
  purposely to reproach and wound his good name, whom with some small
  matter which they can prove, they charge and indict; as is the common
  practice at this day. Prove but one particular charge in the
  indictment, and it must stand (say they) for a true bill, though there
  be ever so many falsehoods therein, purposely to wrong him, who is
  maliciously prosecuted: this is known to the judges, and almost every
  man who has to do with, and attends, their courts. How contrary is
  this to the end and righteousness of the law, which clears the
  innocent, and condemns the guilty, and condemns not the righteous with
  the wicked! Much it is cried out against; but what reformation is
  there thereof? How else shall clerks of assize, and other clerks of
  courts, fill up their bags (out of which perhaps their master must
  have a secret consideration), and be heightened in pride and
  impudence; that even in open court they take upon them to check and
  revile men; men without reproof, when a few lines might serve instead
  of a hundred? How else shall the spirit that is in men, that lusteth
  unto envy, malice, strife, and contention, be cherished and nourished
  to feed the lawyers, and dependents on courts, with the bread of men’s
  children, and the ruin of their families, to maintain their long suits
  and malicious contentions! For a judge to say, ‘I mind not these
  things; I will not hear you clear yourselves of what you are falsely
  accused: one thing I mind in your charge, the rest are but matter of
  form, set there to render you such wicked men before the country, as
  the thing that is to be proved against you is not sufficient to make
  out.’

  “O! abominable wickedness, and perverting of the righteous end of the
  law, which is so careful and tender of every man’s peace and
  innocency. How is the law in the administration thereof adulterated by
  lawyers, as the Scriptures are mangled by priests! And that which was
  made to preserve the righteous, and to punish the wicked, perverted to
  the punishing of the righteous, and the preserving of the wicked! An
  eye for an eye; a tooth for a tooth; life for life; burning for
  burning; wound for wound; a stripe for a stripe; he that accuseth a
  man falsely to suffer the same as he should have suffered, who was
  falsely accused, if he had been guilty; this saith the righteous law
  of God, which is agreeable to that of God, in every man’s conscience.
  Are not such forms of iniquity to be denied, which are so contrary to
  the law of God, and man? which serve for gendering strife, and
  kindling contention? and of this nature was not that, with which thou
  didst cause us to be indicted? and this form didst thou not uphold, in
  not permitting us to answer to the many foul slanders therein; saying,
  ‘Those things thou mindest not.’ Will not the wrath of God be revealed
  from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who
  hold the truth in unrighteousness; who are so far from the power of
  godliness, that they have not the form, but the form of iniquity,
  which is set and held up, instead of, and as a law, to overthrow and
  destroy the righteousness of the righteous, and so to shut him up, as
  by the law he can never get out? Is not the cry, thinkest thou, gone
  up? ‘It is time for thee to set to thine hand, O Lord, for thine
  enemies have made void thy law!’ Draws not the hour nigh? Fills not up
  the measure of iniquity apace? Surely the day is coming, and
  hasteneth. Ye have been warned from the presence, and by the mouth of
  the Lord; and clear will he be when he cometh to judgment, and upright
  when he giveth sentence. That of God in every one of your consciences
  shall so to him bear witness and confess, and your mouths shall be
  stopped, and before your Judge shall ye be silent, when he shall
  divide you your portion, and render unto you according to your deeds.
  Therefore, whilst thou hast time, prize it, and repent: for verily
  ‘Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a fire shall devour
  before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him. He shall
  call to the heavens from above, and to the earth that he may judge his
  people; and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is
  judge himself. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in
  pieces, and there be none to deliver.’

  “And, friend, shouldst thou have given judgment against us (wherein
  thou didst fine us twenty marks a-piece, and imprisonment till
  payment), without causing us, being prisoners, to be brought before
  thee, to hear the judgment, and to move what we had to say in arrest
  of judgment? Is not this contrary to the law, as is manifest to those
  who understand the proceedings thereof? Is not the prisoner to be
  called before judgment be given? and is not the indictment to be read?
  and the verdict thereupon? And is not liberty to be given him to move
  in arrest of judgment? And if it be a just exception in the law, ought
  not there to be an arrest of judgment? For the indictment may not be
  drawn up according to law, and may be wrong placed, and the offence
  charged therein may not be a crime in law; or the jury may have been
  corrupted, or menaced, or set on by some of the justices; with other
  particulars, which are known to be legal and just exceptions. And the
  judgment ought to be in the prisoner’s hearing, not behind his back,
  as if the judge were so conscious of the error thereof, that he dare
  not give it to the face of the prisoner. But these privileges of the
  law, this justice, we (who had so long and so greatly suffered
  contrary to law), received not, nor could have at thy hands; no, not
  so much as a copy or sight of that long and new-found indictment
  (which in England was never heard of before, nor that the matter
  contained therein was an offence in law, nor ever was there any law,
  or judicial precedent, that made it so); though two friends of ours in
  our names and our behalf, that night, next day, and day following,
  often desired it of the clerk of the assize, his assistants, and
  servants; but they could not have it, nor so much liberty as to see
  it. And it is likely not unknown or unperceived by thee, that, had we
  been called, as we ought to have been, or known when it was to be
  given, three or four words might have been a sufficient, legal arrest,
  of the judgment given on that new-found indictment, and the verdict
  thereupon.

  “Therefore, as our liberties, who are innocent, have not (in thy
  account) been worth the minding, and esteemed fit for nothing but to
  be trampled under foot, and destroyed, so, if we find fault with what
  thou hast done, thou hast taken care that no door be left open to us
  in the law, but a writ of error; the consideration whereof, and the
  judgment to be given thereon, is to be had only where thyself art
  chief; of whom such complaint is to be made, and the error assigned
  for the reverse of thy judgment. And what the fruit of that may be
  well expected to be, by what we have already mentioned, as having
  received at thy hands, thou hast given us to understand. And here thou
  mayest think thou hast made thyself secure, and sufficiently barred up
  our way of relief, against whom (though thou knew we had done nothing
  contrary to the law, or worthy of bonds, much less of the bonds and
  sufferings we had sustained): thou hast proceeded as has been
  rehearsed: notwithstanding that thou art (as are all the judges of the
  nation) entrusted, not with a legislative power, but to administer
  justice, and to do even law and execution of right to all, high and
  low, rich and poor, without having regard to any man’s person; and art
  sworn so to do, as has been said: and wherein thou dost contrary art
  liable to punishment, as ceasing from being a judge, and becoming a
  wrong-doer, and an oppressor; which what it is to be, many of thy
  predecessors have understood, some by death, others by fine and
  imprisonment. And of this thou mayest not be ignorant, that to deny a
  prisoner any of the privileges the law allows him, is to deny him
  justice, to try him in an arbitrary way, to rob him of that liberty
  which the law gives him, which is his inheritance as a free man; to do
  which is in effect to subvert the fundamental laws and government of
  England, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical government
  against law; which is treason by the common law; and treasons by the
  common law are not taken away by the statutes of 25 Edw. III. 1 Henry
  IV. 1, 2, m. See O. St. Johns, now chief justice of the common pleas,
  his argument against Strafford, fol. 65, in the case.

  “These things we have laid before thee in all plainness, that (with
  the light of Jesus Christ, who lighteth every one that cometh into the
  world, a measure of which thou hast, which showeth the evil, and
  reproveth thee for sin, for which thou must be accountable,) thou
  mayest consider and see what thou hast done against the innocent; that
  shame may overtake thee, and thou mayest turn unto the Lord, who now
  calleth thee to repentance by his servants, whom, for witnessing his
  living truth in them, thou hast cast into, and yet continues under,
  cruel bonds and sufferings.”

                                                          EDW. PYOT.

  From the Jail in Launceston, the 14th
      day of the 5th Month, 1656.

By this letter the reader may observe how contrary to law we were made
to suffer; but the Lord, who saw the integrity of our hearts to him, and
knew the innocency of our cause, was with us in our sufferings, bore up
our spirits, and made them easy to us; and gave us opportunities of
publishing his name and truth amongst the people; so that several of the
town came to be convinced, and many were made loving to us. Friends from
many parts came to visit us; amongst whom were two out of Wales, who had
been justices of peace. Also Judge Haggert’s wife, of Bristol, who was
convinced, with several of her children; and her husband was very kind
and serviceable to Friends, and had a love to God’s people, which he
retained to his death.

Now in Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire, truth began
to spread mightily, and many were turned to Christ Jesus and his free
teaching; for many Friends that came to visit us, were drawn forth to
declare the truth in those counties; which made the priests and
professors rage, and they stirred up the magistrates to ensnare Friends.
They placed watches in the streets and highways, on pretence of taking
up all suspicious persons; under which colour they stopped and took up
the Friends that travelled in and through those counties, coming to
visit us in prison; which they did, that they might not pass up and down
in the Lord’s service. But that by which they thought to stop the truth,
was the means of spreading it so much the more; for then Friends were
frequently moved to speak to one constable, and to the other officer,
and to the justices they were brought before; and this caused the truth
to spread the more amongst them in all their parishes. And when Friends
got among the watches, it would be a fortnight or three weeks before
they could get out of them again; for no sooner had one constable taken
them and carried them before the justices, and they had discharged them,
than another would take them up, and carry them before other justices;
which put the country to much needless trouble and charges.

As Thomas Rawlinson was coming out of the north to visit us, a constable
in Devonshire took him up, and at night took twenty shillings out of his
pocket; and after being thus robbed, he was cast into Exeter jail. They
cast Henry Pollexfen also into prison in Devonshire for being a Jesuit,
who had been a justice of peace for nearly forty years before. Many
Friends were cruelly beaten by them; nay, some clothiers that were going
to the mill with their cloth, and others about their occupations, were
taken up and whipped, though men of about eighty or a hundred pounds a
year, and not above four or five miles from their families.

The mayor of Launceston, too, was a very wicked man, for he took up all
he could get, and cast them into prison; and he would search substantial
grave women, their petticoats and their head-clothes. A young man having
come to see us, who came not through the town, I drew up all the gross,
inhuman, and unchristian actions of the mayor (for his carriage was more
like a heathen than a Christian,) to him I gave it, and bid him seal it
up, and go out again the back way; and then come into the town through
the gates. He did so; and the watch took him up, and carried him before
the mayor, who presently searched his pockets and found the letter,
wherein he saw all his actions characterized. This shamed him so, that
from that time he meddled little with the servants of the Lord.

Now from the sense I had of the snare that was laid, and mischief
intended, in setting up those watches at the time to stop and take up
Friends, it came upon me to give forth the following, as—

            “_An Exhortation and Warning to the Magistrates._

  “All ye powers of the earth, Christ is come to reign, and is among
  you, and ye know him not; who doth enlighten every one of you, that ye
  all through him might believe in him, who is the light, who treads the
  wine-press alone without the city, and whose feet are upon it.
  Therefore see all, and examine with the light, what ye are ripe for;
  for the press is ready for you.

  “Before honour is humility. You that would have honour before ye have
  humility (mark, before ye have humility), are ye not as the heathen
  are? Ye would have honour before ye have humility; did not all the
  persecutors that ever were upon the earth want this humility? They
  wanted the honour, and yet would have the honour before they had the
  humility, and had learned that. So ye that are out of the humility,
  are out of the honour; and ye are not to have the honour, who have not
  the humility; for before honour is humility; mark, before it.

  “Now ye pretend liberty of conscience; yet one shall not carry a
  letter to a friend, nor men visit their friends, nor prisoners, nor
  carry a book about them, either for their own use, or for their
  friends. Men shall not see their friends; but watches are set up to
  catch and stop them; and these must be well-armed men too, against an
  innocent people, that have not so much as a stick in their hands, who
  are in scorn called Quakers. Yet by such as set up these watches is
  pretended liberty of conscience; who take up them, whose consciences
  are exercised towards God and men, who worship God in their way, which
  is the truth; which they that are out of the light call heresy. Now
  these set up the watches against them, whom they in scorn call
  Quakers, because they confess and witness the true light, that
  lighteth every one that cometh into the world, amongst people, as they
  pass through the country, or among their friends. This is the
  dangerous doctrine which watchmen are set up against, to subdue error,
  as they call it, which is the light that doth enlighten every man that
  cometh into the world—Him, by whom the world was made; who was
  glorified with the Father before the world began. For those whom they
  in scorn call Quakers, have they set their watches, able men,
  well-armed; to take up such as bear this testimony either in words,
  books, or letters. So that is the light you hate, which enlightens
  every man that cometh into the world; and these that witness to this
  light you put in prison; and after you have imprisoned them, you set
  your watches to take up all that go to visit them, and imprison them
  also; so that by setting up your watches, ye would stop all relief
  from coming to prisoners.

  “Therefore this is the word of the Lord God to you, and a charge to
  you all, in the presence of the living God of heaven and earth; every
  man of you being enlightened with a light that cometh from Christ, the
  Saviour of people’s souls; to this light, all take heed, that with it
  you may see Christ, from whom the light cometh, to be your Saviour, by
  whom the world was made, who saith, ‘Learn of me.’ But if ye hate this
  light, ye hate Christ, who doth enlighten you all, that through him
  (who is the light) you might believe. But not believing in, nor
  bringing your deeds to the light, which will make them manifest and
  reprove them, this is your condemnation, even the light. Remember, you
  are warned in your life-time, for this light is your way to salvation,
  if you walk in it; and your condemnation, if you reject and hate it.
  You can never come to Christ, the Second Priest, unless you come to
  the light, which the Second Priest hath enlightened you withal. So ye
  that come not to the light, ye go to the priests that take tithes, as
  did the first priesthood: and hale out of your synagogues and temples
  (as some call them), as that priesthood did that took tithes; which
  they that were of the second priesthood did not. Was there ever such a
  generation! or did ever such a generation of men appear, as in this
  age, who are so full of madness, envy, and persecution, that they
  stand up in watches, with weapons against the truth, to persecute it,
  as the towns and countries do declare; which rings as Sodom, and like
  Gomorrah! And this hath its liberty, and truth is stood against; and
  to reprove sin is accounted a breach of the peace, as they say who are
  out of the truth, and set up their watches against it.”

                                                               G. F.

Besides this general warning, there coming to my hand a copy of a
warrant issued from the Exeter sessions, in express terms, “for
apprehending all Quakers,” wherein truth and Friends were reproached and
vilified, I was moved to write an answer thereunto, and send it abroad,
for clearing truth and Friends from the slanders therein cast upon them,
and to manifest the wickedness of that persecuting spirit from whence it
proceeded; which was after this manner:—

  “Whereas a warrant was granted last sessions, held at Exeter, on the
  eighteenth day of the fifth month, 1656, which warrant is ‘for
  apprehending and taking up all such as are Quakers, or call themselves
  Quakers, or go under the notion of Quakers; and is directed to the
  chief constables, to be sent by them to the petty constables,
  requiring them to set watches, able men with bills, to take up all
  such Quakers as aforesaid.’ And whereas in your said warrant, you
  speak of the Quakers spreading seditious books and papers; I answer,
  They whom ye in scorn call Quakers, have no seditious books or papers:
  but their books are against sedition, and seditious men, and seditious
  books, and seditious teachers, and seditious ways. Thus ye have
  numbered them, who are honest, godly, and holy men, that fear God,
  amongst beggars, rogues, and vagabonds; thus putting no difference
  between the precious and the vile. You are not fit to judge, who have
  set up your bills, and armed your men, to stand up together in battle
  against innocent people, the lambs of Christ, who have not lifted up a
  hand against you. But if ye were sensible of the state of your own
  country, your cities, your towns, your villages, how the cry of them
  is like Gomorrah, and the ring like Sodom, and the sound like the old
  world, where all flesh had corrupted its way, which God overthrew with
  the flood;—if you did consider this with yourselves, you would find
  something to turn the sword against, and not against the lambs of
  Christ;—you would not make a mock of the innocent, that stand a
  witness against all sin and unrighteousness in your towns and
  steeple-houses.

  “Noah, the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, was grieved
  with the filthy conversation of the wicked; so are we now. So likewise
  just Lot was grieved with their unmerciful deeds, and the filthy
  conversation of Sodom. And were not these hated of the world, and of
  them that lived in filthiness? And whereas you speak of those, whom
  you in scorn call Quakers, that they are a grief to those whom you
  call pious and religious people, and their religion. To such as are in
  the religion that is vain, whose tongues are not bridled, I believe
  the Quakers are a grief; but they are not a grief to such as are in
  the pure religion, which keepeth unspotted from the world; which sets
  not up bills, nor watches, to maintain it by the world; for they are
  not of the world who are in the pure religion, which keeps them
  unspotted of the world; mark, the ‘pure religion, which keeps
  unspotted of the world.’ But to such as are in the religion that is
  not pure, who have a form of godliness, and not the power—to such as
  you call pious, the truth itself was always a grief; and so it is in
  this age. And now your fruits appear, the end of your religion and
  profession, and what you possess; but you are in the error, and have
  been but in the profession, out of the possession of the Spirit, who
  are not in the Spirit of truth. For where did that ever set stints and
  bounds, and number the just and innocent with the wicked? But the
  wicked set stints, and bounds, and limits to the just, and number them
  among the wicked; yea, they spoke all manner of evil of them, as ye
  are doing now of us. Nay, according as it was foretold in the
  Scripture, such as tremble at the word of God, you cast out and hate,
  you that have your temple-worship.

  “You say, the Quakers come to disturb you in your churches (as you
  call them,) was it not the practice of the apostles to go into the
  synagogues and temples, to witness against the priesthood that took
  tithes, and was it not the practice of the Jews to hale them out,
  persecute and stone them, that witnessed Christ the second priest, and
  went to bring people off from the first priesthood? Was it not the
  practice of the prophets, to go and cry against the high places? And
  was it not the practice of the Jews, when they were backslidden, and
  of the heathen, to imprison and persecute the prophets, and send after
  them into other countries? And is this not the practice of you now,
  who are holding up your high places, which the Papists erected, which
  ye now call your churches; where ye beat and persecute? What kind of
  religious people are you, that are filled with so much madness? Did
  not Paul confess he was mad, while he was in your practice, haling,
  beating, imprisoning, putting out of the synagogues, having his
  authority from the chief priests? And are not the chief priests the
  cause of this? Was there ever such a cry made in any age past, as
  there is now in the pulpits, railing against an innocent people, whom
  in scorn ye call Quakers, who lift not up a hand against you; but who
  are indeed the pious, that are of the pure religion, who fear God,
  worship him in Spirit and in truth, and cannot join with you in your
  religion? And do not the ministers of God say, that the Scriptures are
  a declaration, which you call the word? Do you not rob Christ of his
  title, and of his honour, and give it to the letter, and show
  yourselves out of the doctrine of the ministers of God, who call the
  Scriptures by the name of writings and treatises, and declarations;
  and who said, Christ’s name is called the Word of God? Are not you
  here in the error you speak of, which is your common talk among you?
  There was talk among some of you of your gospel-shining; doth your
  gospel which you profess persecute? Did ever any of them, that did
  possess it, cast into prison and not suffer others to go to visit
  them? Are you like Christians in this, or like heathens, who set
  bounds and watches over the land, that they should not pass to visit
  them that are in prison? Was ever the like heard in any age? Search
  and see, if you have not outstripped them all in your watches, in your
  persecution, and imprisonments. O! never talk, that we are a grief to
  them that are in the pure religion.

  “And whereas in your warrant we are represented as disaffected to
  government; I say, the law, which is a terror to the evil-doer, we
  own, the higher power to which the soul must be subject; but we deny
  the evil-doer, the malicious man reigning, and the envious man seeking
  for his prey, whose envy is against the innocent; who raiseth up the
  country against honest men, and so becomes a trouble to the country,
  in raising them up to take the innocent; but that we leave to the Lord
  to judge. Your false accusations of heresy and blasphemy we deny. You
  should have laid them down in particulars, that people might have seen
  them, and not have slandered us behind our backs. The law saith, the
  crime should be mentioned in the warrant. Then for your saying, ‘we
  deny the godly ministers to be a true ministry of Christ,’ that is
  false; for we say, that the godly ministers are the ministers of
  Christ. But which of your ministers dare say, that they are truly
  godly? And your charging us with seducing many weak people, is false
  also; we seduce none; but you, that deny the light, which lighteth
  every man that cometh into the world, are seduced from the anointing
  which should teach you; and if ye would be taught by it, ye would not
  need that any man should teach you. But such as are taught by the
  anointing, which abideth in them, and deny man’s teaching, these ye
  call seducers, quite contrary to John’s doctrine, 1 John ii. 26, 27.
  You speak quite contrary to him; that which is truth, ye call
  seducing; and that which he calls seducing, you call truth; read the
  latter part of the chapter.

  “Beware, I warn you all from the Lord God of glory, set not any bound
  against him; stint him not; limit not the Holy One of Israel; for the
  Lord is rising in power and great glory, who will rule the nations
  with a rod of iron, which to him are but as the drop of a bucket. He
  that measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, will dash the
  nations together as a potter’s vessel. And know, you that are found in
  this his day blaspheming his work, that God hath brought forth,
  calling it blasphemy, fighting against it, setting up your carnal
  weapons, making your bonds strong; God will break asunder that which
  your carnal policy hath invented, and which by your carnal weapons ye
  would uphold; and make you to know there is a God in heaven, who
  carries his lambs in his arms, which are come among wolves, and are
  ready to be torn in pieces in every place, yea, in your
  steeple-houses; where people have appeared without reason, and natural
  affection.

  “Therefore all ye petty constables, sheriffs, and justices, take
  warning; take heed what ye do against the lambs of Christ; for Christ
  is come, and coming, who will give to every one of you a reward
  according to your works, you who have the letter, which speaks of
  Christ; but now ye are persecuting that which the Scripture speaks of;
  as your fruits make manifest. Therefore every one, sheriffs, justices,
  constables, &c., consider what ye do possess, and what a profession ye
  are now in, that all these carnal weapons are now set up against the
  innocent, yea, against the truth; which shows that ye have not the
  spiritual weapons, and that ye want the counsel of Gamaliel, yea, ye
  want the counsel of such a man among you, who said, ‘Let the apostles
  alone; if it be of God it will stand; if it be not, it will come to
  nought.’ But ye may see yourselves on the contrary, in the spirit of
  them that came with Judas, with swords and staves from the chief
  priests against Christ; still it is against Christ, where he is made
  manifest. Paul (while Saul) went against him, though he professed a
  Christ that was to come; and the Jews professed a Christ that was to
  come; yet Paul persecuted him, where he was manifested in his saints.
  So ye profess a Christ that is come, but persecute him where he is
  manifest. You that have the letter, the high places, the synagogues,
  you persecute him, where he is made manifest in his saints, as the
  Jews did. They who were in the letter, out of the life, persecuted
  them that were in the life of that which they profess in the letter;
  so now do you persecute them that are in the life, and are yourselves
  strangers to it, as your fruits make appear. You have numbered the
  people of God amongst transgressors; but have you imprisoned any of
  the rogues and transgressors you speak of? You have imprisoned the
  innocent, and let the others go free.”

                                                               G. F.

When I had sent abroad the foregoing, so great a sense came upon me of
the veil of darkness that was over the priests and professors of
Christianity, that I was moved to give forth the following, as an
awakening warning to them:—

  “Blindness hath happened to the professed Christians of the letter
  now-a-days, as blindness happened to the Jews, who professed the
  letter, but owned not the life which the letter speaks of; as the
  Christians now, to whom this blindness hath happened, who profess the
  Scripture, but own not the life, which the Scripture speaks of. For
  against the life the Jews stood, who professed the letter of the
  Scripture, but they were blind; they gathered counsel against the
  life; they were in an uproar when the babe was born in Bethlehem,
  Herod and all the chief priests. And Herod sought to destroy all the
  young children in Bethlehem, yet missed the babe; Herod, that fox,
  though he put John to death. You may here see how the literal
  professors stood up, not for the truth, but quite against it.
  Furthermore, the chief priests consulted together how they might take
  Jesus by subtilty, and put him to death; mark, by their subtilty. The
  professors of a Christ that was to come, preached of a Messiah, of a
  Christ, of a Saviour; but denied the life, when he was made manifest.
  The chief priests, when they were assembled with the elders, and had
  taken counsel, gave large money unto the soldiers, to declare that
  ‘his disciples came by night, and stole him away.’ Likewise in the
  day, when the children of Israel were in Egypt, and they with their
  children began to spread and multiply, ‘Come,’ said the Egyptians,
  ‘let us deal wisely with them to afflict them, and tax them;’ which
  held, until the Lord overthrew their oppressors, and brought out his
  seed by his mighty power from under the oppressor, and exalted his Son
  above all, though the heathen raged, and the people imagined vain
  things. He made his power known, that all might see that there was no
  God upon the earth but himself. This power now hath brought forth the
  work of the Lord! Many who are turned to Christ, the light, have
  received the power of God, and are thereby become the sons of God.

  “Now this birth, that is born of God, are all the powers of the world
  joined together to crucify; to put to death those Jews in the Spirit,
  as they put Christ to death in the flesh formerly. This is the birth
  that all the wicked world is enraged against; against this they set
  their watches,—this birth, brought forth by the Mighty God of Jacob,
  who rides upon the high places of the earth. This is the birth that
  the professed Christians without the life in our days rage against,
  and lay out all their wisdom about. Are not the chief priests and wise
  men of the earth consulting together how they may destroy this birth?
  Is not this the birth, that is banished out of your hearts, you that
  profess the Scripture, and are talkers of it, but do not own the light
  and life which the Scripture speaks of, as the Jews would not; and so
  you will not have Christ to reign over you, as they would not? Do you
  not hale out of your synagogues, and before magistrates? Do you not
  herein fulfil Christ’s words, who said to his disciples, They should
  be haled out of the synagogues, and before rulers? Do you not
  persecute them from city to city? Do you not almost fill your prisons
  with them? And now set your watches, that none may visit them, whom ye
  have put into prison? Is not this an unchristian spirit? How can you
  for shame say you are upholders of truth? Or how can you for shame say
  that truth hath been professed among you? Yet we grant that you have
  talked of it. And how can you for shame say the gospel shines among
  you, when you will not own the life of it; when you call it error, and
  the evil seed? Yea, the very truth, the very life of truth ye have
  blasphemed against now, as the Jews did against Christ, calling him a
  devil; you now call it error, and the evil seed, and stand up against
  it, and turn the sword against it. As in the days of the Jews, it was
  the Jews outward in the flesh, not the Jews in the Spirit, who turned
  the sword against Christ; so in these days it is those Christians who
  profess the Scripture, but are out of the Life of it. And is it not a
  shame to all the ministers of the Gospel (as they are called,) that
  they can find no better way to maintain that which they call the truth
  and their Gospel, than by carnal weapons, stocks and prisons, whips,
  watches, and wards, and powers of the earth? Were these the apostles’
  weapons? Carnal watches and wards, stocks and prisons, and haling out
  of the synagogues, when they came to speak? Judge yourselves, what an
  antichristian spirit you have. Never talk of defending truth with that
  which is against truth. For are you not setting up the rabble of the
  world against it? Do they not join with you with swords and staves
  against it? Is this the life of Christians? Is not this the life of
  error, and of the evil seedsman?

  “Surely, ye would find work enough, if ye were in the fear of the
  Lord, to turn your swords against profaneness, the oaths and
  wickedness that are in your streets and highways. How do they ring
  like Sodom, and give a sound like Gomorrah! But these are become a
  prey in this your age, that reprove in your gates sin, wickedness, and
  profaneness; they are become your by-word. Against them your councils
  are gathered, them you cast into prison, and hale out of your
  synagogues; and cast them likewise into prison that write and speak
  against it, and set your guards to stop and hinder any from visiting
  them whom you cast into prison, and give them the names of vagabonds
  and wanderers. Was ever the like heard, in the days of the heathen,
  against the apostles who witnessed the gospel? Did they set guards and
  watches in every town, in every city, to take the disciples, the
  brethren, the believers, that heard that the apostles were cast into
  prison, and came to see what they wanted? Show ye not as much rage and
  fury now in your age, as was in those in that age? And how can you
  talk of the gospel, and of defending the gospel, when you are setting
  guards and watches against it, and are defending that which stands
  against it; and the lambs of Christ are almost torn to pieces amongst
  you, who are like wolves? for the Lord hath now sent his lambs amongst
  wolves. Have not you professed the words of Christ, of the prophets
  and apostles, as the Jews had long professed the Scriptures, the words
  of Moses and of the prophets, that prophesied of Christ that was to
  come, and stood against him when he was come? as you do in this day of
  his reign, in this day of his glorious gospel, who are persecuting the
  messengers of it, imprisoning them, persecuting them in your streets
  and highways; and are setting up your watches against them, who bring
  you the glad tidings of peace to your souls, whose feet are beautiful
  on the top of the mountains; mark, on the top of the mountains, that
  against which the mountains rage and swell. But God will make them
  melt; the sun is risen, which will make them melt. God will cleave the
  rocks and mountains asunder, and make the hills to bow perpetually;
  for his Son he will exalt, and his glory he will give to HIM and not
  to another.

  “Therefore be awakened, ye rulers of the earth, and take counsel of
  the Lord; take not counsel together against him. Make not your bonds
  strong; set not yourselves in battle against him, for ye will be found
  but as briars and thorns before him, which the fire shall consume.
  Therefore be awakened, all ye talkers of the Scripture, that gather
  yourselves together by your multitudes and meetings, and have had your
  teachers; but not having the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures,
  the Lord God of glory, the Father of spirits, will scatter you. All
  your bonds will not hold you together, who are out of the Spirit,
  which is the bond of peace. The thrashing instrument is gone forth,
  which will beat the hills to pieces. Sion is risen to thrash. Out of
  the holy mountain is the trumpet sounded. Stand not up against the
  Lord; for all nations are with the Lord as the drop of a bucket. He
  that measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, and weighs the
  earth in scales, the Lord of hosts is his name, who is now risen and
  rising to plead the cause of the innocent; who is exalting his Son,
  and bringing his sheep to him. Now are they seen and known that feed
  upon wind, that are lifted up, given up to believe lies; who report,
  and say, ‘Report, and we will report it.’ Now are they seen who have a
  form of godliness, but deny the power; so Christ is denied, the power
  itself is denied; for Christ is the power of God. And the power being
  denied by you, that have a form of godliness, that have the words of
  the Scriptures, the gospel is denied; for the gospel is the power of
  God. Thus it is among you, that have the knowledge and wisdom that is
  sensual, earthly, and devilish. Doth it not appear so? Let your jails
  and watches witness your fruits in every town. Your wisdom is earthly,
  sensual, and devilish; you have a knowledge and wisdom, but not that
  which is from above; for that is pure and gentle, so is not your
  knowledge; but to know Christ is life eternal. Now your fruits have
  manifested that you are not of this; and so out of the power of God,
  which is the cross of Christ; for you are found in the world, out of
  the power of God, out of the cross of Christ, persecuting. So that
  which doth persecute, and send forth writings and decrees to stop all,
  and take up all, and set watches, and prepare bonds to stint the Lord;
  to imprison and persecute, and suffer none to go to visit them; this
  shows you are not Christians, but stand against a Christian’s life,
  which brings to love enemies.

  “Where is your heaping up coals of fire; your love to your enemies;
  who are thus persecuting your friends? ‘He came to his own, and his
  own received him not;’ here is a turning of the sword against the
  just. Do you show here a Christian’s life, or yourselves Christians,
  who are filling your jails with Christians in Spirit, you that are in
  the letter (in shadows), as the Jews in the letter put the Jews in the
  Spirit into prison? Is not this the fruit in our days of the
  Christians in the letter, to put the Christians in the Spirit into
  prison? Doth not this show that your decrees, which you have sent
  forth, proceed from death, who thus act against the life, and them
  that are in it; which the Scriptures were given forth from? Is it not
  here as it was with Saul, when he went to persecute, to hale to
  prison, and bind all that he could find calling upon that name, who
  were Christians in the life, the Spirit, such as you are now
  persecuting, because they are in the life, though you profess their
  words? Are not your decrees gone forth from the same spirit of envy,
  against the same Spirit of Christ they were in? Is it not manifest to
  all that fear God, and to the sober-minded and honest-hearted people
  that see your practices, your decrees, your letters, to stop, to
  molest, to hinder, to imprison them that are moved of the Lord to do
  his will, or to go to visit prisoners whom you have imprisoned? Doth
  this show you to have a spirit like Paul, yea or nay? or are you not
  quite contrary, like unto them that persecuted Paul? The day hath
  declared it.

  “To that of God in you all I speak, which shall witness it at the last
  day,—the day of judgment. Persecution was blind in all ages; and
  madness and folly led it: yet persecution got always a form or
  pretence of godliness,—a talk of religion, as in the days of Moses, of
  Jeremiah, of Christ, and of the apostles. ‘Come,’ saith the council,
  ‘let us crush them while they are young, they have almost overspread
  the nation in every corner.’ This is as much as to say, ‘Let us put
  this birth to death, as Pharaoh and Herod did the children.’ But the
  Lord caused his truth the more to spread. For you may read, what
  numbers came out of Egypt! and what multitudes followed Christ!
  Therefore, with consideration read these lines, and not with fury. Let
  not foolishness appear; but consider in humility the paths you go in,
  what spirit you are of, and what the end of your conversation is; for
  in love to your souls I write, that in the day of your visitation you
  may consider it.

  “From him who loveth righteousness, and the establishing of it, and
  truth, peace, and faith, which is by Christ Jesus (Mercy and peace be
  multiplied among such!) but a witness against all hypocrites, and all
  who have a profession, but live out of the possession, in an
  hypocritical religion, in the lusts and fashions of the world, having
  a form of godliness, but standing against the power with might and
  main, sword and staff. Which things declare your conversation and
  practices to be out of Christ’s life, against the gospel practice, and
  contrary to the manner and order of the saints.”

                                                               G. F.

We continued in prison till the next assize; before which time divers
Friends, both men and women, were sent to prison, that had been taken up
by the watches. When the assize came on, several of these were called
before the judge, and indicted; and though the jailer brought them into
court, yet they indicted them, that they came in “by force of arms and
in an hostile manner;” and the judge fined them, because they would not
put off their hats. But we were not called before the judges any more.

Great work we had, and service for the Lord, both between the assizes
and after, amongst professors and people of all sorts; for many came to
see us and to reason with us. Elizabeth Trelawny of Plymouth (who was
the daughter of a baronet) being convinced (as was formerly mentioned,)
the priests and professors, and some great persons of her kindred were
exasperated, and wrote letters to her. She being a wise and tender
woman, and fearing to give them any advantage, sent their letters to me;
and I answered them, and returned them to her again, for her to answer.
Which she did: till growing in the power, and Spirit, and wisdom of God,
she came herself to be able to answer the wisest priest and professor of
them all; and had a dominion over them in the truth, through the power
of the Lord, by which she was kept faithful to her death.

While I was in prison here, the Baptists and Fifth-monarchy-men
prophesied, “That this year Christ should come, and reign upon earth a
thousand years.” And they looked upon this reign to be outward; when he
was come inwardly in the hearts of his people, to reign and rule there,
and these professors would not thus receive him. So they failed in their
prophecy and expectation, and had not the possession of him. But Christ
_is_ come, and doth dwell in the hearts of his people, and reign there.
Thousands, at the door of whose hearts he hath been knocking, have
opened to him; and he is come in, and doth sup with them and they with
him; the heavenly supper with the heavenly and spiritual man. So many of
these Baptist and Monarchy-people became the greatest enemies to the
possessors of Christ; but he reigns in the hearts of his saints over all
their envy.

At the assize divers justices came to us and were pretty civil, and
reasoned of the things of God soberly, expressing a pity towards us.
Captain Fox, governor of Pendennis Castle, came and looked me in the
face, and said not a word; but went to his company, and told them, “he
never saw a simpler man in his life.” I called after him, and said,
“Stay, we will see who is the simpler man.” But he went his way; a light
chaffy man.

Thomas Lower[49] also came to visit us, and offered us money, which we
refused; accepting his love nevertheless. He asked us many questions
concerning our denying the Scriptures to be the word of God; and
concerning the sacraments and such like; to all which he received
satisfaction. I spoke particularly to him and he afterwards said, “my
words were as a flash of lightning, they ran so through him.” He said,
“he never met with such men in his life; for they knew the thoughts of
his heart, and were as the wise master-builders of the assemblies, that
fastened their words like nails.” He came to be convinced of the truth,
and remains a Friend to this day. When he came home to his aunt
Hambley’s, where he then lived, and made report to her concerning us,
she, with her sister Grace Billing, hearing the report of truth, came to
visit us in prison, and was convinced also. Great sufferings and
spoiling of goods both he and his aunt have undergone for the truth’s
sake.

Footnote 49:

  Thomas Lower was son-in-law to Judge Fell, having married his daughter
  Mary.

About this time I was moved to give forth the following exhortation to
Friends in the ministry:—

        “FRIENDS,

  “In the power of life and wisdom, and dread of the Lord God of life,
  and heaven, and earth, dwell, that in the wisdom of God over all ye
  may be preserved, and be a terror to all the adversaries of God, and a
  dread, answering that of God in them all, spreading the truth abroad,
  awakening the witness, confounding deceit, gathering out of
  transgression into the life, the covenant of light and peace with God.
  Let all nations hear the sound by word or writing. Spare no place,
  spare no tongue nor pen; but be obedient to the Lord God; go through
  the work; be valiant for the truth upon earth; and tread and trample
  upon all that is contrary. Ye have the power, do not abuse it; and
  strength and presence of the Lord, eye it, and the wisdom; that with
  it you may all be ordered to the glory of the Lord God. Keep in the
  dominion; keep in the power over all deceit; tread over them in that
  which lets you see to the world’s end, and the uttermost parts of the
  earth. Reign and rule with Christ, whose sceptre and throne are now
  set up, whose dominion is over all to the ends of the earth; whose
  dominion is an everlasting dominion; whose throne is an everlasting
  throne; whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; and whose power is
  above all powers. Therefore this is the word of the Lord God to you
  all: keep in the wisdom of God, that spreads over all the earth; the
  wisdom of the creation, that is pure, from above, not destructive. For
  now shall salvation go out of Zion, to judge the mount of Esau: and
  now shall the law go forth from Jerusalem, to answer the principle of
  God in all; to hew down all inventors and inventions. For all the
  princes of the earth are but as air to the power of the Lord God,
  which you are in, and have tasted of: therefore live in it; this is
  the word of the Lord God to you all, do not abuse it; keep down and
  low; and take heed of false joys, that will change.

  “Bring all into the worship of God. Plough up the fallow ground.
  Thrash and get out the corn; that the seed, the wheat, may be gathered
  into the barn; that to the beginning all people may come—to Christ,
  who was, before the world was made. For the chaff is come upon the
  wheat by transgression; he that treads it out, is out of
  transgression, and fathoms transgression; puts a difference between
  the precious and the vile; and can pick out the wheat from the tares,
  and gather into the garner: so brings to the lively hope, the immortal
  soul into God, out of which it came. None worship God but who come to
  the principle of God, which they have transgressed. None are ploughed
  up but he who comes to the principle of God in him, that he hath
  transgressed. Then he doth service to God; then is the planting and
  the watering; and the increase from God cometh. So the ministers of
  the Spirit must minister to the Spirit that is in prison, which hath
  been in captivity in every one; that with the Spirit of Christ, people
  may be led out of captivity up to God, the Father of Spirits, do
  service to him, and have unity with him, with the Scriptures, and one
  with another. This is the word of the Lord God to you all, and a
  charge to you all in the presence of the living God; be patterns, be
  examples in all countries, places, islands, nations, wherever you
  come; that your carriage and life may preach among all sorts of
  people, and to them; then you will come to walk cheerfully over the
  world, answering that of God in every one; whereby in them ye may be a
  blessing, and make the witness of God, in them to bless you: then to
  the Lord God you will be a sweet savour, and a blessing.

  “Spare no deceit. Lay the sword upon it; go over it; keep yourselves
  clear of the blood of all men, either by word, or writing; and keep
  yourselves clean, that you may stand, in your throne, and everyone
  have his lot, and stand in the lot in the Ancient of Days. The
  blessing of the Lord be with you, and keep you over all the idolatrous
  worships and worshippers. Let them know the living God; for teachings,
  churches, worships, set up by man’s earthly understanding, knowledge,
  and will, must be thrown down by the power of the Lord God. All this
  must be overthrown by that which gave forth Scripture; and who are in
  that, reign over it all: that is the word of the Lord God to you all.
  In that is God worshipped, that brings to declare his will; and brings
  to the church in God, the ground and pillar of truth: for now has the
  mighty day of the Lord appeared, and the arrows of the Almighty are
  gone forth, which shall stick in the hearts of the wicked. Now will I
  arise, saith the Lord God Almighty, to trample and thunder down
  deceit, which hath long reigned, and stained the earth: now will I
  have my glory out of every one. The Lord God Almighty over all in his
  strength and power keep you, to his glory, that you may come to answer
  that of God in every one.

  “Proclaim the mighty day of the Lord of fire and sword, who will be
  worshipped in spirit and in truth; and keep in the life and power of
  the Lord God, that the inhabitants of the earth may tremble before
  you; that the Lord’s power and majesty may be admired among the
  hypocrites and heathens, and ye in the wisdom, dread, life, terror,
  and dominion preserved to his glory: that nothing may rule or reign,
  but power and life itself; and in the wisdom of God ye may be
  preserved in it. This is the word of the Lord God to you all. The call
  is now out of transgression; the Spirit bids, ‘come.’ The call is now
  from all false worships and gods, and from all inventions and dead
  works, to serve the living God. The call is to repentance, to
  amendment of life, whereby righteousness may be brought forth; which
  shall go throughout the earth. Therefore ye that are chosen and
  faithful, who are with the Lamb, go through your work faithfully, and
  in the strength and power of the Lord: and be obedient to the power;
  for that will save you out of the hands of unreasonable men, and
  preserve you over the world to himself. Hereby you may live in the
  kingdom, that stands in power, which hath no end; where glory and life
  is.”

                                                               G. F.

After the assizes, the sheriff, with some soldiers, came to guard a
woman to execution, that was sentenced to die; and we had much discourse
with them. One of them wickedly said, that “Christ was as passionate a
man as any that lived upon the earth;” for which we rebuked him. Another
time we asked the jailer what doings there were at the sessions; and he
said, “Small matters: only about thirty for bastardy.” We thought it
very strange, that they who professed themselves Christians should make
small matters of such things. But this jailer was very bad himself; I
often admonished him to sobriety; but he abused people that came to
visit us. Edward Pyot had a cheese sent him from BRISTOL by his wife;
and the jailer took it from him, and carried it to the mayor, to search
it for treasonable letters, as he said; and though they found no treason
in the cheese, they kept it from us. This jailer might have been rich if
he had carried himself civilly; but he sought his own ruin; which soon
after came upon him; for the next year he was turned out of his place,
and for some wickedness cast into the jail himself; and there begged of
our Friends. And for some unruliness in his conduct, he was, by the
succeeding jailer, put into Doomsdale, locked in irons, and beaten; and
bid to “remember how he had abused those good men, whom he had wickedly,
without any cause, cast into that nasty dungeon;” and told, “that now he
deservedly should suffer for his wickedness; and the same measure he had
meted to others, should be meted out to himself.” He became very poor,
and died in prison; and his wife and family came to misery.

While I was in prison in LAUNCESTON, a friend went to Oliver Cromwell,
and offered himself, body for body, to lie in Doomsdale in my stead; if
he would take him, and let me have liberty. Which thing so struck him,
that he said to his great men and council, “Which of you would do so
much for me if I were in the same condition?” And though he did not
accept of the Friend’s offer, but said, “he could not do it, for that it
was contrary to law;” yet the truth thereby came mightily over him. A
good while after this he sent down Major-General Desborough, pretending
to set us at liberty. When he came, he offered us our liberty, if we
would say, “we would go home, and preach no more;” but we could not
promise him. Then he urged, that we should promise “to go home, if the
Lord permitted;” whereupon Edward Pyot wrote him the following letter:—

                     “_To Major-General Desborough._

        “FRIEND,

  “Though much might be said as to the liberty of Englishmen to travel
  in any part of the nation of England, it being as the Englishman’s
  house by the law, and he to be protected in any part of it; and if he
  transgress the law, the penalty upon the transgressor is to be
  inflicted. And as to the liberty of conscience, which is a natural
  right, and a fundamental; the exercise of it, by those who profess
  faith in God by Jesus Christ, is to be protected; as by the instrument
  of government appears, though they differ in doctrine, worship, and
  discipline; provided the liberty extend not to Popery, to prelacy, nor
  to licentiousness. Where these rights, which are the price of much
  blood and treasure in the late wars, are denied us, our liberty is
  infringed. Yet in the power of God over all, by which all are to be
  ruled, are we, and in it dwell, and by it alone are guided to do the
  will of God; whose will is free; and we, in the freedom of his will,
  walk by the power, either as it commands or permits, without any
  condition or enforcement thereunto by men; but as the power moves
  either by command or permission. And although we cannot covenant or
  condition to go forth of these parts, or to do this or that thing, if
  the Lord permit (for that were to do the will of man by God’s
  permission,) yet it is probable we may pass forth from these parts in
  the liberty of the will of God, as we may be severally moved, guided
  by the pure power, and not of necessity. We, who were first committed,
  were passing homewards when we were apprehended; and, as far as I
  know, we might pass, if the prison doors were commanded to be opened,
  and we freed of our bonds. Should we stay, if the Lord commands us to
  go; or should we go, if the Lord commands us to stay; or having no
  command to stay, but being permitted to pass from hence, the pure
  power moving thereto, and yet we stay; or go, when as before commanded
  to stay; we should then be wanderers indeed; for such are wanderers,
  who wander out from the will and power of God, abroad, at large, in
  their own wills and earthly minds. And so, in the fear of the Lord
  God, well weigh and consider, with the just weight and just balance,
  that justice thou mayest do to the just and innocent in prison.”

                                                        EDWARD PYOT.

Some time having elapsed after the foregoing was delivered him, and he
not giving any order for our discharge, I also wrote to him, as
follows:—

                     “_To Major-General Desborough._

        “FRIEND,

  “We who are in the power of God, the ruler and upholder of all things,
  who know and dwell in his power, to it we must be obedient; which
  brings us to stand out all men’s wills, unlimited. To say, ‘we will,
  if the Lord permit,’ in a case of buying and selling to get gain, if
  the intent be so to do, may be done; but we standing in the power of
  God to do his will, and to stand out of man’s will, if man propose,
  ‘we shall have our liberty if we will say we will go to our outward
  home, if the Lord permit, or if it will be the will of God;’ and
  because we cannot say these words in this case, shall not have our
  liberty, when we know that the will of God is, we shall ‘go to speak
  at some other place;’ here we cannot say these words truly. For to
  say, ‘we will go to our outward habitation, if it be according to the
  will of God,’ when we know the will of God is otherwise, we cannot
  speak so truly and clearly. Neither can any man say so to him, that
  requires it of him; who stands in the power, and knows the power of
  God to lead him, according to God’s will, when it leads him to another
  place than his outward home. But the Son of God, who came to do, and
  did, the will of God, had no place whereon to lay his head; and the
  apostles, and many of the followers of Christ, had no certain
  dwelling-place. Now, if these should have been restrained, because
  they could not say, they would go to their outward homes, if it were
  the will of God, when they knew it was the will of God they should
  not; and they could not do the will of God in doing so; and therefore
  could not speak those words to satisfy man’s mind and will, would not
  such restraint have been evil? Abraham could not do the will of God,
  but in going from his native country; and those who are of faith are
  of Abraham, of whom Christ came according to the flesh. Now, if you
  allege, ‘this is to let all loose, and at liberty to idleness,’ I say,
  no; such as are in the power of God, who do the will of God, come to
  receive his wisdom, by which all his creatures were created; and by
  which they are used to his glory. This I shall say; whoever are moved
  by the Lord God of glory and power, to go to their outward
  habitations, such of us may go to our outward homes, and there be
  diligent in serving the Lord, that they may be a blessing from the
  Lord God in their generation; diligently serving him in life and
  doctrine, in manners, in conversation, in all things. And those of us
  who are moved of the Lord to go to any other place, we standing in his
  will, and being moved by his power, which comprehends all things, and
  is not to be limited, we shall do his will, as we are commanded to do.

  “So the Lord God open your understandings, that you may see this great
  power of the Lord, which he is now manifesting among his children in
  this his day; that ye may not withstand it in our Friends, that are
  come into the power of God, and to God, and know him by whom the world
  was made; by whom all things were created that were created; and there
  was not anything made, but what was made for him, and to him, and by
  him; who is the power of God, and doth enlighten every man that cometh
  into the world. Friends being come to this light, which cometh from
  Christ, and having received power from him, by whom all things were
  created, who hath all power in heaven and earth given to him, who is
  the wisdom of God, we have received wisdom and power from him; by
  which the Lord doth give us to know how to use and order the creatures
  to the glory of him who is the creator of all things. Friends here are
  taught of the Lord to be diligent, serving him; and who come into the
  life, the Scriptures were given forth from, are given up to serve the
  Lord; and of this I have in all your consciences a witness. So, if
  thou open the prison door, we shall not stay there. If thou send a
  liberate, and set us free, we shall not stay in prison; for Israel is
  to go out free, whose freedom is purchased by the power of God, and
  the blood of Jesus. But who goeth out of the power of God, loseth his
  freedom.

                                                        “GEORGE FOX,

        “The 13th of the 6th         And the rest who are sufferers for
            Month, 1656.”              the truth in Launceston jail.”

After this Major Desborough came to the Castle-Green, and played at
bowls with the justices and others. Several Friends were moved to go,
and admonish them not to spend their time so vainly; desiring them to
consider, that “though they professed themselves to be Christians, yet
they gave themselves up to their pleasures, and kept the servants of God
meanwhile in prison;” and telling them, “the Lord would plead with them,
and visit them for such things.” But notwithstanding what was written or
said to him, he went away, and left us in prison. We understood
afterwards, that he left the business to Colonel Bennet, who had the
command of the jail. For sometime after Bennet would have set us at
liberty, if we would have paid his jailer’s fees. But we told him, “we
could give the jailer no fees, for we were innocent sufferers; and how
could they expect fees of us, who had suffered so long wrongfully?”
After a while Colonel Bennet coming to town, sent for us to an inn, and
insisted again upon fees, which we refused. At last the power of the
Lord came so over him, that he freely set us at liberty on the 13th day
of the seventh month, 1656. We had been prisoners nine weeks at the
first assize, called the Lent-assize, which was in the spring of the
year.




                               CHAPTER X.

1656-1657.—Address to those who are given to pleasures and wantonness—to
    the bowlers in the Castle-Green at Launceston—George Fox visits
    Friends imprisoned at Exeter, amongst whom is James Naylor, who has
    apostatized, but afterwards returned into the Truth—at a meeting in
    the orchard at Bristol about 10,000 persons are present—Paul Gwin, a
    rude Baptist, creates a disturbance, but is reproved and
    silenced—meeting of two or three thousand persons at N.
    Crisp’s—Justice Stooks prevents the magistrates from apprehending
    George Fox—speaks to the protector at Hyde-park, who invites him to
    his house—accordingly goes to Whitehall, and speaks to the Protector
    about Friends’ sufferings—travels through most parts of the nation
    after his liberation from Launceston jail—this year, 1656, there
    were seldom fewer than one thousand Friends in prison—to Friends, on
    the schism of J. Naylor—to Friends, to keep up their meetings—on
    judging the ministry, &c.—an answer to a high-flown professor—to
    professors, priests, and teachers, on immediate revelation and
    universal grace, &c., &c.—at Cardiff, George Fox sends word to some
    who had run out that “the day of their visitation was over”—at
    Brecknock, his companion, John-ap-John, preaches in the streets—at
    night there is a great uproar, like that of Diana’s craftsmen—at
    William Gandy’s has a large meeting of two or three thousand
    persons—Cromwell proclaims a fast for rain, and is told by George
    Fox that the drought was a sign of their barrenness—concerning the
    true fast and the false—preaches three hours at a great meeting in
    Radnorshire, and many are convinced—their horses are twice robbed of
    their oats—from a high hill sounds the day of the Lord, and
    foretells where God would raise up a people to himself, which came
    to pass—travels through every county in Wales, where there is a
    brave people, who sit under Christ’s teaching—has a large meeting on
    the top of a hill near Liverpool—at Manchester is taken into
    custody, but soon released.


Observing, while I was a prisoner at LAUNCESTON, how much the people
(especially they who are called the gentry) were addicted to pleasures
and vain recreations, I was moved, before I left the place, to give
forth several papers as a warning to them, and all that so misspend
their time. One of which was thus directed:—

    “THIS IS TO GO ABROAD AMONG THEM WHO ARE GIVEN TO PLEASURES AND
                              WANTONNESS.

  “The sins of Sodom and Gomorrah were pride, fulness of bread, and
  abundance of idleness. Their filthy conversation vexed the righteous
  soul of just Lot day by day, and they would not take warning; on whom
  God therefore sent fire, and turned them into ashes. And in spiritual
  Sodom and Egypt was our Lord Jesus Christ crucified; and it is
  written, ‘The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to
  play; with whom God was not well pleased; and there fell three and
  twenty thousand in one day.’ These the apostle commanded the saints
  they should not follow; for these things happened to them for
  examples, and are written for our admonition. God spared not the old
  world; but reserving Noah, a preacher of righteousness, brought the
  flood upon the world of the ungodly, making them an example to all
  that after should live ungodly. Mark, ye ungodly ones, who are as
  natural brute beasts, who speak great swelling words of vanity,
  alluring through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, as
  they that count it pleasure to riot in the day-time, sporting
  yourselves with your own deceivings; ye shall receive the reward of
  unrighteousness. Ye are as dogs and swine turned to the vomit, and
  wallowing in the mire, speaking evil of things that ye know not; and
  unless ye repent, ye shall utterly perish in your own corruptions. Ye
  have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have
  nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter: ye have condemned and
  killed the just, and he doth not resist you. Go to, weep and howl, for
  the misery that is coming upon you. She that liveth in pleasures, is
  dead while she liveth. God condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah,
  making them an example to all those that after should live ungodly, in
  the wicked, filthy conversation: mark, here is your example. Hear
  this, ye that are given to pleasures, and read your examples.”

                                                               G. F.

Another paper, upon my taking notice of the bowlers that came to sport
themselves in the Castle-Green, was as follows:—

  “The word of the Lord to all you vain and idle-minded people, who are
  lovers of sports, pleasures, foolish exercises, and recreations, as
  you call them; consider of your ways, what it is you are doing. Was
  this the end of your creation? Did God make all things for you, and
  you to serve your lusts and pleasures? Did not the Lord make all
  things for you, and you for himself, to fear and worship him in spirit
  and in truth, in righteousness and true holiness? But where is your
  service of God, so long as your hearts run after lusts and pleasures?
  Ye cannot serve God, and the foolish pleasures of the world, as
  bowling, drinking, hunting, hawking, and the like: if these have your
  hearts, God will not have your lips: consider, for it is true.
  Therefore from the Lord must you all witness woe and misery,
  tribulation and wrath, who continue in the love and practice of your
  vain sports, lusts, and pleasures. Now is the day, when all everywhere
  are exhorted to repentance. O foolish people, wicked and slow of heart
  to believe the threatenings of the great Jehovah against the wicked!
  What will ye do in the day of the Lord’s fierce wrath, that makes
  haste to come upon the world of ungodly men! What good have your
  foolish sports and delights done you now they are past? Or what good
  will they do you, when the Lord calls for your souls?

  “Therefore all now awake from sleep, and see where you are: and let
  the light of Jesus Christ, that shines in every one of your
  consciences, search you thoroughly; and it will let you clearly see,
  for all your profession of God, Christ, and the Scriptures, you are
  ignorant of them, and enemies to them all, and your own souls also:
  and being found living in pleasures, you are dead while you live.
  Therefore doth the Lord by many messengers forewarn you, and call you
  to repentance and deep humiliation, that you may forsake the evil of
  your doings, own this day of your visitation, and while you have time,
  prize it; lest the things which belong to your peace be hid from your
  eyes, for your disobedience and rebellion against the Holy One. And
  then had it been good that you never had been born. Repent, for the
  kingdom of heaven is at hand: again I say, repent!”

                                     Given forth in LAUNCESTON Jail,
                                            in Cornwall.

  To the Bowlers in the Green.

Being released from our imprisonment we got horses and rode towards
Humphrey Lower’s, and met him on the road. He told us, “He was much
troubled in his mind concerning us, and could not rest at home, but was
going to Colonel Bennet to seek our liberty.” When we told him, “we were
set at liberty, and were going to his house,” he was exceedingly glad.
To his house we went, and had a fine precious meeting; many were
convinced, and turned by the Spirit of the Lord to the Lord Jesus
Christ’s teaching.

From his house we went to Loveday Hambley’s, where we also had a fine
large meeting. The Lord’s power was over all; many were convinced there
also, and turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their teacher.

After we had tarried there two or three days, we came to Thomas
Mouncey’s, where we had a general meeting for the whole county; which,
being very large, was held in his orchard. Friends from Plymouth were
there, and from many places. The Lord’s power was over all; and a great
convincement there was in many parts of the county. Their watches were
down, and all was plain and open; for the Lord had let me see, before I
was set at liberty, that he would make all the country plain before us.
Thomas and Ann Curtis, with an alderman of Reading, who was convinced,
had come to Launceston to see us while I was a prisoner: and when Ann,
and the other man returned, Thomas Curtis stayed behind in CORNWALL, and
had good service for the Lord at that time.[50]

Footnote 50:

  Thomas Curtis became a faithful minister, and sufferer for Christ’s
  sake. In 1666, he is mentioned in a letter from Alexander Parker to
  Margaret Fell as being a prisoner with thirty-two or thirty-three
  others. His wife, Ann Curtis, was a daughter of a sheriff of Bristol.
  See a letter of T. Curtis to George Fox, in _Letters of Early
  Friends_, p. 240.

From Thomas Mouncey’s we passed to LAUNCESTON again, and visited that
little remnant of Friends that had been raised up there while we were in
prison; and the Lord’s plants grew finely, and were established on
Christ, their rock and foundation. As we were going out of town again,
the constable of Launceston came running to us with the cheese that had
been taken from Edward Pyot; which they had kept from us all this while,
and were tormented with it. But being now set at liberty, we would not
receive it.

From Launceston we came to OKINGTON [Oakhampton], and lodged at an inn,
which the mayor of the town kept. He had stopped and taken up several
Friends, but was very civil to us; and was convinced in his judgment.

From thence we came to EXETER, where many Friends were in prison; and
amongst the rest James Naylor. For a little before we were set at
liberty, James had run out into imaginations, and a company with him:
which raised up a great darkness in the nation.[51] He came to Bristol,
and made a disturbance there: and from thence he was coming to
Launceston to see me; but was stopped by the way, and imprisoned at
Exeter; as were also several others; one of whom, an honest tender man,
died in prison there, whose blood lieth on the heads of his persecutors.

Footnote 51:

  James Naylor was a monument of human frailty. His gift in the ministry
  was eminent; his experience in divine things truly great. He fell
  through unwatchfulness, but was restored through deep sufferings and
  unfeigned repentance. His own writings are the most clear and lively
  description of the various dispensations he underwent; some of them
  deserve to be transmitted to the latest posterity. His address to his
  brethren bespeaks the real repentance of his heart; in that he says,
  “My heart is broken this day for the offence I have occasioned to
  God’s truth and people,—I beseech you, forgive wherein I evilly
  requited your love in that day. God knows my sorrow for it!” &c. A few
  hours before his death, he spoke in the presence of several witnesses
  the following remarkable words:—

  “There is a spirit which I feel, that delights to do no evil, nor to
  revenge any wrong; but delights to endure all things, in hope to enjoy
  its own in the end. Its hope is to outlive all wrath and contention,
  and to weary out all exaltation and cruelty, or whatever is of a
  nature contrary to itself. It sees to the end of all temptations; as
  it bears no evil in itself, so it conceives none in thought to any
  other. If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its ground and spring is
  the mercy and forgiveness of God. Its crown is meekness; its life is
  everlasting love unfeigned. It takes its kingdom with entreaty, and
  not with contention, and keeps it by lowliness of mind. In God alone
  it can rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its life. It is
  conceived in sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it; nor
  doth it murmur at grief and oppression. It never rejoiceth, but
  through sufferings; for with the world’s joy it is murdered. I found
  it alone; being forsaken. I have fellowship therein with those who
  lived in dens and desolate places in the earth; who through death
  obtained this resurrection, and eternal, holy life!”

  Such was the end of James Naylor; who, in his forty-fourth year,
  “chastened, but not killed—cast down, but not destroyed”—through much
  tribulation, entered, we may humbly hope, “into the kingdom of
  God.”—(For full particulars, see his Life by Joseph Gurney Bevan.)

The night we came to EXETER, I spoke with James Naylor; for I saw he was
out and wrong: and so was his company. Next day, being First-day, we
went to visit the prisoners, and had a meeting with them in the prison;
but James Naylor and some of them could not stay the meeting. There came
a corporal of horse into the meeting, and was convinced, and remained a
very good Friend. The next day I spoke to James Naylor again; and he
slighted what I said, and was dark, and much out; yet he would have come
and kissed me. But I said, “since he had turned against the power of
God, I could not receive his show of kindness;” the Lord moved me to
slight him, and to set the power of God over him. So after I had been
warring with the world, there was now a wicked spirit risen up amongst
Friends to war against. I admonished him and his company. When he was
come to London, his resisting the power of God in me, and the truth that
was declared to him by me, became one of his greatest burdens. But he
came to see his out-going, and to condemn it; and after some time he
returned to truth again; as in the printed account of his repentance,
condemnation, and recovery, may be more fully seen.

We passed from Exeter through COLLUMPTON and TAUNTON, visiting Friends;
and had meetings amongst them. From thence we came to PUDDIMORE, to
William Beaton’s; where on the First-day we had a very large meeting. A
great convincement there was all through that country; many meetings we
had, and the Lord’s power was over all; many were turned, by the power
and Spirit of God, to the Lord Jesus Christ, who died for them, and came
to sit under his free teaching.

From thence we went to John Dander’s, where we had another precious
meeting. The Lord’s power was over all, and many were convinced of God’s
eternal truth. Contention was raised by professors and Baptists in some
places, but the Lord’s power came over them. From thence we came to
Edward Pyot’s house near BRISTOL. It was the Seventh-day at night that
we came thither; and it was quickly noised over the town that I was
come. I had never been there before.

On First-day morning I went to the meeting in Broadmead at BRISTOL;
which was large and quiet. Notice was given of a meeting to be in the
afternoon in the orchard. There was at Bristol a rude Baptist, named
Paul Gwin, who had before made great disturbance in our meetings, being
encouraged and set on by the mayor, who, it was reported, would
sometimes give him his dinner to encourage him. Such multitudes of rude
people he gathered after him, that it was thought there had been
sometimes ten thousand people at our meeting in the orchard. As I was
going into the orchard the people told me, that Paul Gwin, the rude
jangling Baptist, was going to the meeting. “I bid them never heed, it
was nothing to me who went to it.”

When I was come into the orchard, I stood upon the stone that Friends
used to stand on when they spoke; and I was moved of the Lord to put off
my hat, and to stand a pretty while, and let the people look at me; for
some thousands of people were there. While I thus stood silent, this
rude Baptist began to find fault with my hair; but I said nothing to
him. Then he ran on into words; and at last, “Ye wise men of Bristol,”
said he, “I strange at you, that you will stand here, and hear a man
speak and affirm that which he cannot make good.” Then the Lord opened
my mouth (for as yet I had not spoken a word), and I asked the people,
“whether they ever heard me speak; or ever saw me before:” and I bid
them “take notice what kind of man this was amongst them that should so
impudently say, that I spoke and affirmed that which I could not make
good; and yet neither he nor they had ever heard me or seen me before.
Therefore that was a lying, envious, malicious spirit, that spoke in
him; and it was of the Devil, and not of God. I charged him in the dread
and power of the Lord to be silent: and the mighty power of God came
over him, and all his company. Then a glorious, peaceable meeting we
had, and the word of life was divided amongst them; and they were turned
from the darkness to the light,—to Jesus their Saviour. The Scriptures
were largely opened to them; and the traditions, rudiments, ways, and
doctrines of men were laid open before the people; and they were turned
to the light of Christ, that with it they might see them, and see him to
lead them out of them. I opened also to them the types, figures, and
shadows of Christ in the time of the law; and showed them that Christ
was come, and had ended the types, shadows, tithes, and oaths, and put
down swearing; and had set up yea and nay instead of it, and a free
ministry; for he was now come to teach people himself, and his heavenly
day was springing from on high.” For many hours did I declare the word
of life amongst them in the eternal power of God, that by him they might
come up into the beginning, and be reconciled to him. And having turned
them to the Spirit of God in themselves, that would lead into all truth,
I was moved to pray in the mighty power of God; and the Lord’s power
came over all. When I had done, this fellow began to babble again; and
John Audland was moved to bid him repent, and fear God. So his own
people and followers being ashamed of him, he passed away, and never
came again to disturb the meeting. The meeting broke up quietly, and the
Lord’s power and glory shone over all: a blessed day it was, and the
Lord had the praise. After a while this Paul Gwin went beyond the seas;
many years after I met with him again at Barbadoes: of which in its
place.

From Bristol we returned to Edward Pyot’s, where we had a great meeting.
The Lord’s power was over all, truth was declared and spread abroad, and
many were turned to Christ Jesus, their life, their prophet to teach
them, their shepherd to feed them, and their bishop to oversee them,
After the meeting, I had reasoning with some professors; and the Lord’s
truth and power came over them.

From Edward Pyot’s we passed to SLAUGHTERFORD, where we had a very large
meeting (Edward Pyot and another Friend being still with me); great
turning of people there was to the Lord Jesus Christ, their teacher; and
people were glad that they were brought to know their way, their free
teacher, and their Saviour, Christ Jesus.

The First-day following we went to Nathaniel Crisp’s house, who had been
a justice of peace in WILTSHIRE, where it was supposed there were
between two and three thousand people at a meeting; and all was quiet.
The mighty power of God was manifest, and people were turned to the
grace and truth in their hearts, that came by Jesus Christ, which taught
them to deny all ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live soberly and
godly in this present world; so that every man and woman might know the
grace of God, which had appeared to all men, and which was saving, and
sufficient to bring their salvation. This teacher, the grace of God,
would teach them how to live, what to do, and what to deny; it would
season their words, and establish their hearts. This was a free teacher
to every one of them; that they might come to be heirs of this grace,
and of Christ, by whom it came; who hath ended the prophets, and the
priests that took tithes, and the Jewish temple. And as for the hireling
priests that take tithes now, and their temples (which priests were made
at schools and colleges of man’s setting up, and not by Christ), they,
with all their inventions, were to be denied. For the apostles denied
the true priesthood and temple, which God had commanded, after Christ
had put an end thereto. The Scriptures, and the truths therein
contained, were largely opened, and the people turned to the Spirit of
God in their hearts; that by it they might be led into all truth, and
understand the Scriptures, and know God and Christ, and come to have
unity with them, and one with another in the same Spirit. They went away
generally satisfied, and were glad that they were turned to Christ
Jesus, their teacher and Saviour.

Next day we went to MARLBOROUGH, where we had a little meeting. The
sessions being held that day, they were about to grant a warrant to send
for me; but one Justice Stooks being at the sessions, stopped them,
telling them there was a meeting at his house yesterday, at which there
were several thousands. So the warrant was stopped, and the meeting was
quiet; and several received Christ Jesus their teacher, came into the
new covenant, and abode in it.

From hence we went to NEWBURY, where we had a large, blessed meeting,
and several were convinced. Then we passed to READING, where we had a
large, precious meeting in the Lord’s power, amongst the plants of God.
Many of the people came in, and were reached, and added to the meeting.
All was quiet, and the Lord’s power was over all. We went next to
KINGSTON-ON-THAMES, where a few came in to us that were turned to the
Lord Jesus Christ: but it is since become a larger meeting.

Leaving Kingston, we rode to LONDON. When we came near Hyde Park, we saw
a great concourse of people, and looking towards them, espied the
Protector coming in his coach. Whereupon I rode to his coach-side; and
some of his life-guards would have put me away, but he forbade them. So
I rode by with him, “declaring what the Lord gave me to say to him of
his condition, and of the sufferings of Friends in the nation; showing
him, how contrary this persecution was to Christ and his apostles, and
to Christianity.” When we arrived at James’s Park-gate, I left him; and
at parting he desired me to come to his house. Next day, one of his
wife’s maids, whose name was Mary Saunders, came to me at my lodging,
and told me her master came to her, and said he would tell her some good
news. When she asked him what it was, he told her, George Fox was come
to town. She replied that was good news indeed (for she had received
truth,) but she said, she could hardly believe him, till he told her how
I met him, and rode from Hyde Park to James’s Park with him.

After a little time Edward Pyot and I went to WHITEHALL: and when we
came before him, Dr. Owen, vice-chancellor of Oxford, was with him. We
were moved to speak to Oliver Cromwell concerning the sufferings of
Friends, and laid them before him; and directed him to the light of
Christ, who enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world. He said
it was a natural light; but we “showed him the contrary, and manifested
that it was divine and spiritual, proceeding from Christ, the spiritual
and heavenly man; and that which was called the _life_ in Christ the
Word, was called the _light_ in us.” The power of the Lord God arose in
me, and I was moved in it “to bid him lay down his crown at the feet of
Jesus.” Several times I spoke to him to the same effect. Now I was
standing by the table, and he came and sat upon the table’s side by me,
and said he would be as high as I was; and so continued speaking against
the light of Christ Jesus; and went away in a light manner. But the
Lord’s power came over him, so that when he came to his wife and other
company, he said, “I never parted so from them before;” for he was
judged in himself.

After he had left us, as we were going out, many great persons came
about us; and one of them began to speak against the light, and against
the truth; and I was made to slight him, for speaking so lightly of the
things of God. Whereupon, one of them told me he was the Major-General
of Northamptonshire. “What!” said I, “our old persecutor, that has
persecuted and sent so many of our friends to prison, and is a shame to
Christianity and religion! I am glad I have met with thee,” said I. So I
was moved to speak sharply to him of his unchristian carriage, and he
slunk away: for he had been a cruel persecutor in Northamptonshire.

Now, after I had visited the meetings of Friends in and about LONDON, I
went into BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, and Edward Pyot with me; and in several
places in that county many received the truth. Great meetings we had,
and the Lord’s power was eminently manifested. I passed through
Northamptonshire and Nottinghamshire, into LINCOLNSHIRE. After having
had several meetings in Lincolnshire, I had at last a meeting where two
knights, one called Sir Richard Wrey, and the other Sir John Wrey, with
their wives, were at the meeting. One of their wives was convinced,
received the truth, and died in it. When the meeting was over we passed
away; and it being evening, and dark, a company of wild serving-men
encompassed me about, with intent (as I apprehended) to do me some
mischief. But I spoke aloud to them, and asked, “What are ye?
highwaymen?” Whereupon some Friends and friendly people that were
behind, came up to us, and knew some of them. So I reproved them for
their uncivil and rude carriage, and exhorted them to fear God; and the
Lord’s power came over them, and stopped their mischievous design:
blessed be his name for ever!

Then I turned into HUNTINGDONSHIRE: and the mayor of HUNTINGDON came to
visit me, and was very loving, and his wife received the truth.

Thence I passed into CAMBRIDGESHIRE, and the Fen-country, where I had
many meetings, and the Lord’s truth spread. Robert Craven (who had been
sheriff of Lincoln) and Amor Stoddart, and Alexander Parker were with
me. We went to CROWLAND, a very rude place; for the townspeople were
collected at the inn we went to, and were half drunk, both priest and
people. I reproved them for their drunkenness, and warned them of the
day of the Lord, that was coming upon all the wicked; exhorting them to
leave their drunkenness, and turn to the Lord in time. Whilst I was thus
speaking to them, and showing the priest the fruits of his ministry, he
and the clerk broke out into a rage, and got up the tongs and
fire-shovel to us; so that had not the Lord’s power preserved us, we
might have been murdered amongst them. Yet, for all their rudeness and
violence, some received the truth then, and have stood in it ever since.

Thence we passed to BOSTON, where most of the chief of the town came to
our inn, and the people seemed much satisfied. But there was a raging
man in the yard, and Robert Craven was moved to speak to him, and told
him he shamed Christianity, which with some few other words so stopped
the man, that he went away quiet. Some were convinced there also.

Thus we had large meetings up and down, for I travelled into Yorkshire,
and returned out of Holderness, over Humber, visiting Friends; and then
returning into Leicestershire, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, and
WARWICKSHIRE, among Friends, I had a meeting at EDGE-HILL. There came to
it Ranters, Baptists, and several sorts of rude people; for I had sent
word about three weeks before to have a meeting there, so that hundreds
of people were gathered thither, and many Friends came far to it. The
Lord’s everlasting truth and word of life reached over all; the rude and
unruly spirits were chained down; and many that day were turned to the
Lord Jesus Christ, by his power and Spirit, and came to sit under his
blessed, free teaching, and to be fed with his eternal, heavenly food.
All was peaceable; the people passed quietly away, and some of them said
it was a mighty, powerful meeting; for the presence of the Lord was
felt, and his power and Spirit amongst them.

From hence I passed to WARWICK and to BAGLEY, having precious meetings;
and then in GLOUCESTERSHIRE, and so to OXFORD, where the scholars were
very rude; but the Lord’s power came over them. Great meetings we had up
and down as we travelled. Then I went to Colonel Grimes’s, where there
was a very large meeting; and thence to Nathaniel Crisp’s, where came
another justice to the meeting, who was also convinced. At CIRENCESTER
we had a meeting which is since much increased; and so we came to
EVESHAM again, where I met John Camm.

Thus having travelled over most part of the nation, I returned to LONDON
again, having cleared myself of that which lay upon me from the Lord.
For after I was released out of Launceston jail, I was moved of the Lord
to travel over the nation, the truth being now spread, and finely
planted in most places, that I might answer and remove out of the minds
of people some objections, which the envious priests and professors had
raised and spread abroad concerning us. For what Christ said of false
prophets and antichrists coming in the last days, they applied to us;
and said, We were they.

  Therefore was I moved to open this through the nation, and to show
  “That they who said we were the false prophets, antichrists, and
  deceivers, that should come in the last days, were indeed themselves
  they. For when Christ told his disciples in the viith and xxivth of
  Matthew, that false prophets and antichrists should come in the last
  times, and (if it were possible) should deceive the very elect; he
  said, ‘By their fruits ye shall know them;’ for they should be
  inwardly ravening wolves, having the sheep’s clothing. ‘And,’ said he,
  ‘do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?’ as much as to
  say, their nature and spirit should be like a thorn, or like a
  thistle. And he bid his disciples not go after them. But before the
  disciples were deceased, the antichrists, false prophets, and
  deceivers were come. For John in his first epistle said, ‘Little
  children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that antichrist
  shall come, even now there are many antichrists, whereby we know that
  it is the last time.’ So here, as Christ said to his disciples they
  should come, the disciples saw they were come; as may be seen at large
  in Peter, Jude, John, and other places of Scripture; ‘whereby,’ says
  John, ‘we know it is the last time.’ And this last time began above
  sixteen hundred years since. John said, ‘they went out from us;’ the
  false prophets, antichrists, seducers, and deceivers, went out from
  the church; ‘but you,’ said he, to the church, ‘have an anointing,
  which abideth in you; and you need not that any man teach you, but as
  the same anointing teacheth you of all things; and as it hath taught
  you, ye shall abide in him.’ Christ said to his disciples, ‘Go not
  after them, for they are inwardly ravening wolves;’ and John exhorts
  the saints to the anointing within them; and the rest of the apostles
  exhort the churches to the grace, the light, the truth, the Spirit,
  the word of faith, and to Christ in their hearts, the hope of glory.
  Christ told the saints that the Spirit of truth, the Holy Ghost,
  should be their leader into all truth; and Jude exhorts the church to
  ‘pray in the Holy Ghost,’ and ‘to be built up in their most holy
  faith,’ which Christ was the author of. Christ, by his servant John,
  ‘exhorted the seven churches to hear what the Spirit said to the
  churches,’ and this was an inward, spiritual hearing. Christ says, the
  inwardly ravening wolves should have the sheep’s clothing. Paul speaks
  of some in his time, that had ‘a form of godliness, but denied the
  power.’ John said, ‘they went out from us.’ Jude said, they go in
  Cain’s way, and in Balaam’s, and Corah’s way. By all which it may be
  clearly seen, that the false prophets and antichrists, which Christ
  foretold should come, the apostles saw were come; and in their day it
  was the last time; and these went forth from them into the world, and
  the world went after them. These were the foremen, the leaders of the
  world, that brought them into a form of godliness, but inwardly
  ravened from the power and Spirit. These have the sheep’s clothing,
  the words of Christ, of the prophets, and of the apostles; but are
  inwardly ravened from the power and Spirit that they were in, who gave
  forth the Scriptures. These have made up the beast and the whore!
  These have got the dragon’s power, the murdering, destroying,
  persecuting power! and these are they that the world wonders after!
  These have drunk the blood of the martyrs, prophets, and saints, and
  persecuted the true church into the wilderness! These have set up the
  false compelling worships, and have drunk the blood of the saints,
  that will not drink of their cup! These have made the cage for the
  unclean birds, that have their several unclean notes in their cage;
  which cage is made up by the power of darkness, and uncleanness; and
  the birds of the cage deny the Holy Ghost, and the power of God, which
  the apostles were in, is to be now manifested in the saints!

  “Thus since Christ said, the false prophets and antichrists should
  come, and the apostle said, they were come, the beast’s and the
  dragon’s worship hath been set up; and the whore is got up with her
  false prophets, and her cage hath been made, and all the nations have
  drunk of her cup of fornication; the blood of the martyrs and saints
  they have drunk, and the true church hath fled into the wilderness;
  and all this since the apostles’ days. Yet the blind deceivers, the
  antichrists, and false prophets of our age, would make us and people
  believe, that the false prophets, antichrists, and deceivers are come
  but now, though John and other of the apostles tell us they were come
  above sixteen hundred years ago. And ye may see what work and
  confusion they have made in the world; how much blood these Cains have
  drunk that went in Cain’s way; which blood cries to God for vengeance
  upon Christendom! And how these Balaams that have erred from the power
  and Spirit which the apostles were in, have coveted after other men’s
  estates, the many jails, courts, and spoilings of goods will bear
  witness. And how the Corahs have gainsayed the life, power, and
  Spirit, which the apostles and true church were in, and the free
  teaching of Christ and his apostles, and the work of their ministry,
  which was ‘to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus,’ hath been
  evident.

  “Therefore in the name and power of the Lord Jesus was I sent to
  preach again the everlasting gospel, which had been preached before
  unto Abraham, and in the apostles’ days; which was to go over all
  nations, and be preached to every creature. For as the apostacy hath
  gone over all nations since the apostles’ days, so that the nations
  are become as waters, unstable, being gone from Christ the foundation;
  so must the gospel, the power of God, go over all nations again. We
  find the false prophets, anti-christs, deceivers, whore, false church,
  beast, and his worship in the dragon’s power, have got up in the times
  between the apostles and us. For Christ said, ‘they should come;’ and
  the apostles saw ‘they were come,’ and coming in their days; and that
  they went forth from them, and the world went after them. And now hath
  the Lord raised us up beyond them, and set us over them in the
  everlasting gospel, the power of God; that as all have been darkened
  by the beast, whore, false prophets, and antichrists, so the
  everlasting gospel may be preached again by us to all nations, and to
  every creature, which will bring life and immortality to light in
  them, that they may see over the devil and his false prophets,
  antichrists, seducers, and deceivers, and over the whore and beast,
  and to that which was before they were. This message of the glorious
  everlasting gospel was I sent forth to declare and publish, and
  thousands by it are turned to God, having received it; and are come
  into subjection to it, and into the holy order of it. And since I have
  declared this message in this part of the world, and in America, and
  have written books on the same, to spread it universally abroad; the
  blind prophets, preachers, and deceivers, have given over telling us
  the false prophets should ‘come in the last times;’ for a great light
  is sprung up, and shines over their heads; so that every child in
  truth sees the folly of their sayings.

  “Then they raised other objections against us, and invented shifts to
  save themselves from truth’s stroke. For when we blamed them for
  taking tithes, which came from the tribe of Levi, and were set up here
  by the Romish church, they would plead, ‘that Christ told the scribes
  and Pharisees they ought to pay tithes of mint, anise, and cummin,
  though they had neglected the weightier matters;’ and that Christ
  said, ‘the scribes and pharisees sat in Moses’s seat, therefore all
  that they bid you do, that do and observe.’ And when we told them they
  were envious, persecuting priests, they would reply, that ‘some
  preached Christ of envy, and some of contention, and some of
  good-will.’ Now these Scriptures, and such like they would bring to
  darken the minds of their hearers, and to persuade them and us, ‘that
  we ought to do as they say, though they themselves were like the
  Pharisees; and that we should rejoice when envious men and men of
  strife preached Christ; and that we should give them the tithes, as
  the Jews did to the tribe of Levi.’ These were fair glosses; here was
  a great heap of husks, but no kernel. Now this was their blindness;
  for the Levitical priesthood Christ hath ended, and disannulled the
  commandment that gave them tithes, and the law, by which those priests
  were made. Christ did not come after that order, neither did he send
  forth his ministers after that order; for those of that order were to
  take tithes for their maintenance; but his ministers he sent forth
  _freely_. And as for hearing that the Pharisees, and the Jews paid
  tithes of mint, anise, and cummin, that was before Christ was
  sacrificed and offered up; the Jews were then to do the law, and
  perform their offerings and sacrifices, which the Jewish priests
  taught them. But after Christ was offered up, he bid them then, ‘go
  into all nations and preach the gospel; and lo,’ said he, ‘I will be
  with you to the end of the world;’ and in another place he saith, ‘I
  will be _in_ you.’ So he did not bid them go to hear the Pharisees
  then, and pay tithe of mint, anise, and cummin then; but ‘Go preach
  the gospel, and believe in the Lord Jesus, and be saved, and receive
  the gospel,’ which would bring people off from the Jews, the tithes,
  the Levitical law, and the offerings thereof, to Christ, the one
  Offering, made once for them all. O what work had the apostle with
  both the Galatians and the Romans, to bring them off the law to the
  faith in Christ!

  “And as for the apostle’s saying, ‘Some preached Christ of envy and
  strife,’ &c., that was at the first spreading of Christ’s name abroad,
  when they were in danger not only to be cast out of the synagogues,
  but to be stoned to death, that confessed the name of Jesus, as may be
  seen by the uproars that were among the Jews and Diana’s worshippers
  at the preaching of Christ. So the apostle might well rejoice, if the
  envious, and men of strife and contention did preach Christ at that
  time, though they thought thereby to add affliction to his bonds; but
  afterward, when Christ’s name was spread abroad, and many had got a
  form of godliness, but denied the power thereof, envious, proud,
  contentious men, men of strife, covetous teachers for filthy lucre,
  the apostles commanded the saints to turn from, and not have any
  fellowship with them. And the deacons and ministers were first to be
  proved, to see if they were in the power of godliness, and the Holy
  Ghost made them overseers and preachers. So it may be seen how the
  priests have abused these Scriptures for their own ends, and have
  wrested them to their own destruction, to justify envious, contentious
  men, and men of strife. Whereas the apostle says, ‘the man of God must
  be patient, and apt to teach;’ and they were to follow Christ as they
  had him for their example. The apostle indeed was very tender to
  people, while he saw them walk in simplicity; as in the case of them
  that were scrupulous about meats and days; but when the apostle saw
  that some drew them into the observation of days, and to settle in
  such things, he then reproves them sharply, and asks them, ‘who had
  bewitched them?’ So in the case of marrying he was tender, lest their
  minds should be drawn from the Lord’s joining; but when they came to
  forbid marriage, and to set up rules for meats and drinks, he called
  it ‘a doctrine of devils,’ and an ‘erring from the true faith.’ So
  also he was tender concerning circumcision, and in tenderness suffered
  some to be circumcised; but when he saw they went to make a sect
  thereby, and set up circumcision as a standing practice, he told them
  plainly, ‘if they were circumcised, Christ would profit them nothing.’
  In like manner he was tender concerning baptizing with water; but when
  he saw they began to make sects about it, some crying up Paul, others
  Apollos, he judged them, and called them carnal, and thanks God he had
  baptised no more, but such and such; declaring plainly, that ‘he was
  sent to preach the gospel, and not to baptize;’ and brought them to
  the one baptism by the one Spirit, into the one body, which Christ,
  the spiritual man, is the head of; and exhorted the church ‘all to
  drink into that one Spirit.’ For he set up in the church one faith,
  which Christ was the author of; and one baptism, which was that of the
  Spirit, into the one body; and one Lord Jesus Christ, the spiritual
  baptizer, whom John said should come after him. And further the
  apostle declared, that they who worshipped and served God in the
  Spirit, were of the circumcision of the Spirit, which was not made
  with hands; by which ‘the body of the sins of the flesh was put off;’
  which circumcision Christ is the minister of.

  “Another great objection they had, ‘That the Quakers denied the
  sacrament (as they called it) of bread and wine, which,’ they said,
  ‘they were to take, and do in remembrance of Christ to the end of the
  world.’ Much work we had with the priests and professors about this,
  and the several modes of receiving it in Christendom, so called; for
  some take it kneeling, and some sitting; but none of them all, that
  ever I could find, take it as the disciples took it. For they took it
  in a chamber, after supper; but these generally take it before dinner:
  and some say, after the priest hath blessed it, it is ‘Christ’s body.’
  But as to the matter, Christ said, ‘Do this in remembrance of me.’ He
  did not tell them how often they should do it, or how long; neither
  did he enjoin them to do it always, as long as they lived, or that all
  believers in him should do it to the world’s end.

  “The apostle Paul, who was not converted till after Christ’s death,
  tells the Corinthians, that he had received of the Lord that which he
  delivered unto them concerning this matter: and he relates Christ’s
  words concerning the cup thus; ‘This do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in
  remembrance of me;’ and himself adds, ‘For [as often as] ye eat this
  bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till he come.’
  So according to what the apostle here delivers, neither Christ nor he
  enjoined people to do this always; but leave it to their liberty [as
  oft as ye drink it, &c.]. Now the Jews used to take a cup, and to
  break bread, and divide it among them in their feasts; as may be seen
  in the Jewish Antiquities: so that the breaking of bread, and drinking
  of wine, were Jewish rites, which were not to last always. They also
  baptised with water; which made it not seem a strange thing to them
  when John the Baptist came with his decreasing ministration of
  water-baptism. But as to the bread and wine, after the disciples had
  taken it, some of them questioned whether Jesus was the Christ; for
  some of them said, after he was crucified, ‘We trusted that it had
  been he which should have redeemed Israel,’ &c. And though the
  Corinthians had the bread and wine, and were baptized in water, the
  apostle told them they were ‘reprobates, if Christ was not in them;’
  and bid them ‘examine themselves.’ And as the apostle said, ‘As oft as
  ye do eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lord’s
  death [till he come:’] so Christ had said before, that he ‘was the
  bread of life, which came down from heaven;’ and that ‘he would come
  and dwell in them;’ which the apostles did witness fulfilled; and
  exhorted others to seek for that which comes down from above; but the
  outward bread and wine, and water, are not from above, but from below.

  “Now ye that eat and drink this outward bread and wine in remembrance
  of Christ’s death, and have your fellowships in that, will ye come no
  nearer to Christ’s death, than to take bread and wine in remembrance
  of it? After ye have eaten in remembrance of his death, ye must come
  _into his death_, and _die with him_, as the apostles did, if ye will
  _live with him_. This is a nearer and further advanced state, to be
  with him in the fellowship of his death, than only to take bread and
  wine in remembrance of his death. You must have fellowship with Christ
  in his sufferings: if ye will reign with him, ye must suffer with him;
  if ye will live with him, ye must die with him; and if ye die with
  him, ye must be buried with him: and being buried with him in the true
  baptism, ye also rise with him. Then having suffered with him, died
  with him, and been buried with him, if ye are risen with Christ, ‘seek
  those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand
  of God.’ Eat the bread which comes down from above, which is not
  outward bread; and drink the cup of salvation which he gives in his
  kingdom, which is not outward wine. And then there will not be a
  looking at the things that are seen (as outward bread and wine, and
  water are:) for, as says the apostle, ‘The things that are seen are
  temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal.’

  “So here are many states and conditions to be gone through, before
  people come to see and partake of that, which ‘cometh down from
  above.’ For first, there was a taking of the outward bread and wine in
  remembrance of Christ’s death: this was temporary, and not of
  necessity, but at their liberty; as oft as ye do it, &c. Secondly,
  there must be a coming into his death, a suffering with Christ; and
  this is of necessity to salvation, and not temporary, but continual:
  there must be a dying daily. Thirdly, a being buried with Christ.
  Fourthly, a rising with Christ. Fifthly, after they are risen with
  Christ, then a seeking those things which are above; a seeking the
  bread that comes down from heaven, a feeding on and having fellowship
  in that. For outward bread, wine, and water, are from below, visible
  and temporal: but saith the apostle, ‘We look not at things that are
  seen; for the things that are seen are temporal, but the things that
  are not seen are eternal.’ So the fellowship that stands in the use of
  bread, wine, water, circumcision, outward temple, and things seen,
  will have an end: but the fellowship which stands in the gospel, the
  power of God, which was before the Devil was, and which brings life
  and immortality to light, by which people may see over the Devil, that
  has darkened them; this fellowship is eternal, and will stand. And all
  that are in it seek that which is heavenly and eternal, which comes
  down from above, and are settled in the eternal mystery of the
  fellowship of the gospel, which is hid from all eyes, that look only
  at visible things. The apostle told the Corinthians, who were in
  disorder about water, bread and wine, that he desired to know nothing
  amongst them but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.”

Thus were the objections, which the priests and professors had raised
against Friends, answered and cleared; and the stumbling-blocks, which
they had laid in the way of the weak, removed. And as things were thus
opened, people came to see over them and through them, and to have their
minds settled upon the Lord Jesus Christ, their free teacher: which was
the service for which I was moved to travel over the nation after my
imprisonment in LAUNCESTON jail. In this year the Lord’s truth was
finely planted over the nation, and many thousands were turned to the
Lord; insomuch that there were seldom fewer than one thousand in prison
in this nation for truth’s testimony; some for tithes, some for going to
the steeple-houses, some for contempts (as they called them), some for
not swearing, and others for not putting off their hats, &c.

Now after I had visited most parts of the nation, and was come to LONDON
again, finding that evil spirit at work, which had drawn J. N. and his
followers out from truth, to run Friends into heats about him, I wrote a
short epistle to Friends, as follows:—

  “To all the elect seed of God called Quakers, where the death is
  brought into the death, and the elder is servant to the younger, and
  the elect is known, which cannot be deceived, but obtains victory.
  This is the word of the Lord God to you all: Go not forth to the
  aggravating part, to strive with it out of the power of God; lest ye
  hurt yourselves, and run into the same nature, out of the life. For
  patience must get the victory; and to answer that of God in every one,
  it must bring every one to it, to bring them from the contrary. Let
  your moderation, and temperance, and patience be known unto all men in
  the Seed of God. For that which reacheth to the aggravating part
  without life, sets up the aggravating part, and breeds confusion; and
  hath a life in outward strife, but reacheth not to the witness of God
  in every one, through which they might come into peace and covenant
  with God, and fellowship one with another. Therefore that which
  reacheth this witness of God in yourselves, and in others, is the life
  and light; which will out-last all, is over all, and will overcome
  all. And therefore in the Seed of life live, which bruiseth the Seed
  of death.”

                                                               G. F.

I also wrote another short epistle to Friends, to encourage them to keep
up their meetings in the Lord’s power; of which epistle a copy here
follows:—

        “DEAR FRIENDS,

  “Keep your meetings in the power of the Lord, which is over all that
  is in the fall and must have an end. Therefore be wise in the wisdom
  of God, which is from above, by which all things were made and
  created; that that may be justified among you, and you all kept in the
  solid life, which was before death was; and in the light, which was
  before the darkness was with all its works. In which light and life ye
  all may feel, and have the heavenly unity and peace, possessing the
  gospel fellowship, that is everlasting: which was before that, which
  doth not last for ever; and will remain when that is gone. For the
  gospel being the power of God, is pure and everlasting. Know it to be
  your portion: in which is stability, and life, and immortality,
  shining over that which darkens the mortal. So be faithful every one
  to God, in your measures of his power and life, that ye may answer
  God’s love and mercy to you, as obedient children of the Most High;
  dwelling in love, unity, and peace, and in innocency of heart towards
  one another; that God may be glorified in you, and you kept faithful
  witnesses for him, and valiant for the truth on earth. God Almighty
  preserve you all to his glory, that ye may feel his blessing among
  you, and be possessors thereof.”

                                                               G. F.

About this time many mouths were opened in our meetings, to declare the
goodness of the Lord, and some that were young and tender in the truth
would sometimes utter a few words in thanksgiving and praises to God.
That no disorder might arise from this in our meetings, I was moved to
write an epistle to Friends, by way of advice in that matter. And thus
it was:—

  “All my dear friends in the noble Seed of God, who have known his
  power, life, and presence among you, let it be your joy to hear or see
  the springs of life break forth in any; through which ye may have all
  unity in the same, feeling life and power. And above all things, take
  heed of judging any one openly in your meetings, except they be openly
  profane or rebellious, such as be out of the truth; that by the power,
  life, and wisdom ye may stand over them, and by it answer the witness
  of God in the world, that such, whom ye bear your testimony against,
  are none of you: that therein the truth may stand clear and single.
  But such as are tender, if they should be moved to bubble forth a few
  words, and speak in the Seed and Lamb’s power, suffer and bear that;
  that is, the tender. And if they should go beyond their measure, bear
  it in the meeting for peace and order’s sake, and that the spirits of
  the world be not moved against you. But when the meeting is done, if
  any be moved to speak to them, between you and them, one or two of
  you, that feel it in the life, do it in the love and wisdom that is
  pure and gentle from above: for love is that which edifies, bears all
  things, suffers long, and fulfils the law. In this ye have order and
  edification, ye have wisdom to preserve you all wise and in patience;
  which takes away the occasion of stumbling the weak, and the occasion
  of the spirits of the world to get up: but in the royal Seed, the
  heavy stone, ye keep down all that is wrong; and by it answer that of
  God in all. For ye will hear, see, and feel the power of God
  preaching, as your faith is all in it (when ye do not hear words,) to
  bind, to chain, to limit, to frustrate; that nothing shall rise, nor
  come forth but what is in the power: with that ye will hold back, and
  with that ye will let up, and open every spring, plant, and spark; in
  which will be your joy and refreshment in the power of God.

  “Now that ye know the power of God, and are come to it, which is the
  cross of Christ, that crucifies you to the state that Adam and Eve
  were in, in the fall, and so to the world, by this power of God ye
  come to see the state they were in before they fell; which power of
  God is the cross, in which stands the everlasting glory; which brings
  up into the righteousness, holiness, and image of God, and crucifies
  to the unrighteousness, unholiness, and image of Satan, that Adam and
  Eve, and their sons and daughters, are in, in the fall. Through this
  power of God, ye come to see the state they were in before they fell;
  yea, I say, and to a higher state, to the Seed Christ, the second
  Adam, by whom all things were made. For man hath been driven from God:
  all Adam and Eve’s sons and daughters, being in the state of the fall
  in the earth, are driven from God. But it is said, the Church is in
  God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: so they who come to the
  church, which is in God the Father of Christ, must come to God again:
  and so out of the state that Adam and his children are in, in the
  fall, out of the image of God, of righteousness and holiness, and they
  must come into the righteousness, true holiness, and image of God; and
  so out of the earth whither man hath been driven, when they come to
  the church which is in God. The way to this, is Christ, the Light, the
  Life, the Truth, the Saviour, the Redeemer, the Sanctifier, and the
  Justifier; in and through whose power, light and life, conversion,
  regeneration, and translation are known from death to life, from
  darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God again. These are
  members of the true church, who know the work of regeneration in the
  operation and feeling of it; and being come to be members of the
  church in God, they are indeed members one of another in the power of
  God, which was before the power of darkness was. So they that come to
  the church that is in God and Christ, must come out of the state that
  Adam was in, in the fall, driven from God, to know the state that he
  was in before he fell. But they that live in the state that Adam was
  in, in the fall, and cannot believe a possibility of coming into the
  state he was in before he fell, come not to the church which is in
  God; but are far from that, and are not passed from death to life; but
  are enemies to the cross of Christ, which is the power of God. For
  they mind earthly things, and serve not Christ, nor love the power,
  which should bring them up to the state that Adam was in before he
  fell, and crucify them to the state that man is in in the fall; that
  through this power they might see to the beginning, the power that man
  was in before the heavenly image, and holiness, and righteousness was
  lost; by which power they might come to know the Seed, Christ, which
  brings out of the old things, and makes all things new; in which life
  eternal is felt. For all the poorness, emptiness, and barrenness is in
  the state that man is in, in the fall, out of God’s power; by which
  power he is made rich, and hath strength again; which power is the
  cross, in which the mystery of the fellowship stands: and in which is
  the true glorying, which crucifies to all other gloryings.

  “And, Friends, though ye may have been convinced, and tasted of the
  power, and felt the light; yet afterwards ye may feel a winter storm,
  tempest and hail, frost and cold, and temptation in the wilderness. Be
  patient and still in the power, and in the light, that doth convince
  you, to keep your minds to God; in that be quiet, that ye may come to
  the summer, that your flight be not in the winter. For if ye sit still
  in the patience, which overcomes in the power of God, there will be no
  flying. The husbandman after he hath sowed his seed, is patient. And
  by the power, being kept in the patience, ye will come by the light to
  see through, and feel over winter storms and tempests, and all the
  coldness, barrenness, and emptiness: and the same light and power will
  go over the tempter’s head; which power and light was before he was.
  So standing still in the light, ye will see your salvation, ye will
  see the Lord’s strength, feel the small rain, and the fresh springs,
  your minds being kept low in the power and light; for that which is
  out of the power lifts up. But in the power and light ye will feel
  God, revealing his secrets, inspiring your minds, and his gifts coming
  in unto you: through which your hearts will be filled with God’s love,
  and praises to him that lives for evermore: for in his light and power
  his blessing is received. So in that, the eternal power of the Lord
  Jesus Christ preserve and keep you! Live every one in the power of
  God, that ye may all come to be heirs of that, and know it to be your
  portion; even the Kingdom, that hath no end, and the endless life,
  which the Seed is heir of. Feel that set over all, which hath the
  promise and blessing of God for ever.”

                                                               G. F.

About this time I received some lines from a high professor, concerning
the way of Christ, to which I returned the following answer:—

        “FRIEND,

  “It is not circumstances we contend about, but the way of Christ and
  his light, which are but one; though the world hath imagined many
  ways, and all out of the light; which by the light are condemned. He
  who preached this light, said, ‘He that knoweth God, heareth us; he
  that is not of God heareth us not: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth,
  and the spirit of error.’ It is the same now, with them that know the
  truth; though the whole world lies in wickedness. All dispensations
  and differences, that are not one in the light we deny; and by the
  light, that was before separation, do we see them to be
  self-separations in the sensual, having not the Spirit. Their fruits
  and end are weighed in the even balance, and found to be in the dark,
  the lo-here, and lo-there thou tellest of. The presence of Christ is
  not with them, though the blind see it not; who see not with the pure
  eye which is single; but with the many eyes which lead into the many
  ways. Nor are any the people of God, but they who are baptised into
  this principle of light; by which all the faithful servants of the
  Lord were ever guided in all ages, since the apostacy, and before. For
  the apostacy are and is from the light; and all that oppose the light
  was apostates. They who contest against the truth, are enemies to it,
  and are not actuated by the Spirit; but have another way than the
  light. All such are in the world, its words, fashions, and customs,
  though of several forms, as to their worship; yet all under the god of
  this world, opposing the light and appearance of Christ, which should
  lead out from under his power, of what form soever they are: yet are
  they all joined against the light. All these are of the world; and
  fighting against them who are not of the world, but are gathered and
  gathering out of it; and so it ever was against the people of God,
  under what name soever.

  “They only are saints by calling, who are called into the light; and
  sons of Sion, who vary not from the light, to which the Spirit is
  promised, which is not tied to any forms out of the light; wherein all
  inherit who are co-heirs with Christ; which many talk of, who inherit
  the earthly instead of the heavenly. And whereas thou speakest of
  Christ and his apostles clothing themselves with the sayings and words
  of the prophets; and of their being your example in so doing; I say,
  wolves will take the sheep’s clothing; but the light and life finds
  them out, and judges (not by their stolen words, but) by their works.
  Nor did Christ cover himself with any words, but what were fulfilled
  in him; neither do any of Christ’s boast in other men’s lines made
  ready without them: to which rule if ye be obedient, fewer words and
  more life will be seen among you. Then ye will not count it straitness
  to silence the flesh, and hear what he saith, who speaks peace, ‘that
  his people turn no more to folly.’ If ye once know that what is stolen
  must be restored fourfold, the mouth of the false prophet will be
  stopped, which builds up in deceit, but not in righteousness.

  “And whereas thou sayest, ‘The Spirit of truth affords nothing but
  endless varieties;’ I say, the Spirit of truth thou knowest not: for
  the Spirit of truth said, ‘there is but one thing needful;’ and to
  speak the same thing again, is safe for the hearers. But that spirit,
  which affords nothing but endless varieties, is not the Spirit of
  truth; but is gone out into curious notions: and the number of his
  names and colours is read nowhere, but in the unity of the Spirit of
  truth. All others call truth deceit, and deceit truth, as the blind,
  that opposed the light, ever did; who are ever learning endless
  varieties, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, nor
  to an end of their labours: but when they are out of one form, get
  into another; so long as they can find a green tree without. Thus ye
  are kept at work all your life, and to the grave in sorrow, as the
  dumb priests, thou tellest of, have been before you: only ye have got
  a finer image, but less life. And thou, whose teaching hath no end,
  art in the horse-mill thou speakest of. I have read the epistles of
  Timothy, and to the Hebrews; and there I find the duty of all
  believers is, to see the law of the new covenant written in the heart,
  whereby all may know God, from the least to the greatest. I know the
  Holy Scriptures are profitable for the man of God; but what is that to
  the man of sin, to the first-born, who is out of the light, and being
  unstable and unlearned, wrests them to his own destruction; but to the
  life cannot come?

  “And for your two ordinances thou speakest of, I say, upon the same
  account ye deny the priests of the world therein, we deny you; being
  both of you not only out of the life, but out of the form too. That
  command, Matt. xxviii. 19, ye never had, nor its power; which was, ‘to
  baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.’ What Paul
  received of the Lord, that body, and that bread, ye know as little,
  but what ye have found in the chapter; nor the coming of Christ
  either, who cannot believe his light. And whereas thou speakest of
  preaching Christ of envy, and pleadest for it; I say, such preachers
  we have enough of in these days. What else art thou doing, who sayest,
  Paul was sent to baptize; though Paul says he was not: and so thou
  wouldst prove him a liar, if any would believe thee before him. Thou
  sayest also, ‘for ought thou knowest, he might baptize thousands.’
  Thou mightest as easily have said millions, and as soon have proved
  it. Thou mayest say the same of circumcision also, and on the same
  ground.

  “As for the signs that followed those that believed, which thou sayest
  are ceased; I say, they who cannot receive the light cannot see the
  signs, nor could believe them if they should see them to carp at; no
  more than formerly they could do, who opposed the light in former
  ages. They cannot properly be said to cease to such, who never had
  them; but have only heard or read, that others long ago had them. But
  that the power, and signs, and presence of God is not the same that
  ever it was, in the measure, wherein he is received in the light, that
  I deny; and declare it to be false, and from a spirit that knows not
  God, nor his power.

  “And as for the gospel foundation thou speakest of, I say, it is to be
  laid again in all the world. Ye never were on it, since the man of sin
  set up his forms without power. Till ye can own the light of Christ,
  which the saints preached, and their life and practice; for shame
  cease to talk of their foundation, or glorious work, or quakings and
  tremblings, which are the saints’ experiences, which the world knows
  not, nor can own: though ye cannot read that ever any came aright to
  declare how they knew God, or received his word, without them. In thy
  exhortation thou biddest me ‘love Christ, wheresoever I see him:’ but
  hadst thou told me where one might come to see him, or how one might
  know him, thou hadst showed more of a Christian in that, than in all
  thou hast spoken. But it seems, ye are not all of one mind: some of
  you say, ‘he is gone, and will be no more seen, till doomsday;’ but if
  ever ye come to see Christ to your comfort, while ye oppose his light,
  then God hath not spoken by me. This thou shalt remember, when thy
  time thou hast spent.”

                                                               G. F.

Great opposition did the priests and professors make about this time
against the light of Christ Jesus, denying it to be universally given;
and against the pouring forth of the Spirit, and sons and daughters
prophesying thereby. Much they laboured to darken the minds of people,
that they might keep them still in a dependence on their teaching.
Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to give forth the following lines, for
the opening of the minds and understandings of people, and to manifest
the blindness and darkness of their teachers:—

  “To all you professors, priests, and teachers, who are in darkness,
  and know not the Spirit in prison, nor the light that shines in
  darkness, and which the darkness doth not comprehend; but are the
  infidels, whom the god of the world hath blinded, and to whom the
  gospel is hid. For though ye have the four books, yet the gospel is
  hid to you; who are now wondering at the work of God, and do not
  believe that Christ hath enlightened every one that cometh into the
  world. I offer you some Scriptures to read, which will prove your
  spirits, and try them, how contrary they are to the apostles’ spirit,
  the Spirit of Christ and of the saints. Christ went and ‘preached to
  the spirits in prison,’ 1 Pet. iii. 19. He that readeth, let him
  understand, whether this was a measure of the Spirit, yea or nay, or
  the Spirit without measure, which he ministered to? ‘For he whom God
  hath sent, speaketh the words of God; for God giveth not the Spirit by
  measure unto him,’ John iii. 34. Here Christ had not the Spirit given
  to him by measure. The apostle said, ‘We will not boast of things
  without (or beyond) our measure.’ 2 Cor. x. 13. So here was measure,
  and not by measure. Christ, who received not the Spirit by measure,
  told his disciples he would ‘send them the Comforter, the Spirit of
  Truth, that should guide them into all truth: for he should not speak
  of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he
  will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall
  receive of mine, and show it unto you,’ John xvi. 13, 14. Mind, read,
  and learn; the Comforter shall receive of mine, saith Christ, and
  shall show it unto you: who hath the measure, receives of his who hath
  not by measure. The Comforter, when he comes, is to ‘reprove the world
  of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment,’ ver. 8. Now all mind
  the great work of God: the Spirit of Truth, which leads the saints
  into all truth, which receives of Christ’s, and shows it unto the
  disciples, who are in the measure, he shall reprove the world of sin,
  because they do not believe, &c. The Comforter, whom Christ will send,
  takes of his, and shows it to the disciples; the same reproves the
  world. Mind now, whether this be a measure, yea or nay, which comes
  from him, who received not the Spirit by measure. He that leads the
  believer into all truth, reproves the unbeliever in the world, of sin,
  of righteousness, and of judgment; so he that is led into all truth,
  sees that which is reproved, by the Spirit of Truth that leads him.
  Now Christ saith, ‘He shall take of mine, and show it unto you.’ Is
  this a measure, yea or nay, from him to whom God gave the Spirit not
  by measure?

  “Again, the Lord said, both by his prophet, Joel ii. 28, and his
  apostle, Acts ii. 17, 18, ‘It shall come to pass in the last days, I
  will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, your sons and your
  daughters shall prophesy, your young men shall see visions, and your
  old men shall dream dreams: and on my servants, and handmaidens, I
  will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy.’
  Look, ye deceivers: here the Lord saith, he will pour out of his
  Spirit; mark the word, OF the Lord’s Spirit upon all flesh. What!
  young men, old men, sons and daughters, and maidens, all these to have
  the Spirit of God poured forth upon them? Here, say they, these deny
  the means then: nay, that is the means. And the great and notable day
  of the Lord is coming, wherein it shall come to pass, that whosoever
  shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. The God of the
  spirits of all flesh is known; ‘And,’ saith the apostle, who would not
  boast of things beyond his measure, ‘that which may be known of God is
  manifest _in_ them; for God hath showed it unto them,’ Rom. i. 19. By
  this which was of God manifest in them, they knew covetousness,
  maliciousness, murder, deceit, and ungodliness; and knew that the
  judgments of God were upon such things; and that they were worthy of
  death not only that did the same, but who had pleasure in them that
  did them. Therefore said the apostle, ‘the wrath of God is revealed
  from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men,’ &c.
  Now this of God manifest in them, which God showed unto them, by which
  they know unrighteousness, and God’s judgments thereupon, and that
  they which commit such things are worthy of death; whether this be a
  measure, yea or nay, which is of God, and which he hath showed to
  them? What was that in them that ‘did by nature the things contained
  in the law, which showed the work of the law written in their heart,’
  Rom. ii. 14, 15? Mark, ‘written!’ Shall not this judge them that have
  the outward law, but are out of the life of it? The apostle saith,
  ‘the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
  withal,’ 1 Cor. xii. 7. There are diversities of gifts, but the same
  Spirit; but ‘the manifestation of it is given to every man to profit
  withal.’ Mark, ‘to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom; to
  another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by
  the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;
  to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
  discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another
  the interpretation of tongues: but all these worketh that one and the
  self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.’ Mark
  that, to every man severally as he will.

  “Again, the apostle saith, ‘the grace of God that bringeth salvation,
  hath appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
  worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
  present world,’ Tit. ii. 11, 12. Now ye, that turn this grace which
  bringeth salvation, into lasciviousness, deny it, and say, that which
  teacheth the saints, who by grace are saved, hath not appeared to all
  men. Jude saith, ‘Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his
  saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
  ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have
  committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
  spoken against him,’ ver. 15. Here mark again; him that cometh with
  ten thousands of his saints, to convince all of their ungodly deeds
  and hard speeches; here it is, ALL of their ungodly deeds, and ALL of
  their hard speeches; none left out, but ALL to be convinced and
  judged, the world reproved by him who comes with ten thousands of his
  saints, and will reign, and be king and judge. And have not ye all
  something in you, that doth reprove you for your hard speeches, and
  your ungodly deeds, the ungodliest of you all, who live in your hard
  speeches against him, and his light and spiritual appearance in his
  people?

  “Again, the apostle, writing to the Gentiles, saith, ‘But unto every
  one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
  Christ,’ Eph. iv. 7. Now mark, here is the measure of the gift of
  Christ, ‘who lighteth every man that cometh into the world,’ John i.
  9, ‘that all men through him might believe. He that believeth on him
  is not condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned, &c. And this
  is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,’ &c., John
  iii. 18, 19. Now every man that cometh into the world being
  enlightened, one loves it, and brings his deeds to the light, that
  with the light he may see whether they be wrought in God; the other
  hates the light, ‘because his deeds are evil;’ and he will not bring
  his deeds to the light, because he knows the light will reprove him.
  So he that hates the light, wherewith Christ hath enlightened him,
  knows the light will reprove him for his evil deeds; and, therefore,
  he will not come to the light.

  “Again, the Lord by his prophet said concerning Christ, ‘I will give
  him for a light to the Gentiles, that he may be my salvation to the
  ends of the earth,’ Isa. xliv. 6. And what is that, which the children
  that walk ‘according to the course of this world, according to the
  prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the
  children of disobedience,’ Eph. ii. 2, are disobedient to? Mark, and
  read for yourselves, who being disobedient, walk according to the
  course of the world, according to the power of the prince of the air;
  mark, I say, what it is that all such are disobedient to? He that hath
  an ear, let him hear. The apostle saith to the Colossians, ‘the wrath
  of God cometh upon the children of disobedience,’ Col. iii. 6. Come,
  ye professors, let us see, is not this something of God that is
  disobeyed? Is it not that which is of God manifest in them, which God
  hath shown them, which lets them see God’s judgments are upon such,
  when they act unrighteously? Is not this the measure of God (mark),
  the Spirit that is in prison? and the Spirit of God that is grieved?

  “And ye professors, come, let us read the parable of the talents, and
  reckon with you, and see who it is that hath hid the Lord’s money in
  the earth? Come, ye that have gained, enter ye into your master’s joy.
  Go, thou that hast hid the Lord’s money in the earth, into utter
  darkness; ‘take it from him, and give it to him that hath;’ every man
  shall have his reward. For the Lord hath given ‘to every man according
  to his several ability,’ Matt. xxv. 15; mark that, ‘to every man
  according to his several ability?’ read this, if you can. Now is the
  Lord coming to call every man severally to account, to whom he hath
  given severally according to his ability. Now the wicked and slothful
  servant, who hid the Lord’s money in the earth, will be found out; and
  the Lord’s money will be taken from him, although he hath hidden it.
  To him the Lord’s commands have been grievous; but to us they are not,
  who love God and keep his commandments. ‘And,’ saith the apostle to
  the Romans, ‘I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that
  is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to
  think, but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man
  the measure of faith,’ Rom. xii. 3. Read and mark, here is a measure
  of faith.

  “‘And,’ said another apostle, ‘as everyone hath received the gift,
  even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
  manifold grace of God,’ 1 Pet. iv. 10, ‘For the grace of God hath
  appeared unto all men.’ The good stewards can give their account with
  joy; but ye bad stewards, that turn the grace of God into
  lasciviousness, now ye will be reckoned withal; now ye shall have your
  reward. ‘But,’ say the world, ‘must every one minister as he hath
  received the gift?’ ‘Yea,’ say I, ‘but let him speak as the oracles of
  God; and let him do it as of the ability which God giveth,’ ver. 11.
  John in the Revelation saith, ‘They were judged every man according to
  his works,’ Rev. xx. 13. Christ saith, ‘every idle word that men shall
  speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment,’ Matt.
  xii. 36. So ‘ye, that name the name of Christ depart from iniquity,’ 2
  Tim. ii. 19. ‘The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father,
  with his angels; and then he shall reward every one according to his
  works,’ Matt. xvi. 27. He who is gone into a far country, and hath
  given the talents to every one of you, according to your several
  ability, ‘will render to every man according to his deeds,’ Rom. ii.
  6. ‘And further I say unto you, if any man have not the Spirit of
  Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead
  because of sin, but the Spirit is life, because of righteousness,’
  Rom. viii. 9, 10. So let the light which cometh from Christ examine;
  for the Lord is appearing. Ye that have received according to your
  ability, smite not your fellow-servant; and think not that the Lord
  delayeth the time of his coming. Be not as they that said, ‘Let us eat
  and drink, for to-morrow we shall die.’

  “The apostle tells the Ephesians, that unto him ‘this grace was
  given—to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which
  from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God, who created all
  things by Jesus Christ,’ Eph. iii. 9. Read and understand every one
  with the light which comes from Christ, the mystery, which will be
  your condemnation, if ye believe not in it. This is to all, who
  stumble at the work of the Spirit of God, the manifestation of it,
  ‘which is given to every man, to profit withal.’ Come, ye professors,
  who stumble at it; let us read the parables. ‘A sower went forth to
  sow; and some seed fell on the highway ground, and some on stony
  ground, and some on thorny ground; the Seed is the Word, the Son of
  Man is the seedsman. He that hath an ear, let him hear,’ Matt. xiii.
  Now look, all ye professors, what ground ye are? and what ye have
  brought forth? and whether the wicked seedsman hath not got his seed
  into your ground? ‘He that hath an ear, let him hear.’ And come, read
  another parable, of the householder, hiring labourers to go into the
  vineyard, and agreeing with every man for a penny, Matt. xx. Every man
  is to have his penny, the last that went in, as well as the first; and
  the last shall be first, and the first shall be last; for many are
  called but few are chosen. He that hath an ear, let him hear.’ There
  is a promise spoken to Cain, that if he did well he should be
  accepted, Gen. iv. 7. And Esau had a birthright, but despised it. Yet
  it is ‘not of him that willeth,’ Rom. ix. 16; ‘but by grace ye are
  saved,’ Eph. ii. 8. And stand still, and see your salvation, Exod.
  xiv. 13. And ye that are children of light, put on the armour of
  light, that ye may come into the ‘unity of the faith, and of the
  knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
  the stature of the fulness of Christ; that henceforth ye be no more
  children tossed to and fro,’ Eph. iv. 13.

  “And the Lord said, he would make a new covenant, by ‘writing his law
  in people’s hearts, and putting his Spirit in their inward parts;’
  whereby they should all come to know the Lord—Him by whom the world
  was made. Now every one of you, mind the law written in your hearts,
  and this Spirit put in your inward parts, that it need not be said to
  you, ‘know the Lord;’ but that ye may witness the promise of God
  fulfilled in you. ‘But,’ say the world, and professors, ‘if every one
  must come to witness the law of God written in their hearts, and the
  Spirit put in the inward parts, what must we do with all our
  teachers?’ As we come to witness that, we need not any man to teach us
  to know the Lord, having his law written in our hearts, and his Spirit
  put in our inward parts. This is the covenant of life, the everlasting
  covenant, which decays not, nor changes; and here is the way to the
  Father, without which no man cometh unto the Father.

  “And here is the everlasting priesthood, the end of the old
  priesthood, whose lips were to preserve knowledge; but now, saith
  Christ, ‘Learn of me;’ who is the high-priest of the new priesthood.
  ‘And,’ saith the apostle, ‘that ye may grow up in the knowledge of
  Jesus Christ, in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.’
  So we are brought off from the old priesthood that changed, to Christ,
  to the new priesthood, that changeth not; and off from the first
  covenant, that doth decay, to the everlasting covenant that doth not
  decay, Christ Jesus, the covenant of Light, from whom every one of you
  have a light, that ye might believe in the covenant of Light. If ye
  believe not, ye are condemned; for light is come into the world, and
  men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. ‘I
  am come a light into the world,’ saith Christ, ‘that whosoever
  believeth in me, should not abide in darkness, but have the light of
  life,’ John xii., 46. And, ‘believe in the light, that ye may be
  children of the light.’ But ye who do not believe in the light, but
  hate it, because it manifests your deeds to be evil, ye are they that
  are condemned by the light.

  “Therefore, while ye have time, prize it; seek the Lord while he may
  be found, and call upon him while he is near; lest he say, ‘time is
  past;’ for the rich glutton’s time was past. Therefore, while time is
  not quite past, consider, search yourselves, and see if ye be not they
  that hate the light; and so are builders that stumble at the
  corner-stone; for they that hated the light, and did not believe in
  the light, did so in ages past. ‘I am the light of the world,’ saith
  Christ, ‘who enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world;’ and
  he also saith, ‘learn of me;’ and of him God saith, ‘this is my
  beloved Son, hear ye him.’ Here is your teacher. But ye that hate the
  light, do not learn of Christ, and will not have him to be your king,
  to reign over you;—Him, to whom all power in heaven and earth is
  given, who bears his government upon his shoulders, who is now come to
  reign; who lighteth every man that cometh into the world, and will
  give to every man a reward, according to his works, whether they be
  good or evil. So every man, with the light that comes from Christ,
  will see his deeds, both he that hates it, and he that loves it. And
  he that will not bring his deeds to the light, because it will reprove
  him, that is his condemnation; and he shall have a reward according to
  his deeds. For the Lord is come to reckon with you. He looks for
  fruits; now the axe is laid to your root, and every tree of you that
  bears not good fruit, must be hewn down, and cast into the fire.”

                                                               G. F.

Having stayed some time in LONDON, and visited the meetings of Friends
in and about the city, and cleared myself of what services the Lord had
at that time laid upon me there, I travelled into KENT, SUSSEX, and
SURREY, visiting Friends, amongst whom I had great meetings; and many
times met with opposition from Baptists and other jangling professors;
but the Lord’s power went over them.

We staid one night at FARNHAM, where we had a little meeting, and the
people were exceedingly rude; but at last the Lord’s power came over
them. After it we went to our inn, and gave notice that any that feared
God might come to us: and there came abundance of rude people, the
magistrates of the town also, and some professors. I declared the truth
unto them; and those of the people that behaved rudely, the magistrates
put out of the room. When they were gone there came another rude company
of professors and some of the chief of the town. They called for faggots
and drink, though we forbade them; and were as rude a people as ever I
met with. The Lord’s power chained them that they had not power to do us
any mischief; but when they went away, they left all their faggots and
beer which they had called for into the room, for us to pay for in the
morning. We showed the innkeeper what an unworthy thing it was, but he
told us, “we must pay it,” and we did. Before we left the town I wrote a
paper to the magistrates and heads of the town, and to the priest,
showing them and him how he had taught his people, and laying before
them their rude and uncivil conduct to strangers that sought their good.

Leaving that place we came to BASINGSTOKE, a very rude town; where they
had formerly very much abused Friends. There I had a meeting in the
evening, which was quiet for the Lord’s power chained the unruly. At the
close of it I was moved to put off my hat, and pray to the Lord to open
their understandings; upon which they raised a report, that, “I put off
my hat to them, and bid them good-night,” which was never in my heart.
After the meeting, when we came to our inn, I sent for the innkeeper (as
I used to do,) and he came into the room to us, and showed himself a
very rude man. I admonished him to be sober and fear the Lord; but he
called for faggots and a pint of wine, and drank it off himself; then
called for another, and called up half a dozen men into our chamber.
Thereupon I bid him go out of the chamber, and told him he should not
drink there, for we sent for him up to speak to him concerning his
eternal good. He was exceedingly mad, rude, and drunk. When he continued
his rudeness, and would not be gone, I told him the chamber was mine for
the time I lodged in it, and called for the key. Then he went away in
great rage. In the morning he would not be seen; but I told his wife of
his unchristian and rude behaviour towards us.

After this we came to BRIDPORT, having meetings in the way. We went to
an inn, and sent into the town for such as feared God; and there came a
shopkeeper, a professor, and put off his hat to us, and seeing we did
not the same to him again, but said Thou and Thee to him, he told us,
“he was not of our religion;” and after some discourse with him he went
away. Then he went and stirred up the priest and magistrates against us,
and after a while sent to the inn to desire us to come to his house, for
there were some that would speak with us, he said. Thomas Curtis was
with me, and he went to the man’s house; where, when he came, the man
had laid a snare for him, for he had got the priest and magistrate
thither, and they boasted much that they had caught George Fox, taking
him for me. When they perceived their mistake, they were in great rage;
yet the Lord’s power came over them, so that they let him go again.
Meanwhile I had an opportunity of speaking to some sober people that
came to the inn. When Thomas was come back, and we were passing out of
the town, some of them came to us, and said, “the officers were coming
to fetch me;” but the Lord’s power came over them all, so that they had
not power to touch me. There were some convinced in the town, who were
turned to the Lord, and have stood faithful in their testimony to the
truth ever since, and a fine meeting there is there.

Passing hence we visited PORTSMOUTH and POOLE, where we had glorious
meetings; and many were turned to the Lord. At RINGWOOD we had a large
general meeting, where the Lord’s power was over all. At WEYMOUTH we had
a meeting; and thence came through DORCHESTER to LYME, where the inn we
went to was taken up with mountebanks, so that there was hardly any room
for us or our horses. In the evening we drew up some queries concerning
the ground of all diseases, and the natures and virtues of medicinal
things, and sent them to the mountebanks; letting them know, “if they
would not answer them, we would stick them on the cross next day.” This
brought them down, and made them cool, for they could not answer them;
but in the morning they reasoned a little with us. We left the queries
with some friendly people, that were convinced in the town, to stick
upon the market-cross. The Lord’s power reached some of the sober people
in that place, who were turned by the Light and Spirit of Christ to his
free teaching.

We then travelled to EXETER; and at the sign of the Seven Stars, an inn
at the bridge foot, had a general meeting of Friends out of Cornwall and
Devonshire; to which came Humphrey Lower, Thomas Lower, and John
Ellis[52] from the Land’s End, Henry Pollexfen, and Friends from
Plymouth, Elizabeth Trelawny, and divers other Friends. A blessed
heavenly meeting we had, and the Lord’s everlasting power came over all,
in which I saw and said, “that the Lord’s power had surrounded this
nation round about, as with a wall and bulwark, and his seed reached
from sea to sea.” Friends were established in the everlasting Seed of
life, Christ Jesus, their life, rock, teacher and shepherd.

Footnote 52:

  John Ellis, who is only twice mentioned in this journal, was an able
  gospel minister, preaching in the authority of divine life, to the
  reaching of God’s witness in many hearts. His doctrine was sound,
  flowing from the living fountain and divine spring of life and
  heavenly wisdom. His preaching was full of reproof and caution, but in
  that meekness which made it edifying. Whilst tender of the good in
  all, he was terrible against the workers of iniquity. He was a man of
  great kindness, a visitor of the widows and fatherless in their
  distress, feeding the hungry and clothing the naked, according to his
  ability. He laboured greatly in the gospel in several counties, often
  saying, “His Father’s business must not be neglected, or done
  negligently.” As he was travelling in the service of Truth, he was
  taken ill, and died in great peace in 1707 saying, “I am ready, for I
  have a sure foundation.”

Next morning Major Blackmore sent soldiers to apprehend me; but I was
gone before they came. As I was riding up the street, I saw the officers
going down; so the Lord crossed them in their design, and Friends passed
away peaceably and quietly. The soldiers examined some Friends after I
was gone, “what they did there;” but when they told them they were in
their inn, and had business in the city, they went away without meddling
any further with them.

From EXETER I took meetings as I went, till I came to BRISTOL, and was
at the meeting there. After which I did not stay in the town, but passed
into Wales, and had a meeting at the Slone. Thence going to CARDIFF, a
justice of the peace sent to me, desiring I would come with half a dozen
of my friends to his house. So I took a friend or two, and went up to
him, and he and his wife received us very civilly. The next day we had a
meeting at Cardiff in the town-hall, and that justice sent about
seventeen of his family to the meeting. There came some disturbers, but
the Lord’s power was over them, and many were turned to the Lord. To
some that had run out with James Naylor, and did not come to meetings, I
sent word, that “the day of their visitation was over,” and they never
prospered after.

We travelled from Cardiff to SWANSEA, where we had a blessed meeting;
and a meeting was settled there in the name of Jesus. In our way thither
we passed over in a boat, with the high-sheriff of the county, and next
day I went to speak with him, but he would not admit me.

We went to another meeting in the country, where the Lord’s presence was
much with us. Thence to a great man’s house, who received us very
lovingly; but next morning he would not be seen; one that in the mean
time had come to him, had so estranged him, that we could not get to
speak with him again.

We still passed on through the countries, having meetings and gathering
people, in the name of Christ, to Him their heavenly teacher, till we
came to BRECKNOCK; where we set up our horses at an inn. There went with
me Thomas Holmes and John-ap-John, who was moved of the Lord to speak in
the streets. I walked out a little into the fields, and when I came in
again, the town was in an uproar. When I came into the chamber in the
inn, it was full of people, and they were speaking in Welsh; I desired
them to speak in English, which they did, and much discourse we had.
After a while they went away; but towards night the magistrates gathered
together in the streets, with a multitude of people, and they bid them
shout, and gathered up the town; so that for about two hours together,
there was such a noise, that the like we had not heard; and the
magistrates set them on to shout again, when they had given over. We
thought it looked like the uproar, which we read was amongst Diana’s
craftsmen. This tumult continued till night; and if the Lord’s power had
not limited them, they seemed likely to have pulled down the house, and
us to pieces.

At night, the woman of the house would have had us go to supper in
another room, but we discerning her plot, refused. Then she would have
had half a dozen men come into the room to us, under pretence of
discoursing with us. We told her, no persons should come into our room
that night, neither would we go to them. Then she said, we should sup in
another room; but we told her we would have no supper, if not in our own
room. At length, when she saw she could not get us out, she brought up
our supper in a great rage. So she and they were crossed in their
design, for they had an intent to do us mischief; but the Lord God
prevented them. Next morning I wrote a paper to the town concerning
their unchristian conduct, showing the fruits of their priests and
magistrates; and as I passed out of the town I spoke to the people, and
told them, they were a shame to Christianity and religion.

From this place we went to a great meeting in a steeple-house yard,
where was a priest, and Walter Jenkin, who had been a justice, and
another justice. A blessed glorious meeting we had. There being many
professors, I was moved of the Lord to open the Scriptures to them, and
to answer their objections (for I knew them very well;) and to turn them
to Christ, who had enlightened them; with which light they might see the
sins and trespasses they had been dead in, and their Saviour, who came
to redeem them out of them, who was to be their way to God, the truth
and the life to them, and their priest made higher than the heavens, so
that they might come to sit under his teaching. A peaceable meeting we
had; many were convinced and settled in the truth that day. After it, I
went with Walter Jenkin to the other justice’s house; and he said to me,
“You have this day given great satisfaction to the people, and answered
all the objections that were in their minds.” For the people had the
Scriptures, but were not turned to the Spirit, which should let them see
that, which gave them forth, the Spirit of God, which is the key to open
them.

From hence we passed to Richard Hamborow’s, at PONTEMOIL, where was a
great meeting; to which came another justice of peace, and several great
people, whose understandings were opened by the Lord’s Spirit and power,
and they were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, from whence it came. A
great convincement there was; a large meeting was gathered in those
parts, and settled in the name of Jesus.

After this we returned to England, and came to SHREWSBURY, where we had
a great meeting, and visited Friends all over the countries in their
meetings, till we came to William Gandy’s, in CHESHIRE, where we had a
meeting of between two and three thousand people, as it was thought; and
the everlasting word of life was held forth, and received that day. A
blessed meeting it was, for Friends were settled by the power of God
upon Christ Jesus, the rock and foundation.

At this time there was a great drought; and after this general meeting
was ended, there fell so great a rain, that Friends said, they thought
we could not travel, the waters would be so risen. But I believed the
rain had not extended so far, as they had come that day to the meeting.
Next day in the afternoon, when we turned back into some parts of Wales
again, the roads were dusty, and no rain had fallen there.

When Oliver Cromwell sent forth a proclamation for a fast throughout the
nation, for rain, when there was a very great drought, it was observed,
that as far as truth had spread in the north, there were pleasant
showers and rain enough, when in the south, in many places, they were
almost spoiled for want of rain. At that time I was moved to write an
answer to the Protector’s proclamation, wherein I told him, “if he had
come to own God’s truth, he should have had rain; and that drought was a
sign unto them of their barrenness, and want of the water of life.”
About the same time was written the following paper, to distinguish
between true and false fasts:—

               “_Concerning the true Fast and the false._

  “To all you that are keeping fasts, who ‘smite with the fist of
  wickedness, and fast for strife and debate;’ against you hath a voice
  cried aloud, like a trumpet, that you may come to know the true fast,
  which is accepted; and the fast, which is in the strife and the
  debate, and smiting with the fists of wickedness; which fast is not
  required of the Lord. ‘Behold, in the day of your fast, you find
  pleasure, and exact all your labours. Behold (mark, take notice), ye
  fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness;
  ye shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your voice heard on
  high. Is it such a fast, that I have chosen, saith the Lord, a day for
  a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head like a bulrush,
  and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a
  fast and an acceptable day to the Lord?’

  “Consider all you that fast, see, if it be not ‘hanging down the head
  for a day, like a bulrush;’ and fasting for ‘strife and debate,’ and
  to ‘smite with the fists of wickedness, to make your voice be heard on
  high?’ But this fast is not accepted of the Lord: but that which leads
  you from strife, from debate, from wickedness; which is not to ‘bow
  down the head, as a bulrush for a day,’ and yet live in exacting and
  pleasure; this is not accepted of the Lord: but that which separates
  from all these before-mentioned. That which separates from
  ‘wickedness, debate, strife, pleasures, smiting with the fist of
  wickedness,’ brings to know the true fast, which ‘breaks the bonds of
  iniquity, and deals bread to the hungry; brings the poor that are cast
  out to his own house, and when he sees any naked, he covers them, and
  hides not himself from his own flesh.’ Here is the true fast, which
  separates from them, where the bonds of iniquity are standing, and the
  heavy burthens of the oppressed remaining, and the yoke not broken;
  who deal not bread to the hungry, and bring not the poor to their own
  house; who see the naked, but let him go unclothed, and hide
  themselves from their own flesh. Yet such will make their voice to be
  heard on high, as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, who ‘sounded a
  trumpet before them, and disfigured their faces,’ to appear to men to
  fast; but the bonds of iniquity were standing, strife and debate were
  standing, striking with the fists of wickedness standing; these made
  their voice heard on high, who had their reward.

  “But that which brings to the true fast, which appears not to men to
  fast, but unto the Father ‘who seeth in secret; the Father that seeth
  in secret, shall reward this openly.’ This fast separates from the
  Pharisees’ fast, and them that bow the head for a day, like a bulrush.
  This is it which brings ‘to deal bread to the hungry, and clothe thine
  own flesh when thou seest them naked; to bring the poor to thine
  house, and to loose the bonds of wickedness;’ mark, this is the fast;
  and ‘to undo every heavy burthen (mark again), and to let the
  oppressed go free;’ this is the fast: and ‘to break every yoke.’ When
  thou observest this fast, ‘then shall thy light break forth as the
  morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
  righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy
  rere-ward. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt
  cry, and he shall say, Here I am: if thou take away from the midst of
  thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;
  and if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
  soul, then shall thy light arise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as
  the noon-day.’ The light brings to know this fast; and walking in it
  this fast is kept; and he that believeth in the light, abides not in
  darkness. And again; ‘the Lord shall guide thee continually, and
  satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; and thou shalt be
  like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail
  not,’ Isa. lviii. 11. These are they that are guided by the light
  which comes from Christ, where the springs are.

  “And again; ‘they that shall be of thee (that keep this fast,) shall
  build the old waste places, and thou shalt raise up the foundations of
  many generations; and thou shalt be called The repairer of the breach,
  The restorer of the paths to dwell in,’ Isa. lviii. 12. Now that which
  gives to see the foundations of many generations, is the light which
  separates from all, which is out of the light: and they that go out of
  the light, though they may pretend a fast, and bow down the head for a
  time, yet they are far from this fast, that doth raise up the
  foundations of many generations, and is the repairer of the breach,
  and restorer of the paths to dwell in. That which doth give to see
  these foundations of many generations, and these breaches that are to
  be repaired and restored, and paths to dwell in, is the light which
  brings to know the true fast; and where this fast is known, which is
  from wickedness, debate, strife, pleasures, from exacting, from the
  voice that is heard on high, from the speaking of vanity, from the
  bonds of iniquity, which breaks every yoke, and lets the oppressed go
  free; here the health grows; here the morning is known, and
  righteousness goes forth; the glory of the Lord is the rere-ward, and
  the light riseth; the soul is drawn out to the hungry, and satisfies
  the afflicted soul; and the springs of living water are known and
  felt. The waters fail not here; the Lord guides continually, and the
  foundations of many generations come to be seen and raised up: The
  repairer of breaches is here witnessed, The restorer of paths to dwell
  in.

  “But all such as are out of the light which the prophets were in, with
  which they saw Christ, and such as are in fasts, where was strife,
  wickedness, debate, and bowing down the head like a bulrush for a day,
  lifting their voice on high, and the bonds of wickedness yet standing,
  and the burthens unloosed, and the oppressed not let go free, and the
  yoke not broken, the nakedness not clothed, the bread not dealt to the
  hungry, and these foundations of many generations not raised up; until
  these things before-mentioned, be broken down,—on such the light
  breaks not forth as the morning, and the Lord hears them not. Such
  have their reward; their iniquities have separated them from their
  God, their sins have hid his face from them, that he will not hear:
  their hands are defiled with blood, and their fingers with iniquity,
  whose lips have spoken lies, and tongues muttered perverseness. ‘None
  calleth for justice, nor do any plead for truth; they trust in vanity,
  and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. They
  hatch cockatrice-eggs, and weave the spider’s web: he that eateth of
  their eggs, dies; and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper:
  their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
  themselves with their works.’ Observe; ‘their works are works of
  iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands: their feet run to
  do evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts
  are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths;
  the way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their
  doings. They have made them a crooked path; whosoever goeth therein
  shall not know peace:’ mark; such go from the light, therefore is
  judgment far off; neither doth justice overtake. Here is obscurity,
  walking in darkness; groping like blind men, as though they had no
  eyes, and stumbling at noon-day in desolate places, like blind men.
  Here is the roaring like bears, and mourning sorely like doves; here
  judgment is looked for, but there is none, and salvation is put far
  off: for the light is denied, which gives to see it. But here are the
  multiplying of transgression, and their sins testifying against them;
  the transgression that was within them, and their iniquities, which
  they knew in transgressing and lying against the Lord, speaking the
  things they should not, when they knew by that of God in them, that
  they should not speak it. So departing from the way of God, speaking
  oppression, revolting, conceiving and uttering forth from the heart
  words of falsehood; here judgment is turned away backward, and justice
  stands afar off; truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot
  enter. Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil makes
  himself a prey. The Lord saw it, and it displeased him. These are such
  as are in the fast, which God doth not accept; not in the true fast,
  whose ‘light breaks forth as the morning:’ but these are such as are
  in the false fast, who grope, like blind men.

  “That which gives to know the true fast, and the false fast, is the
  Light, which gives the eye to see each fast, where the true judgment
  is, and the iniquity standeth not, nor the transgressor, nor the
  speaker of lies; but that is judged and condemned with the Light,
  which makes it manifest. And when they who are in this fast call upon
  the Lord, the Lord will answer them, Here am I. Here truth is pleaded
  for, and falsehood flies away.

  “But they who are out of this fast, in the perverseness, whose tongues
  utter perverse things, who are stumbling and groping like blind men,
  out of the light, in the iniquity which separates from God, who hides
  his face from them that he will not hear;—these going from the light,
  go from the Lord and his face. So this is it which must be fasted
  from; for it separates from God; and here comes the reward openly,
  which condemns all that is contrary to the light; injustice, iniquity,
  transgression, vanity, and that which bringeth forth mischief, which
  hatcheth the cockatrice-eggs, and weaves the spider’s web: he that
  eateth of these eggs dies. Mark, ‘that which is crushed breaks out
  into a viper;’ mark again, ‘their webs shall not become garments,
  neither shall they cover themselves with their works of vanity; acts
  of violence are in their hands.’ This is all out of the light, in the
  wickedness. ‘Their feet run to do evil, and they make haste to shed
  innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of vanity; wasting and
  destruction are in their path.’ This is all far from the light. Again,
  ‘the way of peace they know not, there is no judgment in their goings;
  they have made them crooked paths, whosoever go therein, shall not
  know peace.’ Mark; who go in their way, that know not the way of
  peace, shall they know peace? ‘Whose path is crooked, where there is
  no judgment in their goings;’ take notice, ‘no judgment in their
  goings;’ this is all from the light, which manifesteth that which is
  to be judged; where the covenant of peace is known, where all that
  which is contrary to it is kept out. All who live in those things
  contrary to the light, in the false fast, stumbling and groping like
  blind men, may mark their path, and behold their reward. They that are
  in the true fast, are separated from all these; from their words and
  actions, their fruits, and their fast: but of those whose fast breaks
  the bonds of iniquity, whom the Lord hears, and to whom righteousness
  springs forth, and goes before them, the glory of the Lord is the
  rere-ward.”

                                                               G. F.

We passed into Wales through MONTGOMERYSHIRE, and so into RADNORSHIRE,
where there was a meeting like a leaguer, for multitudes. I walked a
little aside, whilst the people were gathering; and there came to me
John-ap-John, a Welshman, whom I desired to go to the people; and if he
had anything upon him from the Lord to them, he might speak to them in
Welsh, and thereby gather them more together. Then came Morgan
Watkins[53] to me, who was then become loving to Friends, and said, “the
people lie like a leaguer, and the gentry of the country are come in.” I
bid him go up also, and leave me, for I had a great travail upon me for
the salvation of the people. When they were well gathered, I went into
the meeting, and stood upon a chair about three hours. I stood a while
before I began to speak; after some time I felt the power of the Lord go
over the whole assembly; and his everlasting life and truth shone over
all. The Scriptures were opened to them, and their objections answered.
They were directed to the light of Christ, the heavenly man; that by it
they might all see their sins, and Christ Jesus to be their Saviour,
their Redeemer, their Mediator, and come to feed on him, the bread of
life from heaven. Many were turned to the Lord Jesus, and his free
teaching that day; and all were bowed down under the power of God; so
that though the multitude was so great, that many sat on horseback to
hear, there was no opposition. A priest who sat with his wife on
horseback, heard attentively, and made no objection. The people parted
peaceably and quietly, with great satisfaction; many of them saying they
never heard such a sermon before, or the Scriptures so opened. For the
new covenant was opened, and the old, and the nature and terms of each;
and the parables were explained. The state of the church in the
apostles’ days was set forth, and the apostacy laid open; and the free
teaching of Christ and the apostles was set over the hireling teachers;
and the Lord had the praise of all, for many were turned to him that
day.

Footnote 53:

  Morgan Watkins, who is only mentioned in this place, became a sufferer
  for the truth. About eight years from the above date, we find him in
  the Gatehouse prison, near Westminster abbey, with nineteen others on
  the same account, being committed by warrant from the Duke of
  Albemarle, “for being at a meeting in St. John’s.” This was during the
  time the plague visited London. In Barclay’s _Letters of Early
  Friends_, are two from Morgan Watkins, one of them dated from the
  Gatehouse prison, in which he says, “Blessed be His name who hath kept
  me, and nineteen more in this close place, all in health, above these
  five weeks; notwithstanding three have been buried out of this prison
  of the sickness.—Good is the hand of the Lord to his own, whose death
  is gain.”

  In a letter written about three months after the above, he mentions
  the release of himself and Friends, and adds, “I have been weak since
  I came out into the air, but through the great love of my God, I am
  wonderfully preserved, to the praise of his name. But the two
  imprisonments in Newgate, and the one at the Gatehouse, have much
  weakened my body, in which I have had several battles with death; but
  the power of my God arising, gave me dominion over the distemper and
  weakness of the flesh. The day was dreadful to all flesh, and few were
  able to abide it, and stand in the judgment; but the Lord was very
  merciful to the remnant of his people, and his blessed seed is arising
  in many.”

I went back thence to LEOMINSTER, where was a great meeting in a field;
many hundreds of people being gathered together. There were about six
congregational preachers and priests among them; and Thomas Taylor, who
had been a priest, but was now become a minister of Christ, was with me.
I stood up, and declared about three hours; and none of the priests were
able to open their mouths in opposition; the Lord’s power and truth so
reached them, and bound them down. At length one priest went off about a
bow-shot from me, drew several of the people after him, and began to
preach to them. So I kept our meeting, and he kept his. After a while
Thomas Taylor was moved to go and speak to him; and he gave over; and
he, and the people he had drawn off, came to us again; and the Lord’s
power went over them all. At last a Baptist, that was convinced, said,
“Where’s priest Tombs? how chance he doth not come out?” This Tombs was
priest of Leominster. Hereupon some went and told the priest; who came
with the bailiffs and other officers of the town. When he was come, they
set him upon a stool over against me. Now I was speaking of the
heavenly, divine light of Christ, with which he “enlightens every one
that cometh into the world, to give them the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ Jesus their Saviour.” When priest Tombs heard
this, he cried out, “That is a natural light, and a made light.” Then I
desired the people to take out their Bibles; and I asked the priest
whether he affirmed that that was a created, natural, made light, which
John, a man that was sent from God, did bear witness to, and spoke of,
when he said, “In him (to wit, in the Word) was life, and that life was
the light of men,” John i. 4. “Dost thou affirm and mean,” said I, “that
this light here spoken of, was a created, natural, made light?” And he
said, “Yes.” Then I showed by the Scriptures, that the natural, created,
made light, is the outward light in the outward firmament, proceeding
from the sun, moon, and stars. “And dost thou affirm,” said I, “that God
sent John to bear witness to the light of the sun, moon, and stars?”
Then said he, “Did I say so?” I replied, “Didst thou not say it was a
natural, created, made light, that John bore witness unto? If thou dost
not like thy words, take them again and mend them.” Then he said, “That
light which I spoke of, was a natural, created light.” I told him, “he
had not at all mended his cause; for that light which I spoke of, was
the very same that John was sent of God to bear witness to, which was
the life in the Word, by which all the natural lights, as sun, moon, and
stars, were made. ‘In him (to wit, the Word) was life, and that life was
the light of men.’” So I directed the people to turn to the place in
their Bibles, and recited to them the words of John, how that ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not anything made, that was made. (So all natural,
created lights were made by Christ the Word.) In him was life, and the
life was the light of men; and that was the true light, which lighteth
every man that cometh into the world.’ And Christ saith of himself, John
viii. 12, “I am the light of the world;” and bids them “believe in the
light,” John xii. 36. And God said of him by the prophet Isaiah, chap.
xlix. 6, “I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
mayest be my salvation to the ends of the earth.” So Christ in his light
is saving. And the apostle said, “The light which shined in their
hearts, was to give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ;” and that was their “treasure in their
earthen vessels,” 2 Cor. iv. 6, 7.

When I had thus opened the matter to the people, the priest cried to the
magistrates, “Take this man away, or else I shall not speak any more.”
“But,” said I, “Priest Tombs, deceive not thyself, thou art not in thy
pulpit now, nor in thy old mass-house; but we are in the fields.” So he
was shuffling to be gone; and Thomas Taylor stood up, and undertook to
make out our principle by Christ’s parable concerning the sower, Matt.
xiii. Then said the priest, “Let that man speak, and not the other.” So
he got into a little jangling for a while; till the Lord’s power stopped
and confounded him. Afterwards a Friend stood up and told him, how he
had sued him for tithe eggs, and other Friends for other tithes; for he
was an Anabaptist preacher, and yet had a parsonage at Leominster, and
had several journeymen under him. He said “he had a wife, and he had a
concubine; and his wife was the baptized people, and his concubine was
the world.” But the Lord’s power came over him and them all, and the
everlasting truth was declared that day; and many were turned by it to
the Lord Jesus Christ their teacher and way to God. Of great service
that meeting was in those parts. Next day Thomas Taylor went to this
priest, and reasoned with him; and overcame him by the power of the
Word.

From this place I travelled on in Wales, having several meetings, till I
came to TENBY; where, as I rode up the street, a justice of peace came
out of his house, desired me to alight, and stay at his house; and I did
so. On First-day the mayor and his wife, and several of the chief of the
town, came in about ten o’clock, and stayed all the time of the meeting.
A glorious one it was. John-ap-John being then with me, left it, and
went to the steeple-house; and the governor cast him into prison. On the
Second-day morning the governor sent one of his officers to the
justice’s house to fetch me; which grieved the mayor and the justice;
for they were both with me in the justice’s house when the officer came.
So the mayor and the justice went up to the governor before me; and a
while after I went up with the officer. When I came in, I said, “Peace
be unto this house.” And before the governor could examine me, I asked
him why he cast my friend into prison. He said, “For standing with his
hat on in the church.” I said, “Had not the priest two caps on his head,
a black one and a white one? Cut off the brims of the hat, and then my
friend would have but one, and the brims of the hat were but to defend
him from weather.” “These are frivolous things,” said the governor. “Why
then,” said I, “dost thou cast my friend into prison for such frivolous
things?” Then he asked me, whether I owned election and reprobation;
“Yes,” said I, “and thou art in the reprobation.” At that he was in a
rage, and said he would send me to prison till I proved it; but I told
him I would prove that quickly, if he would confess truth. Then I asked
him, whether wrath, fury, rage, and persecution, were not marks of
reprobation; for he that was born of the flesh, persecuted him that was
born of the Spirit; but Christ and his disciples never persecuted nor
imprisoned any. Then he fairly confessed that he had too much wrath,
haste and passion in him. I told him Esau was up in him, the first
birth, not Jacob, the second birth. The Lord’s power so reached and came
over him, that he confessed to truth; and the other justice came, and
shook me kindly by the hand.

As I was passing away, I was moved to speak to the governor again, and
he invited me to dine with him, and set my friend at liberty. I went
back to the other justice’s house; and after some time the mayor and his
wife, and the justice and his wife, and divers other Friends of the
town, went about half a mile out of town with us, to the water-side,
when we went away; and there, when we parted from them, I was moved of
the Lord to kneel down with them; and pray to the Lord to preserve them.
So after I had recommended them to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour
and free teacher, we passed away in the Lord’s power, and the Lord had
the glory. A meeting continues in that town to this day.

We travelled to Pembrokeshire, and in PEMBROKE had some service for the
Lord. Thence we passed to HAVERFORD-WEST, where we had a great meeting,
and all was quiet. The Lord’s power came over all, and many were settled
in the new covenant, Christ Jesus, and built upon him, their rock and
foundation; and they stand a precious meeting to this day. Next day,
being their fair-day, we passed through it, and sounded the day of the
Lord, and his everlasting truth amongst them.

After this we came into another county, and at noon came into a great
market-town, and went into several inns, before we could get any meat
for our horses. At last we came to one where we got some. Then
John-ap-John being with me, went and spoke through the town, declaring
the truth to the people; and when he came to me again, he said he
thought all the town were as people asleep. After a while he was moved
to go and declare truth in the streets again; then the town was all in
an uproar, and cast him into prison. Presently after, several of the
chief of the town came, with others, to the inn where I was, and said,
“They have cast your man into prison.” “For what?” said I, “He preached
in our streets,” said they. Then I asked them, “What did he say? had he
reproved some of the drunkards and swearers, and warned them to repent,
and leave off their evil doings, and turn to the Lord?” I asked them,
who cast him into prison? They said, the high-sheriff and justices, and
the mayor. I asked their names, and whether they understood themselves?
and whether that was their conduct to travellers that passed through
their town, and strangers that admonished and exhorted them to fear the
Lord, and reproved sin in their gates? These went back, and told the
officers what I said; and after a while they brought down John-ap-John,
guarded with halberts, in order to put him out of the town. Being at the
inn door, I bid the officers take their hands off him. They said, ‘the
mayor and justices had commanded them to put him out of town.’ I told
them I would talk with their mayor and justices, concerning their
uncivil and unchristian carriage towards him. So I spoke to John to go
look after the horses, and get them ready, and charged the officers not
to touch him. And after I had declared the truth to them, and showed
them the fruits of their priests, and their incivility and
unchristian-like carriage, they left us. They were a kind of
Independents; but a very wicked town, and false. We bid the innkeeper
give our horses a peck of oats; and no sooner had we turned our backs,
than the oats were stolen from our horses. After we had refreshed
ourselves a little, and were ready, we took horse, and rode up to the
inn, where the mayor, sheriff, and justices were. I called to speak with
them, and asked them why they had imprisoned John-ap-John, and kept him
in prison two or three hours? But they would not answer me a word; they
only looked out at the windows upon me. So I showed them how unchristian
their carriage was to strangers and travellers, and manifested the
fruits of their teachers; and I declared the truth unto them, and warned
them of the day of the Lord, that was coming upon all evildoers; and the
Lord’s power came over them, that they looked ashamed; but not a word
could I get from them in answer. So when I had warned them to repent,
and turn to the Lord, we passed away; and at night came to a little inn,
very poor, but very cheap; for our own provision and our two horses,
cost but eightpence; but the horses would not eat their oats. We
declared the truth to the people of the place, and sounded the day of
the Lord through the countries.

Thence, we came to a great town, and went to an inn. Edward Edwards went
into the market, and declared the truth amongst the people; and they
followed him to the inn, and filled the yard, and were exceedingly rude;
yet good service we had for the Lord amongst them; for the life of
Christianity and the power of it tormented their chaffy spirits, and
came over them, so that some were reached and convinced; and the Lord’s
power came over all. The magistrates were bound; they had no power to
meddle with us.

After this we came to another great town on a market-day; and
John-ap-John declared the everlasting truth through the streets, and
proclaimed the day of the Lord amongst them. In the evening many people
gathered about the inn; and some of them, being drunk, would fain have
had us into the street again; but seeing their design, I told them, if
there were any that feared God, and desired to hear the truth, they
might come into our inn; or else we might have a meeting with them next
morning. Some service for the Lord we had amongst them, both over night
and in the morning; and though the people were hard to receive the
truth, yet the seed was sown; and thereabouts the Lord hath a people
gathered to himself. In that inn also I turned but my back to the man
that was giving oats to my horse; and looking round again, I observed he
was filling his pockets with the provender. A wicked, thievish people,
to rob the poor dumb creature of his food. I would rather they had
robbed me.

Leaving this town and travelling on, a great man overtook us on the way,
and he purposed (as he told us afterwards) to take us up at the next
town for highwaymen. But before we came to the town, I was moved of the
Lord to speak to him. What I spoke reached to the witness of God in the
man, who was so affected therewith, that he had us to his house, and
entertained us very civilly. He and his wife desired us to give them
some Scriptures, both for proof of our principles and against the
priests. We were glad of the service, and furnished them with Scriptures
enough; and he wrote them down, and was convinced of the truth, both by
the Spirit of God in his own heart, and by the Scriptures, which were a
confirmation to him. Afterwards he set us on our journey, and as we
travelled we came to a hill, which the people of the country say, is two
or three miles high; from the side of this hill I could see a great way.
And I was moved to set my face several ways, and to sound the day of the
Lord there; and I told John-ap-John (a faithful Welsh minister) in what
places God would raise up a people to himself, to sit under his own
teaching. Those places he took note of, and a great people have since
been raised up there. The like I have been moved to do in many other
rude places; and yet I have been moved to declare the Lord had a seed in
those parts, and afterwards there have been a brave people raised up in
the covenant of God, and gathered in the name of Jesus; where they have
salvation and free teaching.

From this hill we came to DOLGELLY, and went to an inn. John-ap-John
declared through the streets, and the town’s people rose and gathered
about him. There being two Independent priests in the town, they came
out and discoursed with him together. I went up to them, and finding
them speaking in Welsh, I asked them, “what was the subject they spoke
upon, and why they were not more moderate, and spoke not one by one? For
the things of God,” I told them, “were weighty, and they should speak of
them with fear and reverence.” Then I desired them to speak in English,
that I might discourse with them, and they did so. They affirmed, “that
the light which John came to bear witness of, was a created, natural,
made light.” But I took the Bible, and showed them (as I had done to
others before,) “that the natural lights, which were made and created,
were the sun, moon, and stars; but this light, which John bare witness
to, and which he called ‘the true light, that lighteth every man that
cometh into the world,’ is the life in Christ the Word, by which all
things were made and created. The same that is called the life in
Christ, is called the light in man; and this is a heavenly divine light,
which lets men see their evil words and deeds, shows them all their
sins, and, if they would attend unto it, would bring them to Christ,
from whom it comes, that they might know him to save them from their
sin, and to blot it out. This light, I told them, shone in the darkness
of their hearts, and the darkness in them could not comprehend it; but
in those hearts where God had commanded it to shine out of darkness, it
gave unto such the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ
Jesus their Saviour. Then I opened the Scriptures largely to them, and
turned them to the Spirit of God in their hearts, which would reveal the
mysteries in the Scriptures to them, and would lead them into all truth
as they became subject thereunto. I directed them to that which would
give everyone of them the knowledge of Christ, who died for them, that
he might be their way to God, and make peace between God and them.”

The people were attentive, and I spoke to John-ap-John to stand up and
speak it in Welsh to them, which he did; and they generally received it,
and with hands lifted up blessed and praised God. The priests’ mouths
were stopped, so that they were quiet all the while, for I had brought
them to be sober at the first, by telling them that, “when they speak of
the things of God and of Christ, they should speak with fear and
reverence.” Thus the meeting broke up in peace in the street, and many
of the people accompanied us to our inn, and rejoiced in the truth that
had been declared unto them; that they were turned to the light and
Spirit in themselves, by which they might see their sin, and know
salvation from it. When we went out of the town, the people were so
affected, that they lifted up their hands, and blessed the Lord for our
coming. A precious seed the Lord hath thereaway, and many people in
those parts are since gathered to the Lord Jesus Christ, to sit down
under his free teaching; and they have suffered much for him.

From hence we passed to CAERNARVON, a city like a castle. When we had
put up our horses at an inn, and refreshed ourselves, John-ap-John went
forth, and spoke through the streets; which were so strait and short,
that one might stand in the midst of the town and see both the gates. I
followed him, and a multitude of people were soon gathered; amongst whom
a very dark priest began to babble; but his mouth was soon stopped. When
John had cleared himself, I declared the word of life amongst the
people; directing them to “the light of Christ in their hearts, that by
it they might see all their own ways, religions, and teachers, and might
come off from them all, to Christ, the true and living way, and the free
teacher.” Some of them were rude, but the greater part were civil, and
told us they had heard how we had been persecuted and abused in many
places, but they would not do so to us there. I commended their
moderation and sobriety, and warned them of “the day of the Lord, that
was coming upon all sin and wickedness;” testifying unto them, “that
Christ was now come to teach his people himself, by his Spirit and by
his power.”

From hence we went to BEAUMARIS; a town wherein John-ap-John had
formerly been preacher. After we had put up our horses at an inn, John
went forth and spoke through the street: and there being a garrison in
the town, they took him and put him into prison. The innkeeper’s wife
came and told me that the governor and magistrates were sending for me
to commit me to prison also. I told her, they had done more than they
could answer already; and had acted contrary to Christianity in
imprisoning him for reproving sin in their streets and for declaring the
truth. Soon after came other friendly people, and told me, if I went out
into the street they would imprison me also; and therefore they desired
me to keep at the inn. Upon this I was moved to go and walk up and down
the streets; and told the people, “what an uncivil and unchristian thing
they had done, in casting my friend into prison.” And, they being high
professors, I asked them, “if this was the entertainment they had for
strangers; if they would willingly be so served themselves; and whether
they, who looked upon the Scriptures to be their rule, had any example
therein from Christ or his apostles, for what they had done?” So after a
while they set John-ap-John at liberty.

Next day, being market-day, we were to cross a great water: and not far
from the place where we were to take boat, many of the market-people
drew to us; amongst whom we had good service for the Lord, “declaring
the word of life and everlasting truth unto them, and proclaiming the
day of the Lord amongst them, which was coming upon all wickedness; and
directing them to the light of Christ, which he, the heavenly man, had
enlightened them with; by which they might see all their sins, and false
ways, religions, worships, and teachers: and by the same light might see
Christ Jesus, who was come to save them, and lead them to God.” After
the Lord’s truth had been declared to them in the power of God, and
Christ the free teacher set over all the hireling teachers, I bid
John-ap-John get his horse into the boat, which was then ready. But
there being a company of wild gentlemen, as they called them, got into
it, whom we found very rude, and far from gentleness, they, with others,
kept his horse out of the boat. I rode to the boat’s side and spoke to
them, showing them “what unmanly and unchristian conduct it was; and
told them they showed an unworthy spirit, below Christianity or
humanity.” As I spoke, I leaped my horse into the boat amongst them,
thinking John’s horse would have followed, when he had seen mine go in
before him; but the water being deep, John could not get his horse into
the boat. Wherefore I leaped out again on horseback into the water, and
stayed with John on that side till the boat returned. There we tarried
from eleven in the forenoon, to two in the afternoon, before the boat
came to fetch us; and then we had forty-two miles to ride that evening:
and when we had paid for our passage, we had but one groat left between
us in money. We rode about sixteen miles, and then got a little hay for
our horses. Setting forward again, we came in the night to a little
ale-house, where we intended to stay and bait; but finding we could have
neither oats nor hay there, we travelled on all night; and about five in
the morning got to a place within six miles of WREXHAM; where that day
we met with many Friends, and had a glorious meeting; and the Lord’s
everlasting power and truth was over all: and a meeting is continued
there to this day. Very weary we were with travelling so hard up and
down in Wales; and in many places we found it difficult to get meat
either for our horses or ourselves.

Next day we passed thence into FLINTSHIRE, sounding the day of the Lord
through the towns; and came into WREXHAM at night. Here many of Floyd’s
people came to us; but very rude, wild, and airy they were, and little
sense of truth they had: yet some were convinced in that town. Next
morning one called a lady sent for me, who kept a preacher in her house.
I went, but found both her and her preacher very light and airy; too
light to receive the weighty things of God. In her lightness she came
and asked me, if she should cut my hair: but I was moved to reprove her,
and bid her cut down the corruptions in herself with the sword of the
Spirit of God. So after I had admonished her to be more grave and sober,
we passed away: and afterwards in her frothy mind, she made her boast
that “she came behind me and cut off the curl of my hair;” but she spoke
falsely.

From Wrexham we came to CHESTER; and being the fair time, we stayed a
while, and visited Friends. For I had travelled through every county in
Wales, preaching the everlasting gospel of Christ; and a brave people
there is now, who have received it, and sit under Christ’s teaching. But
before I left Wales, I wrote to the magistrates of BEAUMARIS concerning
the imprisoning of John-ap-John; letting them see their conditions, and
the fruits of their Christianity, and of their teachers. Afterwards I
met with some of them near LONDON; but oh how ashamed they were of their
action!

From CHESTER we came to LIVERPOOL, where was at that time a fair also.
As I rode through the fair, there stood a Friend upon the cross,
declaring the truth to the people: who seeing me ride by, and knowing I
had appointed a meeting next day upon a hill not far off, gave notice to
the people “that George Fox, the servant of the Lord, would have a
meeting next day upon such hill; and if any feared the Lord, they might
come and hear him declare the word of life to them.” We went that night
to Richard Cubban’s, who himself was convinced, though not his wife; but
at that time she became convinced also.

Next day we went to the meeting on the top of the hill, which was very
large. Some rude people with a priest’s wife came, and made a noise for
a while, but the Lord’s power came over them, the meeting became quiet,
and the truth of God was declared amongst them. Many were that day
settled upon the rock and foundation, Christ Jesus, and under his
teaching; who made peace between God and them.

We had a small meeting with a few Friends and people at MALPAS. Thence
we came to another place, where we had another meeting. There came a
bailiff with a sword, and was rude; but the Lord’s power came over him,
and Friends were established in the truth.

Thence we came to MANCHESTER; and the sessions being there that day,
many rude people were come out of the country. In the meeting they threw
at me coals, clods, stones, and water; yet the Lord’s power bore me up
over them, that they could not strike me down. At last, when they saw
they could not prevail by throwing water, stones, and dirt at me, they
went and informed the justices in the sessions; who thereupon sent
officers to fetch me before them. The officers came in while I was
declaring the word of life to the people, and plucked me down, and haled
me up into their court. When I came there, all the court was in disorder
and noise. Wherefore I asked where were the magistrates that they did
not keep the people civil? Some of the justices said they were
magistrates. I asked them, why then did they not appease the people, and
keep them sober? for one cried, “I’ll swear,” and another cried, “I’ll
swear.” I declared to the justices how we were abused in our meeting by
the rude people who threw stones, and clods, dirt, and water; and how I
was haled out of the meeting, and brought thither, contrary to the
instrument of government, which said, “none shall be molested in their
meetings that professed God, and owned the Lord Jesus Christ;” which I
did. So the truth came over them, that when one of the rude fellows
cried “he would swear,” one of the justices checked him, saying “what
will you swear? hold your tongue.” At last they bid the constable take
me to my lodging; and there be secured till morning, till they sent for
me again. So the constable had me to my lodging; and as we went the
people were exceedingly rude; but I let them see “the fruits of their
teachers, and how they shamed Christianity, and dishonoured the name of
Jesus, which they professed.” At night we went to a justice’s house in
the town, who was pretty moderate; and I had much discourse with him.
Next morning we sent to the constable to know if he had anything more to
say to us. And he sent us word “he had nothing to say to us, but that we
might go whither we would.” The Lord hath since raised up a people to
stand for his name and truth in that town over those chaffy professors.

We passed from Manchester, having many precious meetings in several
places, till we came to PRESTON; between which and Lancaster I had a
general meeting: from which I went to LANCASTER. There at our inn I met
with Colonel West, who was very glad to see me: who meeting with Judge
Fell, told him I was mightily grown in the truth; when indeed he was
come nearer to the truth, and so could better discern it.

We came from Lancaster to Robert Widders’s. On the First-day after I had
a general meeting near SAND-SIDE, of Friends of WESTMORLAND and
LANCASHIRE, when the Lord’s everlasting power was over all; in which the
word of eternal life was declared, and Friends were settled upon the
foundation, Christ Jesus, under his free teaching; and many were
convinced, and turned to the Lord.

Next day I came over the Sands to SWARTHMORE, where Friends were glad to
see me. I stayed there two First-days, visiting Friends in their
meetings thereaways. They rejoiced with me in the goodness of the Lord,
who by his eternal power had carried me through, and over many
difficulties and dangers in his service: to him be the praise for ever!




                              CHAPTER XI.

1657.—Exhortation to Friends to take heed to the Light of Christ—an
    expostulation with persecutors—to Friends to be valiant for the
    truth—in parts of Cumberland the priests are so forsaken that some
    steeple-houses stand empty—John Wilkinson, the priest, is so
    deserted, that he sets up a meeting in his own house—then a silent
    meeting, and at last joins Friends, and becomes an able
    minister—George Fox travels into Scotland with Col. Osborn and
    Robert Widders—the latter was a thundering man against the
    rottenness of the priests’ hypocrisy and deceit—Lady Hamilton is
    convinced—the Scotch priests raise the war-cry, and draw up their
    curses, which George Fox answers—they are in a rage and panic when
    he comes there, thinking “that all was gone”—some Baptists, with
    their logic and syllogisms, are confuted by George Fox’s logic—he is
    banished Scotland by the council, but disregards their order—George
    Fox and William Osburn are waylaid by thieves, who are admonished by
    the former, and overawed by the Lord’s power—the Highlanders run at
    them with pitchforks—at Johnstons they are banished the town—on
    hearing that the council of Edinburgh had issued warrants against
    him, George Fox goes thither, and is not molested.


Having got a little respite from travel, I was moved to write an epistle
to Friends, as follows:—

  “All Friends of the Lord everywhere, whose minds are turned in towards
  the Lord, take heed to the light within you, which is the light of
  Christ; which, as ye love it, will call your minds inward, that are
  abroad in the creatures: so your minds may be renewed by it, and
  turned to God in this which is pure, to worship the living God, the
  Lord of Hosts over all the creatures. That which calls your minds out
  of the lusts of the world, will call them out of the affections and
  desires, and turn you to set your affections above. That which calls
  the mind out of the world, will give judgment upon the world’s
  affections and lusts, and is the same that calls out your minds from
  the world’s teachers, and the creatures, to have your minds renewed.
  There is your obedience known and found; there the image of God is
  renewed in you; and ye come to grow up in it. That which calls your
  minds out of the earth, turns them towards God, where the pure Babe is
  born of the virgin; and the Babe’s food is known, the children’s
  bread, which comes from the living God, and nourishes up to eternal
  life. These babes and children receive their wisdom from above, from
  the pure living God, and not from the earthly one: for that is trodden
  under foot with such. All who hate this light, whose minds are abroad
  in the creatures, in the earth, and in the image of the devil, get the
  words of the saints, that received their wisdom from above, into the
  old nature, and their corrupted minds. Such are murderers of the just,
  enemies to the cross of Christ, in whom the prince of the air lodgeth:
  sons of perdition, betrayers of the just.

  “Therefore take heed to that light, which is oppressed with that
  nature; which light, as it arises, shall condemn all that cursed
  nature, shall turn it out, and shut it out of the house; and so ye
  will come to see the candle lighted, and the house sweeping and swept.
  Then the pure pearl ariseth; then the eternal God is exalted. The same
  light that calls in your minds out of the world, turns them to God,
  the Father of lights. Here in the pure mind is the pure God waited
  upon for wisdom from above; the pure God is seen night and day; and
  the eternal peace, of which there is no end, enjoyed. People may have
  openings, and yet their minds go into the lusts of the flesh; but
  there the affections are not mortified. Therefore hearken to that, and
  take heed to that, which calls your minds out of the affections and
  lusts of the world, to have them renewed. The same will turn your
  minds to God; the same light will set your affections above, and bring
  you to wait for the pure wisdom of God from on high, that it may be
  justified in you.

  “Wait all in that, which calls in your minds, and turns them to God;
  here is the true cross. That mind shall feed upon nothing that is
  earthly; but be kept in the pure light of God up to God, to feed upon
  the living food, which comes from the living God. The Lord God
  Almighty be with you all, dear babes, and keep you all in his strength
  and power to his glory, over all the world—you whose minds are called
  out of it, and turned to God, to worship the Creator, and serve him,
  and not the creature. The light of God, which calls the mind out of
  the creatures, and turns it to God, brings into a being of endless joy
  and peace. Here is always a seeing God present, which is not known to
  the world, whose hearts are in the creatures, whose knowledge is in
  the flesh, whose minds are not renewed.

  “Therefore all Friends, the Seed of God mind and dwell in, to reign
  over the unjust: and the power of the Lord dwell in, to keep you clear
  in your understandings, that the Seed of God may reign in you all;—the
  Seed of God, which is but one in all, which is Christ in the male and
  in the female, which the promise is to. Wait upon the Lord for the
  just to reign over the unjust, and for the Seed of God to reign over
  the seed of the serpent, and be the head; and that all that is mortal
  may die; for out of that will rise presumption. So fare ye well, and
  God Almighty bless, and guide, and keep you in his wisdom.”

                                                               G. F.

About this time Friends, that were moved of the Lord to go to the
steeple-houses and markets, to reprove sin, and warn people of the day
of the Lord, suffered much hardship from rude people, and also from the
magistrates; being commonly pulled down, buffeted, beaten, and
frequently sent to prison. Wherefore I was moved to give forth the
following expostulation, to be spread amongst people, to show them, how
contrary they acted therein to the apostles’ doctrine and practice, and
to bring them to more moderation. Thus it was:—

  “Is it not better for you, that have cast into prison the servants and
  children of the Lord God, for speaking as they are moved, in
  steeple-houses or markets? Is it not better, I say, for you to try all
  things, and hold fast that which is good? Is it not of more honour and
  credit, to prove all things, and try all things, than to pluck down in
  the steeple-houses, and pull off the hair of their heads, and cast
  them into prison? Is this an honour to your truth and gospel you
  profess? Doth it not show that ye are out of the truth, and are not
  ready to instruct the gainsayers? Hath not the Lord said, ‘He will
  pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, and his sons and his daughters
  shall prophesy; old men shall dream dreams, and young men see visions;
  and on his handmaids he will pour forth of his Spirit?’ Was not this
  prophecy in past ages stood against by the wise learned men in their
  own wisdom, and by the synagogue teachers? Were not those haled out of
  the synagogues and temple, who witnessed the Spirit poured forth upon
  them? Doth not this show, that ye have not the pourings forth of this
  Spirit upon you, who fill the jails with so many sons and daughters,
  and hold up such teachers as are bred up in learning at Oxford and
  Cambridge, and are made by the will of man? Doth not this show, that
  ye, who are bred up there, who are made teachers by the will of man,
  and who persecute for prophesying, are strangers to the Spirit that is
  ‘poured forth upon sons and daughters,’ by which Spirit they come to
  ‘minister to the spirits that are in prison?’ The Lord hath a
  controversy with you, who are found prisoning and persecuting such as
  the Lord hath poured forth of his Spirit upon. Do not your fruits
  show, in all the nation where ye come; in towns, cities, villages, and
  countries, that ye are the seedsmen made by the will of man, who sow
  to the flesh, of which nothing but corruption is reaped? Ye are looked
  upon, and your fruits, and that which may be gathered, is seen by all
  that are in the light, as they pass through your countries, towns,
  cities, and villages, that ye are all the seedsmen that have sown to
  the flesh. Mark, and of this take notice, ye who are of that birth
  that is born of the flesh, sow to your own, persecuting him that is
  born of the Spirit. Such as sow to the Spirit, and of the Spirit reap
  life eternal, ye cast into prison. Do ye not hale out of the
  synagogues, persecute and beat in them, and knock down? Are not these
  the works of the flesh? Have not many been almost murdered and
  smothered in your synagogues? Have not some been haled out of them,
  for but looking at the priest, and after cast into prison? Doth not
  all this make manifest what spirit ye are of, and your fruits to be of
  the flesh? What pleasures and sports in every town are to be seen
  among your flocks, that sow to the flesh and are born of it!

  “Whereas the ministers of the Spirit cried against such, as ‘sported
  in the day-time;’ such as ‘ate and drank, and rose up to play;’ such
  as lived wantonly upon earth in pleasures; such as lived in fulness of
  bread and idleness; such as defile the flesh: such did God overthrow
  and destroy, and set them forth as examples to all them that after
  should live ungodly. But are not the fruits of this reaped in every
  town? Cannot we hence see, that here is sowing to the flesh? Again,
  what scorning and scoffing, what mocking, derision, and strife! What
  oaths and drunkenness, uncleanness and cursed speaking! What lust and
  pride are seen in the streets! These fruits we see are reaped to the
  flesh. So here we see the seedsman, him that sows to this flesh, of
  which nothing but corruption is reaped; as the countries, towns,
  cities, and villages make manifest. But the ministers of the Spirit,
  who sow to the Spirit, come to reap eternal life. These discern the
  other seedsman, who sows to the flesh, and of the flesh reaps
  corruption. For the day hath manifested each seedsman, and what is
  reaped from each is seen; glory be to the Lord God for ever! The
  ministers of the Spirit, who are born of the Spirit, sons and
  daughters, who have the Spirit poured forth upon them, and witness the
  promise of God fulfilled in them, by the Spirit of God preach and
  minister to the Spirit in prison in every one, in the sight of God,
  the Father of Spirits. God’s hand is turned against you all, that have
  destroyed God’s creatures upon your lust. God’s hand is turned against
  you that have wronged by unjust dealing, defrauded, and oppressed the
  poor, and respected the persons of the proud (such as are in gay
  apparel); and lend not your ear to the cry of the poor. The Lord’s
  hand is turned against you, and his righteous judgment and justice
  upon you will be accomplished and repaid: who shall have a reward,
  every one according to his works.

  “O! the abomination, the hypocritical profession that is upon the
  earth, where God and Christ, faith, hope, the Holy Spirit, and truth
  are professed; but the fear of God, and the faith that purifies and
  gives victory over the world, are not lived in! Doth it not appear,
  that the wisdom that rules in all those, whom the seedsman that sows
  to the flesh, sows for, and who are born of the flesh, is from below,
  earthly, sensual, and devilish; that their understanding is brutish,
  and their knowledge natural, as the brute beasts? For men and women in
  that state, have not patience to speak one to the other of the
  Scriptures, without much corruption and flesh appearing, yet they have
  a feigned humility, a will-worship, and righteousness of self; but
  they own not the light, which ‘lighteth every man that cometh into the
  world,’ Christ Jesus, the righteousness of God; which being owned,
  self, and the righteousness of self, come to be denied. Here is the
  humility that is contrary to the light, that is from below and
  feigned: here is the wisdom that is earthly, sensual, and devilish;
  for people can scarce speak one to another, without destroying one
  another, prisoning and persecuting one another, when they speak of the
  Scriptures. Now, this is the devilish wisdom, murdering and
  destroying: this is not the wisdom that is from above, which is pure
  and peaceable; gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
  fruits. Here all may read each seedsman, which hath each wisdom. He
  that sows to the flesh, and is born of that, hath the wisdom that is
  earthly, sensual, and devilish; he that sows to the Spirit, a minister
  of the Spirit, hath the wisdom from above, which is pure, peaceable,
  gentle, and easy to be entreated;—the wisdom by which all things were
  made and created. Now is each wisdom discovered, and each seedsman;
  the day, which is the light, hath discovered them.”

                                                               G. F.

I was also moved to give forth the following epistle to Friends, to stir
them up to be bold and valiant for the truth, and to encourage them in
their sufferings for it:—

  “All Friends and brethren everywhere, now is the day of your trial,
  now is the time for you to be valiant, and to see that the testimony
  of the Lord doth not fall. Now is the day for the exercise of your
  gifts, of your patience, and of your faith. Now is the time to be
  armed with patience, with the light, with righteousness, and with the
  helmet of salvation. Now is the trial of the slothful servant, who
  hides his talent, and will judge Christ hard. Now, happy are they that
  can say, ‘the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof, and he
  gives the increase;’ and therefore, who takes it from you? Is it not
  the Lord still that suffers it? For the Lord can try you as he did
  Job, whom he made rich, whom he made poor, and whom he made rich
  again; who still kept his integrity in all conditions. Learn Paul’s
  lesson, ‘in all states to be content;’ and have his faith, that
  ‘nothing is able to separate us from the love of God, which we have in
  Christ Jesus.’ Therefore be rich in life, and in grace, which will
  endure, ye who are heirs of life, and born of the womb of eternity,
  that noble birth, that cannot stoop to that which is born in sin, and
  conceived in iniquity; who are better bred and born; whose religion is
  from God, above all the religions that are from below; and who walk by
  faith, by that which God hath given you, and not by that which men
  make, who walk by sight, from the Mass-Book to the Directory. Such are
  subject to stumble and fall, who walk by sight and not by faith.

  “Therefore mind him that destroys the original of sin, the devil and
  his works, and cuts off the entail of Satan, viz., sin; who would have
  by entail an inheritance of sin in men and women from generation to
  generation, and pleads for it by all his lawyers and counsellors. For
  though the law, which made nothing perfect, did not cut it off; yet
  Christ being come destroys the devil and his works, and cuts off the
  entail of sin. This angers all the devil’s lawyers and counsellors,
  that Satan shall not hold sin by entail in thy garden, in thy field,
  in thy temple, thy tabernacle. So keep your tabernacles, that there ye
  may see the glory of the Lord appear at the doors thereof. And be
  faithful; for ye see, what the worthies and valiants of the Lord
  attained unto by faith. Enoch by faith was translated. Noah by faith
  was preserved over the waters in his ark. Abraham by faith forsook his
  father’s house and religion, and all the religions of the world. Isaac
  and Jacob by faith followed his steps. See also how Samuel, with other
  of the Lord’s prophets, and David, by faith were preserved to God,
  over God’s enemies! Daniel and the three children by faith escaped the
  lions and the fire, and preserved their worship clean, and by it were
  kept over the worships of the world. The apostles by faith travelled
  up and down the world, were preserved from all the religions of the
  world, and held forth the pure religion to the dark world, which they
  had received from God; and likewise their fellowship was received from
  above, which is in the gospel that is everlasting. In this, neither
  powers, principalities, nor thrones, dominions nor angels, things
  present, nor things to come, nor heights, nor depths, nor death,
  mockings, nor spoiling of goods, nor prisons, nor fetters, were able
  to separate them from the love of God, which they had in Christ Jesus.

  “And Friends, ‘quench not the Spirit, nor despise prophesying,’ where
  it moves; neither hinder the babes and sucklings from crying Hosanna;
  for out of their mouths will God ordain strength. There were some in
  Christ’s day that were against such, whom he reproved; and there were
  some in Moses’s day, who would have stopped the prophets in the camp,
  whom Moses reproved, and said, by way of encouragement to them, ‘Would
  God, that all the Lord’s people were prophets!’ So I say now to you.
  Therefore ye, that stop it in yourselves, do not quench it in others,
  neither in babe nor suckling; for the Lord hears the cries of the
  needy, and the sighs and groans of the poor. Judge not that, nor the
  sighs and groans of the Spirit, which cannot be uttered, lest ye judge
  prayer; for prayer as well lies in sighs and groans to the Lord as
  otherwise. Let not the sons and daughters, nor the hand-maidens be
  stopped in their prophesyings, nor the young men in their visions, nor
  the old men in their dreams; but let the Lord be glorified in and
  through all, who is over all, God blessed for ever! So every one may
  improve his talents, every one exercise his gifts, and every one speak
  as the Spirit gives him utterance. Thus every one may minister as he
  hath received the grace, as a good steward to him that hath given it
  him; so that all plants may bud and bring forth fruit to the glory of
  God; ‘for the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to
  profit withal.’

  “See, that every one hath profited in heavenly things: male and
  female, look into your own vineyards, and see what fruit ye bear to
  God; look into your own houses, see how they are decked and trimmed,
  and see what odours, myrrh, and frankincense ye have therein, and what
  a smell and savour ye have to ascend to God, that he may be glorified.
  Bring all your deeds to the light, which ye are taught to believe in
  by Christ, your Head, the heavenly Man; and see how they are wrought
  in God. Every male and female, let Christ dwell in your hearts by
  faith, and let your mouths be opened to the glory of God the Father,
  that he may rule and reign in you. We must not have Christ Jesus, the
  Lord of life, put any more in a stable, amongst the horses and asses;
  but he must now have the best chamber, the heart, and the rude,
  debauched spirit must be turned out. Therefore let Him reign, whose
  right it is, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, by which ye call him
  Lord, in which ye pray, and have comfort and fellowship with the
  Father and with the Son. Therefore know the triumph in it, and in God
  and his power (which the devil is out of), and in the seed, which is
  first and last, the beginning and ending, the top and cornerstone; in
  which is my love to you, and in which I rest—

                                                 Your friend, G. F.”

  “_Postscript_—And, Friends, be careful how ye set your feet among the
  tender plants, that are springing up out of God’s earth; lest ye tread
  upon them, hurt, bruise, or crush them in God’s vineyard.”

After I had tarried two First-days at Swarthmore, and had visited
Friends in their meetings thereabouts, I passed into WESTMORLAND, in the
same work, till I came to John Audland’s, where there was a general
meeting. The night before I had a vision of a desperate creature, that
was coming to destroy me, but I got victory over it. And next day in
meeting-time came one Otway, with some rude fellows. He rode round about
the meeting with his sword or rapier, and would fain have got in through
the Friends to me; but the meeting being great, the Friends stood close,
so that he could not easily come at me. When he had rode about several
times raging, and found he could not get in, being limited by the Lord’s
power, he went away. It was a glorious meeting, ended peaceably, and the
Lord’s everlasting power came over all. This wild man went home, became
distracted, and not long after died. I sent a paper to John Blaykling to
read to him, while he lay ill, showing him his wickedness; and he
acknowledged something of it.

From hence, I went through KENDAL, where a warrant had long lain to
apprehend me; and the constables seeing me, ran to fetch their warrant,
as I was riding through the town; but before they could come with it, I
was gone past, and so escaped their hands.

I travelled northwards, visiting Friends’ meetings, till I came to
STRICKLAND-HEAD, where I had a great meeting. Most of the gentry of that
country being gathered to a horse-race, not far from the meeting, I was
moved to go and declare the truth unto them; and a chief-constable, that
was there, also admonished them. Our meeting was quiet, and the Lord was
with us; and by his word and power, Friends were settled in the eternal
truth.

From hence we passed into CUMBERLAND, where we had many precious living
meetings. After we had travelled to GILSLAND, and had a meeting there,
we came to CARLISLE, where they used to put Friends out of the town; but
there came a great flood while we were there, that they could not put us
out; so we had a meeting there on First-day. After which we passed to
ABBEY-HOLM, and had a little meeting there. This is a place, where I
told Friends long before, a great people would come forth to the Lord;
which hath since come to pass, and a large meeting is gathered to the
Lord in those parts.

I passed hence to a general meeting at LANGLANDS in Cumberland, which
was very large; for most of the people had so forsaken the priests, that
the steeple-houses in some places stood empty. And John Wilkinson,[54] a
preacher, I have often named before, who had three steeple-houses, had
so few hearers left, that, giving over preaching in them, he first set
up a meeting in his house, and preached there to them that were left.
Afterwards he set up a silent meeting (like Friends,) to which came a
few; for most of his hearers were come to Friends. Thus he held on till
he had not past half a dozen left; the rest still forsaking him, and
coming to Friends. At last, when he had so very few left, he would come
to Pardshaw Crag (where Friends had a meeting of several hundreds of
people, who were all come to sit under the Lord Jesus Christ’s
teaching,) and he would walk about the meeting on First-days, like a man
that went about the commons to look for sheep. During this time I came
to PARDSHAW CRAG meeting, and he with three or four of his followers,
that were yet left to him, came to the meeting that day, and were all
thoroughly convinced. After the meeting, Wilkinson asked me two or three
questions, which I answered him to his satisfaction; and from that time
he came amongst Friends, became an able minister, preached the gospel
freely, and turned many to Christ’s free teaching. And after he had
continued many years in the free ministry of Jesus, he died in 1675.

Footnote 54:

  This was not the same John Wilkinson who joined with Storey in
  creating a schism in the Society.

I had for some time felt drawings on my spirit to go into SCOTLAND; and
had sent to Colonel William Osburn of Scotland, desiring him to come and
meet me; and he, with some others, came out of Scotland to this meeting.
After the meeting was over (which, he said, was the most glorious one he
ever saw in his life,) I passed with him and his company into Scotland;
having Robert Widders with me, a thundering man against hypocrisy,
deceit, and the rottenness of the priests.

The first night we came into Scotland we lodged at an inn. The innkeeper
told us, an Earl lived about a quarter of a mile off, who had a desire
to see me; and had left word at his house, that if ever I came into
Scotland, he should send him word. He told us there were three
drawbridges to his house, and that it would be nine o’clock before the
third bridge was drawn. Finding we had time in the evening, we walked to
his house. He received us very lovingly; and said, he would have gone
with us on our journey, but he was previously engaged to go to a
funeral. After we had spent some time with him, we parted very friendly,
and returned to our inn. Next morning we travelled on, and passing
through DUMFRIES came to DOUGLAS, where we met with some Friends; and
thence passed to the HEADS, where we had a blessed meeting in the name
of Jesus, and felt him in the midst.

Leaving Heads, we went to BADCOW, and had a meeting there; to which
abundance of people came, and many were convinced; amongst whom was one,
called a lady. From thence we passed towards the HIGHLANDS to William
Osburn’s house, where we gathered up the sufferings of Friends, and the
principles of the Scotch priests, which may be seen in a book called
_The Scotch Priests’ Principles_.

Afterwards we returned to Heads, Badcow, and GARSHORE, where the said
Lady Margaret Hambleton was convinced; who afterwards went to warn
Oliver Cromwell and Charles Fleetwood of the day of the Lord that was
coming upon them.

On First-day we had a great meeting, and several professors came to it.
Now, the priests had frightened the people with the doctrine of election
and reprobation, telling them “that God had ordained the greatest part
of men and women for hell; and that, let them pray, or preach, or sing,
or do what they could, it was all to no purpose, if they were ordained
for hell;—that God had a certain number elected for heaven, let them do
what they would, as David an adulterer, and Paul a persecutor, yet
elected vessels for heaven. So the fault was not at all in the creature,
less or more, but God had ordained it so.” I was led to open to the
people the falseness and folly of their priests’ doctrines, and showed
how they had abused those Scriptures they brought and quoted to them, as
in Jude, and other places. For whereas they said, there was no fault at
all in the creature, I showed them that they whom Jude speaks of, to
wit, Cain, Korah, and Balaam, who, he says, were ordained of old to
condemnation, the fault was in them. For did not God warn Cain and
Balaam, and put the question to Cain, “If thou doest well, shalt thou
not be accepted?” And did not the Lord bring Korah out of Egypt and his
company? yet did not he gainsay both God and his law, and his prophet
Moses? Here people might see that there was a fault in Cain, Korah, and
Balaam, and so there is in all that go in their ways. For if they who
are called Christians, resist the gospel, as Korah did the law; if they
err from the Spirit of God, as Balaam did, and do evil, as Cain did, is
not here a fault? Which fault is in themselves, and is the cause of
their reprobation, and not God. Doth not Christ say, “Go, preach the
gospel to all nations?” Which is the gospel of salvation. He would not
have sent them into all nations, to preach the doctrine of salvation, if
the greatest part of men had been ordained for hell. Was not Christ a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, for those that become
reprobates, as well as for the saints? He died for all men, the ungodly,
as well as the godly, as the apostle bears witness, 2 Cor. v. 15; Rom.
v. 6. And he “enlightens every man that cometh into the world,” that
through him they might all believe. And Christ bids them believe in the
light; but all they that hate the light, which Christ bids all believe
in, are reprobated.

Again, “the manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every man, to
profit withal;” but they that vex, quench and grieve it, are in the
reprobation; and the fault is in them, as it is also in them that hate
his light. The apostle says, “The grace of God, which brings salvation,
hath appeared unto all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this
present world,” Tit. ii. 11, 12. Now when men and women live ungodly,
and in the lusts of the world, turn this grace of God into wantonness,
and walk despitefully against it, and so deny God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, that bought them; the fault is in all such as thus turn the
grace of God into wantonness, and walk despitefully against that which
would bring their salvation, and save them out of the reprobation. But
the priests, it seems, can see no fault in such as deny God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, that hath bought them—such as deny his light, which
they should believe in, and his grace, which should teach them to live
godly, and which should bring them their salvation. Now all that believe
in the light of Christ, as he commands, are in the election, and sit
under the teaching of the grace of God which brings their salvation. But
such as turn this grace into wantonness, are in the reprobation; and
such as hate the light are in the condemnation. Therefore I exhorted all
the people to believe in the light, as Christ commands, and own the
grace of God, their free teacher; and it would assuredly bring them
their salvation; for it is sufficient. Many other Scriptures were
opened, concerning reprobation, and the eyes of the people were opened;
and a spring of life rose up among them.

These things soon came to the priests’ ears; for the people that sat
under their dark teachings, began to see light and to come into the
covenant of light. The noise was spread over Scotland, amongst the
priests, that I was come thither; and a great cry was among them that
all would be spoiled; for they said I had spoiled all the honest men and
women in England already, so according to their account the worst was
left to them. Upon this they gathered great assemblies of priests
together, and drew up a number of curses to be read in their several
steeple-houses, that all the people might say “Amen” to them. Some few
of these I will here set down, the rest may be read in the book before
mentioned, of _The Scotch Priests’ Principles_.

  The first was, “Cursed is he that saith, every man hath a light within
  him sufficient to lead him to salvation; and let all the people say,
  Amen.”

  The second, “Cursed is he that saith, faith is without sin; and let
  all the people say, Amen.”

  The third, “Cursed is he that denieth the Sabbath day; and let all the
  people say, Amen.”[55]

Footnote 55:

  It is justly observed by a writer, not of the Society of Friends, that
  these “place the Presbyterian Christianity of that day in a most
  unfavourable light, and show how deeply it was imbued with a sour
  persecuting spirit of Popery.”

In this last they make the people curse themselves; for on the Sabbath
day (which is the seventh-day of the week, which the Jews kept by the
command of God to them), they kept markets and fairs, and so brought the
curse upon their own heads.

As to the first, concerning the light, Christ saith, “Believe in the
light, that ye may become children of the light;” and “he that believeth
shall be saved; he that believeth shall have everlasting life; he that
believeth passes from death to life, and is grafted into Christ.” And
“ye do well,” said the apostle, “that ye take heed unto the light that
shines in the dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in
your hearts.” So the light is sufficient to lead unto the day-star.

And as concerning faith, it is the gift of God; and every gift of God is
pure. The faith, which Christ is the author of, is precious, divine, and
without sin. This is the faith which gives victory over sin, and access
to God; in which faith, they please God. But they are reprobates
themselves concerning this faith, and are in their dead faith, who
charge sin upon this faith, under pain of a curse; which faith gives
victory over their curse, and returns it into their own bowels.

A company of Scots near BADCOW, challenged a dispute with some of our
Scotch Friends, for with me they would not dispute; so some of the
Scotch Friends met them at the market-place. The dispute was to be
concerning the Sabbath-day, and some other of their principles
before-mentioned; and I having got their principles and assertions,
showed the Friends where they might easily be overthrown, and a Scotch
Friend, a smith, overthrew them clearly.

There were two Independent churches in Scotland, in one of which many
were convinced; but the pastor of the other was in a great rage against
truth and Friends. They had their elders, who sometimes would exercise
their gifts amongst the church-members, and were sometimes pretty
tender; but their pastor speaking so much against the light and us, the
friends of Christ, he darkened his hearers, so that they grew blind, and
dry, and lost their tenderness. He continued preaching against Friends,
and against the light of Christ Jesus, calling it natural; at last one
day in his preaching, he cursed the light, and fell down, as if dead, in
his pulpit. The people carried him out, and laid him upon a grave-stone,
and poured strong waters into him, which brought him to life again; and
they carried him home, but he was mopish. After a while he stripped off
his clothes, put on a Scotch plaid, and went into the country amongst
the dairy-women. When he had stayed there about two weeks, he came home,
and went into the pulpit again. Whereupon the people expected some great
manifestation or revelation from him; but, instead thereof, he began to
tell them what entertainment he had met with; how one woman gave him
skimmed-milk, another gave him buttermilk, and another gave him good
milk; so the people were fain to take him out of the pulpit again, and
carry him home. He that gave me this account was Andrew Robinson, one of
his chief hearers, who came afterwards to be convinced, and received the
truth. He said he never heard that he recovered his senses again. By
this people may see what came upon him that cursed the light; which
Light is the Life in Christ, the Word; and it may be a warning to all
others, that speak evil against the Light of Christ.

Now were the priests in such a rage, that they posted to Edinburgh to
Oliver Cromwell’s council there, with petitions against me. The noise
was, “that all was gone;” for several Friends were come out of England
and spread over Scotland, sounding the day of the Lord, preaching the
everlasting gospel of salvation, and turning people to Christ Jesus, who
died for them, that they might receive his free teaching. After I had
gathered the principles of the Scotch priests, and the sufferings of
Friends, and had seen the Friends in that part of Scotland settled, by
the Lord’s power, upon Christ their foundation, I went to Edinburgh, and
in the way came to LINLITHGOW; where, lodging at an inn, the innkeeper’s
wife, who was blind, received the word of life, and came under the
teaching of Christ Jesus, her Saviour. At night there came in abundance
of soldiers and some officers, with whom we had much discourse; some
were rude. One of the officers said, “he would obey the Turk’s or
Pilate’s command if they should command him to guard Christ to crucify
him.” So far was he from all tenderness, or sense of the Spirit of
Christ, that he would rather crucify the just, than suffer for or with
the just; whereas many officers and magistrates have lost their places,
before they would turn against the Lord and his Just One.

When I had stayed a while at EDINBURGH, I went to LEITH, where many
officers of the army came in with their wives, and many were convinced.
Among these Edward Billing’s wife was one; she brought a great deal of
coral in her hand, and threw it on the table before me, to see whether I
would speak against it or not. I took no notice of it, but declared the
truth to her, and she was reached. There came in many Baptists, who were
very rude, but the Lord’s power came over them, so that they went away
confounded. Then there came in another sort, and one of them said, “he
would dispute with me; and for argument’s sake, would deny there was a
God.” I told him, “he might be one of those fools that said in his
heart, There is no God, but he should know him in the day of his
judgment.” So he went his way; and a precious time we had afterwards
with several people of account; and the Lord’s power came over all.
William Osburn was with me. Colonel Lidcott’s wife and William Welch’s
wife, and several of the officers themselves, were convinced. Edward
Billing and his wife at that time lived apart; and she being reached by
truth, and become loving to Friends, we sent for her husband, who came;
and the Lord’s power reached unto them both, they joined in it, and
agreed to live together in love and unity, as man and wife.

After this we returned to EDINBURGH, where many thousands were gathered
together, with abundance of priests among them, about burning a witch,
and I was moved to declare the day of the Lord amongst them. When I had
done, I went to our meeting, whither many rude people and Baptists came.
The Baptists began to vaunt with their logic and syllogisms; but I was
moved in the Lord’s power to thrash their chaffy, light minds; and
showed the people that, after that fallacious way of discoursing, they
might make white seem black, and black white; as, that because a cock
had two legs, and each of them had two legs, therefore they were all
cocks. Thus they might turn anything into lightness and vanity; but it
was not the way of Christ or his apostles, to teach, speak, or reason,
after that manner. Hereupon those Baptists went their way, and after
they were gone, we had a blessed meeting in the Lord’s power, which was
over all.

I mentioned before, that many of the Scotch priests, being greatly
disturbed at the spreading of truth, and the loss of their hearers
thereby, were gone to Edinburgh, to petition the council against me.
Now, when I came from the meeting to the inn where I lodged, an officer
belonging to the council brought me the following order:—

    “_Thursday, the 8th of October, 1657, at his Highness’s Council in
                                Scotland._

        ORDERED,

  That George Fox do appear before the Council on Tuesday, the 13th of
  October next, in the forenoon.

                                  E. DOWNING, Clerk of the Council.”

When he had delivered me the order, he asked me, “whether I would appear
or not?” I did not tell him whether I would or not; but asked him “if he
had not forged the order:” he said, “no, it was a real order from the
council, and he was sent, as their messenger, with it.” When the time
came I appeared, and was conducted into a large room, where many great
persons came and looked at me. After a while the door-keeper had me into
the council-chamber; and as I was going in, he took off my hat. I asked
him “why he did so, and who was there, that I might not go in with my
hat on?” for I told him “I had been before the Protector with it on.”
But he hung it up, and had me in before them. When I had stood a while,
and they had said nothing to me, I was moved of the Lord to say, “Peace
be amongst you; wait in the fear of God, that ye may receive his wisdom
from above, by which all things were made and created; that by it ye may
all be ordered, and may order all things unto your hands to God’s
glory.” They asked me, “what was the occasion of my coming into that
nation?” I told them, “I came to visit the seed of God, which had long
lain in bondage under corruption; and the intent of my coming was, that
all in the nation, that professed the Scriptures, the words of Christ,
and of the prophets, and apostles, might come to the light, Spirit, and
power, which they were in, who gave them forth; that so in and by the
Spirit they might understand the Scriptures, know Christ and God aright,
and have fellowship with them, and one with another.” They asked me
“whether I had any outward business there?” I said, “nay.” Then they
asked me how long I intended to stay in the country? I told them “I
should say little to that; my time was not to be long, yet in my freedom
in the Lord, I stood in the will of him that sent me.” Then they bid me
withdraw, and the door-keeper took me by the hand, and led me forth. In
a little time they sent for me again, and told me, “I must depart the
nation of Scotland by that day seventh night.” I asked them, “why, what
had I done? What was my transgression, that they passed such a sentence
upon me to depart out of the nation?” They told me, “they would not
dispute with me.” Then I desired them “to hear what I had to say to
them;” but they said, “they would not hear me.” I told them, Pharaoh
heard Moses and Aaron, and yet he was a heathen and no Christian, and
Herod heard John the Baptist; and they should not be worse than these.
But they cried, “withdraw, withdraw.” Whereupon the door-keeper took me
again by the hand, and led me out. Then I returned to my inn, and
continued still in Edinburgh, visiting Friends there and thereabouts,
and strengthening them in the Lord. After a little time, I wrote a
letter to the council, to lay before them their unchristian dealing in
banishing me, an innocent man, that sought their salvation and eternal
good; a copy of which letter here follows:—

                    “_To the Council of Edinburgh._

  “Ye that sit in council, and bring before your judgment-seat the
  innocent, the just, without showing the least cause what evil I have
  done, or convicting me of any breach of law; and afterward banish me
  out of your nation and country, without telling me why, or what evil I
  had done; though I told you, when ye asked me how long I would stay in
  the nation, that my time was not long (I spoke it innocently), and yet
  ye banish me. Will not all, think ye, that fear God, judge this to be
  wickedness? Consider, did not they sit in council about Stephen, when
  they stoned him to death? Did not they sit in council about Peter and
  John, when they haled them out of the temple, and put them out of
  their council for a little season, and took counsel together, and then
  brought them in again and threatened them, and charged them to speak
  no more in that name? Was not this to stop the truth from spreading in
  that time? And had not the priests a hand in these things with the
  magistrates? and in examining Stephen, when he was stoned to death?
  Was not the council gathered together against Jesus Christ to put him
  to death? and had not the chief priests a hand in it? When they go to
  persecute the just, and crucify the just, do they not then neglect
  judgment, and mercy, and justice, and the weighty matters of the law,
  which is just? Was not the apostle Paul tossed up and down by the
  priests and the rulers? Was not John the Baptist cast into prison? Are
  not ye doing the same work, showing what spirit ye are of? Now do not
  ye show the end of your profession, the end of your prayers, the end
  of your religion, and the end of your teaching, who are now come to
  banish the truth, and him that is come to declare it unto you? Doth
  not this show that ye are but in the words, out of the life, of the
  prophets, Christ, and his apostles? for they did not use such practice
  as to banish any. How do ye receive strangers, which is a command of
  God among the prophets, Christ, and the apostles? Some by that means
  have entertained angels at unawares; but ye banish one that comes to
  visit the Seed of God, and is not chargeable to any of you. Will not
  all that fear God, look upon this to be spite and wickedness against
  the truth? How are ye like to love enemies, that banish your friend?
  How are ye like to do good to them that hate you, when ye do evil to
  them that love you? How are ye like to heap coals of fire on their
  heads that hate you, and to overcome evil with good, when ye banish
  thus? Do ye not manifest to all that are in the truth, that ye have
  not the Christian spirit? How did ye do justice to me, when ye could
  not convict me of any evil, yet banish me? This shows that truth is
  banished out of your hearts, and ye have taken part against the truth
  with evil-doers; with the wicked, envious priests, and stoners,
  strikers, and mockers in the streets; with these, ye that banish, have
  taken part. Whereas ye should have been a terror to these, and a
  praise to them that do well, and succourers of them that are in the
  truth; then might ye have been a blessing to the nation; ye would not
  have banished him that was moved of the Lord to visit the Seed of God,
  and thereby have brought your names upon record, and made them to
  stink in ages to come, among them that fear God. Were not the
  magistrates stirred up in former ages to persecute or banish, by the
  corrupt priests? and did not the corrupt priests stir up the rude
  multitude against the just in other ages? Therefore are your streets
  like Sodom and Gomorrah. Did not the Jews and the priests make the
  Gentiles’ minds envious against the apostles? Who were they that would
  not have the prophet Amos to prophesy at the king’s chapel; but bid
  him fly his way? And when Jeremiah was put in the prison, in the
  dungeon, and in the stocks, had not the priests a hand with the
  princes in doing it? Now see all that were in this work of banishing,
  prisoning, persecuting, whether they were not all out of the life of
  Christ, the prophets, and apostles? To the witness of God in you all I
  speak. Consider whether they were not always the blind magistrates,
  who turned their sword backward, that knew not their friends from
  their foes, and so hit their friends? Such magistrates were deceived
  by flattery.”

                                                               G. F.

When this was delivered, and read amongst them, some of them, I heard,
were troubled at what they had done, being made sensible that they would
not be so served themselves. But it was not long before they that
banished me, were banished themselves, or glad to get away; who would
not do good in the day when they had power, nor suffer others that
would.

After I had spent some time among Friends at Edinburgh, and thereabouts,
I passed to HEADS again, where Friends had been in great sufferings; for
the Presbyterian priests had excommunicated them, and given charge that
none should buy or sell, or eat or drink with them. So they could
neither sell their commodities, nor buy what they wanted; which made it
go very hard with some of them; for if they had bought bread or other
victuals of any of their neighbours, the priests threatened them so with
curses, that they would run and fetch it from them again. But Colonel
Ashfield being a justice of peace in that country, put a stop to the
priests’ proceedings. This Colonel Ashfield was afterwards convinced
himself, had a meeting settled at his house, declared the truth, and
lived and died in it.

After I had visited Friends at Heads and thereaways, and had encouraged
them in the Lord, I went to GLASGOW, where a meeting was appointed; but
not one of the town came to it. As I went into the city, the guard at
the gates took me before the governor, who was a moderate man. Much
discourse I had with him; but he was too light to receive the truth, yet
he set me at liberty; so I passed to the meeting. But seeing none of the
town’s-people came, we declared truth through the town, and so passed
away; and having visited Friends in their meetings thereabouts, returned
towards BADCOW. Several Friends declared truth in their steeple-houses,
and the Lord’s power was with them.

Once as I was going with William Osburn to his house, there lay a
company of rude fellows by the way-side, hid under the hedges and in
bushes. Seeing them, I asked him, “what they were?” “O,” said he, “they
are thieves.” Robert Widders, being moved to go and speak to a priest,
was left behind, intending to come after. So I said to William Osburn,
“I will stay here in this valley, and do thou go look after Robert
Widders;” but he was unwilling to go, being afraid to leave me there
alone, because of those fellows, till I told him, “I feared them not.”
Then I called to them, asking them, “what they lay lurking there for,”
and I bid them come to me; but they were loath to come. I charged them
to come up to me, or else it might be worse with them; then they came
trembling, for the dread of the Lord had struck them. I admonished them
to be honest, and directed them to the light of Christ in their hearts,
that by it they might see what an evil it was to follow after theft and
robbery; and the power of the Lord came over them. I stayed there till
William Osburn and Robert Widders came up, and then we passed on
together. But it is likely that, if we two had gone away before, they
would have robbed Robert Widders when he had come after alone, there
being three or four of them.

We went to William Osburn’s house, where we had a good opportunity to
declare the truth to several people that came in. Then we went among the
Highlanders, who were so devilish they had like to have spoiled us and
our horses; for they ran at us with pitch-forks; but through the Lord’s
goodness we escaped them, being preserved by his power.

Thence we passed to STIRLING, where the soldiers took us up, and had us
to the main-guard. After a few words with the officers, the Lord’s power
coming over them, we were set at liberty: but no meeting could we get
amongst them in the town, they were so closed up in darkness. Next
morning there came a man with a horse that was to run a race, and most
of the town’s-people and officers went to see it. As they came back from
the race, I had a brave opportunity to declare the day of the Lord, and
his word of life amongst them. Some confessed to it, and some opposed;
but the Lord’s truth and power came over them all.

Leaving Stirling, we came to BURNTISLAND, where I had two meetings at
one Captain Pool’s house; one in the morning, the other in the
afternoon. Whilst they went to dine, I walked to the seaside, not having
freedom to eat with them. Both he and his wife were convinced, and
became good Friends afterwards, and several officers of the army came in
and received the truth.

We passed thence through several other places, till we came to
JOHNSTONS, where were several Baptists that were very bitter, and came
in a rage to dispute with us: vain janglers and disputers indeed they
were. When they could not prevail by disputing, they went and informed
the governor against us; and next morning raised a whole company of
foot, and banished me, and Alexander Parker, also James Lancaster, and
Robert Widders out of the town. As they guarded us through the town,
James Lancaster was moved to sing with a melodious sound in the power of
God; and I was moved to proclaim the day of the Lord, and preach the
everlasting gospel to the people. For they generally came forth, so that
the streets were filled with them: and the soldiers were so ashamed that
they said, “they would rather have gone to Jamaica, than have guarded us
so.” But we were put into a boat with our horses, carried over the
water, and there left. The Baptists, who were the cause of our being put
out of this town, were themselves, not long after, turned out of the
army; and he that was then governor was discarded also when the king
came in.

Being thus thrust out of Johnstons, we went to another market-town,
where Edward Billing[56] and many soldiers quartered. We went to an inn,
and desired to have a meeting in the town, that we might preach the
everlasting gospel amongst them. The officers and soldiers said, we
should have it in the town-hall; but the Scotch magistrates in spite
appointed a meeting there that day for the business of the town. When
the officers of the soldiery understood this, and perceived that it was
done in malice, they would have had us to go into the town-hall
nevertheless. But we told them, “by no means, for then the magistrates
might inform the governor against them, and say, they took the town-hall
from them by force, when they were to do their town business therein.”
We told them, “we would go to the market-place;” they said, “it was
market-day;” we replied, “it was so much the better; for we would have
all people to hear truth, and know our principles.” Alexander Parker
went and stood upon the market-cross with a Bible in his hand, and
declared the truth amongst the soldiers and market-people; but the
Scots, being a dark, carnal people, gave little heed, and hardly took
notice of what was said. After a while I was moved of the Lord to stand
up at the cross, and declare with a loud voice the everlasting truth,
and the day of the Lord that was coming upon all sin and wickedness.
Whereupon the people came running out of the town-hall, and they
gathered so together, that at last we had a large meeting; for they sat
in the court only for a pretence, to hinder us from having the hall to
meet in. When the people were come away, the magistrates followed them.
Some walked by, but some stayed and heard; and the Lord’s power came
over all, and kept all quiet. “The people were turned to the Lord Jesus
Christ, who died for them, and had enlightened them, that with his light
they might see their evil deeds, be saved from their sins by him, and
come to know him to be their teacher. But if they would not receive
Christ and own him, it was told them, that this light, which came from
him, would be their condemnation.”

Footnote 56:

  Edward Billing was a faithful sufferer for the truth. Henry Fell, in a
  letter to Margaret Fell, in 1660, mentions Friends being beat very
  sore, and exceedingly abused in the streets. “They pulled me out of
  meeting,” he says, “beat me much, knocked me down in the street, and
  tore all my coat. Edward Billing and his wife were much abused, he
  especially.”

  Edward Billing was one of the three Friends, who, in 1659, appeared
  before the bar of the House of Commons, to present an address
  describing the sufferings of Friends, and signed by 164 of the
  Society, wherein they make an offer of their own bodies, person for
  person, to lie in prison instead of such of their brethren as were
  then under confinement, and might be in danger of their lives through
  extreme durance. (See _Letters of Early Friends_, pp. 62–68.) Although
  little or no apparent effect appeared to be produced at the time in
  the House from the above-mentioned appeal, it appears, from the
  journals of the Commons in the month following, a committee was
  appointed, “to consider of the imprisonment of such persons who
  continue committed for conscience sake, and how, and in what manner
  they are, and continue committed, together with the whole cause
  thereof, and how they may be discharged; and to report the same to the
  Parliament.”

Several of them were made loving to us, especially the English people,
and some came afterwards to be convinced. But there was a soldier that
was very envious against us; he hated both us and the truth, spoke evil
of it, and very despitefully against the light of Christ Jesus, to which
we bore testimony. Mighty zealous he was for the priests and their
hearers. As this man was hearing the priest, holding his hat before his
face, while the priest prayed, one of the priest’s hearers stabbed him
to death; so he who had rejected the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and cried down the servants of the Lord, was murdered amongst them whom
he had so cried up, and by one of them.

We travelled from this town to LEITH, warning and exhorting people, as
we went, to turn to the Lord. At Leith the innkeeper told me, that the
council had granted warrants to apprehend me, “because I was not gone
out of the nation, after the seven days were expired, that they had
ordered me to depart in.” Several friendly people also came and told me
the same; to whom I said, “What do ye tell me of their warrants against
me? if there were a cart-load of them I do not heed them, for the Lord’s
power is over them all.”

I went from Leith to EDINBURGH again, where they said the warrants of
the council were out against me. I went to the inn where I had lodged
before, and no man offered to meddle with me. After I had visited
Friends in the city, I desired those that travelled with me, to get
ready their horses in the morning, and we rode out of town together;
there were with me at that time, Thomas Rawlinson, Alexander Parker, and
Robert Widders. When we were out of town they asked me, “whither I would
go?” I told them it was upon me from the Lord to go back again to
Johnstons (the town out of which we had been lately thrust,) to set the
power of God and his truth over them also. Alexander Parker said, “he
would go along with me;” and I wished the other two to stay at a town,
about three miles from Edinburgh, till we returned. Then Alexander and I
got over the water, about three miles across, and rode through the
country; but in the afternoon, his horse being weak, and not able to
hold up with mine, I put on and got into Johnstons just as they were
drawing up the bridges; the officers and soldiers never questioning me.
I rode up the street to Captain Davenport’s house, from which we had
been banished. There were many officers with him; and when I came
amongst them, they lifted up their hands, wondering that I should come
again; but I told them, “the Lord God had sent me amongst them again;”
so they went their way. The Baptists sent me a letter, by way of
challenge, “to discourse with me next day.” I sent them word, “I would
meet them at such a house, about half a mile out of the town, at such an
hour.” For I considered, if I should stay in town to discourse with
them, they might under pretence of discoursing with me, have raised men
to put me out of the town again as they had done before. At the time
appointed I went to the place, Captain Davenport and his son
accompanying me, where I stayed some hours, but not one of them came.
While I stayed there waiting for them, I saw Alexander Parker coming;
who not being able to reach the town, had lain out the night before; and
I was exceedingly glad that we were met again.

This Captain Davenport was then loving to Friends; but afterwards coming
more into obedience to truth, he was turned out of his place for not
putting off his hat, and for saying Thou and Thee to them.

When we had waited beyond reasonable ground to expect any of them
coming, we departed; and Alexander Parker being moved to go again to the
town, where we had the meeting at the market-cross, I passed alone to
Lieutenant Foster’s quarters, where I found several officers that were
convinced. From thence I went up to the town, where I had left the other
two Friends, and we went back to EDINBURGH together.

When we were come to the city, I bid Robert Widders follow me; and in
the dread and power of the Lord we came up to the first two sentries;
and the Lord’s power came so over them, that we passed by them without
any examination. Then we rode up the street to the marketplace, by the
main-guard out at the gate by the third sentry, and so clear out at the
suburbs, and there came to an inn and set up our horses, it being the
seventh-day of the week. Now I saw and felt that we had rode, as it
were, against the cannon’s mouth, or the sword’s point; but the Lord’s
power and immediate hand carried us over the heads of them all. Next day
I went to the meeting in the city, Friends having notice that I would
attend it. There came many officers and soldiers to it, and a glorious
meeting it was; the everlasting power of God was set over the nation,
and his Son reigned in his glorious power. All was quiet, and no man
offered to meddle with me. When the meeting was ended, and I had visited
Friends, I came out of the city to my inn again; and next day, being the
second day of the week, we set forward towards the borders of England.

As we travelled along the country I spied a steeple-house, and it struck
at my life. I asked “what steeple-house it was,” and was answered that
it was DUNBAR. When I came thither, and had put up at an inn, I walked
to the steeple-house, having a friend or two with me. When we came into
the yard, one of the chief men of the town was walking there. I spoke to
one of the friends that were with me, to go to him and tell him, “that
about nine next morning there would be a meeting there of the people of
God called Quakers; of which we desired he would give notice to the
people of the town.” He sent me word, that they were to have a lecture
there at nine; but that we might have our meeting there at eight, if we
would. We concluded so, and desired him to give notice of it.
Accordingly in the morning both poor and rich came; and there being a
captain of horse quartered in the town, he and his troopers came also,
so that we had a large meeting; and a glorious one it was, the Lord’s
power being over all.

After some time the priest came, and went into the steeple-house; but we
being in the yard, most of the people stayed with us. Friends were so
full, and their voices so high in the power of God, that the priest
could do little in the steeple-house, but came quickly out again, stood
a while, and then went his way. I opened to the people, “where they
might find Christ Jesus, turned them to the light, which he had
enlightened them withal, that in the light they might see Christ, that
died for them, turn to him, and know him to be their Saviour and free
teacher. I let them see, that all the teachers they had hitherto
followed, were hirelings, who made the gospel chargeable; showed them
the wrong ways they had walked in, in the night of apostacy, directed
them to Christ, the new and living way to God; manifested unto them, how
they had lost the religion and worship which Christ set up in spirit and
truth, and had hitherto been in the religions and worships of men’s
making and setting up. After I had turned the people to the Spirit of
God, which led the holy men of God to give forth the Scriptures; and
showed them, that they must also come to receive, and be led by, the
same Spirit in themselves (a measure of which was given unto every one
of them), if ever they came to know God and Christ, and the Scriptures
aright; perceiving the other Friends that were with me to be full of the
power and word of the Lord, I stepped down, giving way for them to
declare what they had from the Lord unto the people.”

Towards the latter end of the meeting some professors began to jangle;
whereupon I stood up again, and answered their questions, so that they
seemed to be satisfied, and our meeting ended in the Lord’s power, quiet
and peaceable. This was the last meeting I had in Scotland; the truth
and the power of God was set over that nation, and many, by the power
and Spirit of God, were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour
and teacher, whose blood was shed for them; and there is since a great
increase, and great there will be in Scotland. For when first I set my
horse’s feet upon Scottish ground, I felt the seed of God to sparkle
about me, like innumerable sparks of fire. Not but that there is
abundance of thick, cloddy earth of hypocrisy and falseness above, and a
briery, brambly nature, which is to be burnt up with God’s Word, and
ploughed up with his spiritual plough, before God’s Seed brings forth
heavenly and spiritual fruit to his glory. But the husbandman is to wait
in patience.




                              CHAPTER XII.

1657-1659.—George Fox journeys from Scotland to England—dissuades a
    person from setting up a college at Durham to make ministers—has a
    meeting with Rice Jones and his people—attends a general Yearly
    Meeting for the whole nation, held at John Crook’s, which continued
    three days—address to Friends in the ministry—disputes with a
    Jesuit—writes to Lady Claypole—writes to Cromwell respecting the
    fast on account of persecution abroad, whilst there was much of it
    at home—writes a reproof to Parliament for their hypocrisy—speaks to
    the Protector in Hampton-Court Park about Friends’ sufferings—the
    Protector invites Fox to his house—he goes next day, but the
    Protector being sick he does not see him—the Protector died soon
    after—writes to encourage Friends to faithfulness—has a foresight of
    the King’s restoration long before the event occurred, as well as
    several others—Friends are disseized of their copyhold lands for
    refusing to swear—cautions Friends to avoid plots, &c.—against
    bearing arms—great places in the army are offered to Friends, but
    invariably refused—priest Townsend fails to substantiate his charge
    of error and blasphemy against George Fox, and is signally
    defeated—George Fox’s vision of the city of London is realized—he
    gives a final warning to those in authority before their overthrow.


From Dunbar we came to BERWICK, where we were questioned a little by the
officers: but the governor was loving towards us; and in the evening we
had a little meeting, in which the power of the Lord was manifested over
all.

Leaving Berwick, we came to MORPETH, and so through the country,
visiting Friends, to NEWCASTLE, where I had been once before. The
Newcastle priests had written many books against us; and one Ledger, an
alderman of the town, was very envious against truth and Friends. He and
the priests had said, “the Quakers would not come into any great towns,
but lived in the Fells, like butterflies.” So I took Anthony Pearson
with me, and went to this Ledger, and several others of the aldermen,
“desiring to have a meeting amongst them, seeing they had written so
many books against us, for we were now come, I told them, into their
great town.” But they would not allow we should have a meeting, neither
would they be spoken to withal, save only this Ledger and one other. I
queried, “had they not called Friends butterflies, and said, we would
not come into any great towns? and now we were come into their town,
they would not hear us, though they had printed books against us; ‘Who
are the butterflies now?’” said I. Then Ledger began to plead for the
Sabbath-day; but I told him they kept markets and fairs on that which
was the Sabbath-day, for that was the seventh day of the week; whereas
that day, which the professed Christians now met on, and call their
Sabbath, is the first day of the week. As we could not have a public
meeting among them, we got a little one among Friends and friendly
people, at Gateshead; where a meeting is continued to this day, in the
name of Jesus. As I was passing by the market-place, the power of the
Lord rose in me, “to warn them of the day of the Lord, that was coming
upon them.” And not long after, all those priests of Newcastle and their
profession, were turned out, when the king came in.

From Newcastle we travelled through the countries, having meetings and
visiting Friends as we went, in Northumberland and Durham. A very good
one we had at Lieutenant Dove’s, where many were turned to the Lord and
his teaching. After the meeting I went to visit a justice of peace, a
very sober, loving man, who confessed to the truth.

Thence we came to DURHAM, where was a man come from London, to set up a
college there, to make ministers of Christ, as they said. I went, with
some others, to reason with him, and to let him see, “that to teach men
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and the seven arts, which were all but the
teachings of the natural man, was not the way to make them ministers of
Christ. For the languages began at Babel; and to the Greeks, that spoke
Greek, as their mother-tongue, the preaching of the cross of Christ was
foolishness; and to the Jews, that spoke Hebrew as their mother-tongue,
Christ was a stumbling-block. The Romans, who had the Latin, persecuted
the Christians; and Pilate, one of the Roman governors, set Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin over Christ, when he crucified him. So he might see the
many languages began at Babel, and they set them above Christ, the Word,
when they crucified him. John the divine, who preached the Word, that
was in the beginning, said, ‘that the beast and the whore have power
over tongues and languages, and they are as waters.’ Thus I told him he
might see, the whore and beast have power over the tongues and the many
languages which are in mystery Babylon; for they began at Babel; and the
persecutors of Christ Jesus set them over him, when he was crucified by
them; but he is risen above them all, who was before them all. ‘Now,’
said I, to this man, ‘dost thou think to make ministers of Christ by
these natural, confused languages, which sprung from Babel, are admired
in Babylon, and set above Christ, the Life, by a persecutor?’ O no!” The
man confessed to many of these things. Then we showed him further, “that
Christ made his ministers himself, gave gifts unto them, and bid them
‘pray to the Lord of the harvest, to send forth labourers.’ And Peter
and John, though unlearned and ignorant (as to school-learning) preached
Christ Jesus, the Word, which was in the beginning, before Babel was.
Paul also was made an apostle, not of man, nor by man, neither received
he the gospel from man, but from Jesus Christ, who is the same now, and
so is his gospel, as it was at that day.” When we had thus discoursed
with the man, he became very loving and tender; and, after he had
considered further of it, declined to set up his college.

From Durham we went to Anthony Pearson’s: thence into CLEVELAND, passed
through Yorkshire to the further end of HOLDERNESS, and had mighty
meetings, the Lord’s power accompanying us.

After we left Anthony Pearson’s, we went by HULL and PONTEFRACT, to
George Watkinson’s house, and visited most of the meetings in those
parts, till we came to SCALE-HOUSE, and so to SWARTHMORE; the
everlasting power and arm of God carrying us through and preserving us.
After I had visited Friends thereaways, I passed into Yorkshire again,
and Cheshire, and so through other counties into Derbyshire and
Nottinghamshire: glorious meetings we had, the Lord’s presence being
with us.

At NOTTINGHAM I sent to Rice Jones, desiring him to make his people
acquainted, that I had something to say to them from the Lord. He came
and told me, “many of them lived in the country, and he could not tell
how to send to them.” I told him, “he might acquaint those about the
town of it, and send to as many in the country as he could.” Next day we
met at the castle, there being about fourscore people, to whom I
declared the truth for about two hours; and the Lord’s power was over
them all, so that they were not able to open their mouths in opposition.
When I had done, one of them asked me a question, which I was loath to
answer, for I saw it might lead to dispute, and I was unwilling to go
into jangling, for some of the people were tender; yet I could not well
tell how to escape it. Wherefore I answered the question, and was moved
forthwith to speak to Rice Jones, and lay before him, “that he had been
the man that had scattered such as had been tender, and some that had
been convinced, and had been led out of many vanities of the world,
which he had formerly judged; but now he judged the power of God in
them, and they, being simple, turned to him; and so he and they were
turned to be vainer than the world: for many of his followers were
become the greatest foot-ball players and wrestlers in the country. I
told him, it was the serpent in him, that had scattered, and done hurt
to such as were tender towards the Lord. Nevertheless, if he waited in
the fear of God, for the Seed of the woman, Christ Jesus, to bruise the
serpent’s head in him, that had scattered and done the hurt, he might
come to gather them again by this heavenly Seed; though it would be a
hard work for him to gather them again out of those vanities he had led
them into.” At this Rice Jones said, “Thou liest, it is not the Seed of
the woman that bruises the serpent’s head.” “No!” said I, “what is it
then?” “I say it is the law,” said he. “But,” said I, “the Scripture,
speaking of the Seed of the woman, saith, ‘It shall bruise thy head, and
thou shalt bruise his heel.’ Now, hath the law an heel,” said I, “to be
bruised?” Then Rice Jones and all his company were at a stand, and I was
moved in the power of the Lord to speak to him, and say, “This Seed,
Jesus Christ, the Seed of the woman, which should bruise the serpent’s
head, shall bruise thy head, and break you all to pieces.” Thus did I
leave on the heads of them the Seed, Christ; and not long after he and
his company scattered to pieces, several of whom came to be Friends, and
stand to this day. Many of them had been convinced about eight years
before, but had been led aside by this Rice Jones; for they denied the
inward cross, the power of God, and so went into vanity.

It was about eight years since I had been formerly amongst them; in
which time I was to pass over them, and by them, seeing they had
slighted the Lord’s truth and power, and the visitation of his love unto
them. But now I was moved to go to them again, and it was of great
service, for many of them were brought to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
were settled upon him, sitting down under his teaching and feeding,
where they were kept fresh and green; and the others that would not be
gathered to him, soon after withered. This was that Rice Jones who some
years before had said, “I was then at the highest, and should fall.”
But, poor man! he little thought how near his own fall was.

We left Nottingham, and went into WARWICKSHIRE, and thence passing
through some parts of NORTHAMPTONSHIRE and LEICESTERSHIRE, visiting
Friends, and having meetings with them as we travelled, came into
BEDFORDSHIRE, where we had large gatherings in the name of Jesus. After
some time we came to John Crook’s house, where a general YEARLY MEETING
for the whole nation was appointed to be held.[57] This meeting lasted
three days, and many Friends from most parts of the nation came to it;
so that the inns and towns around were filled, for many thousands of
people were at it. And although there was some disturbance by rude
people that had run out from truth; yet the Lord’s power came over all,
and a glorious meeting it was. The everlasting gospel was preached, and
many received it, which brought life and immortality to light in them,
and shined over all.

Footnote 57:

  The first Yearly Meeting of the Society appears to have been held in
  1658, at Scalehouse, about three miles from Skipton. At that meeting
  the subject of the visit of Friends “beyond the sea,” claimed much
  attention, and it was agreed to recommend a general collection in aid
  of these gospel missions. An epistle was issued to that effect, and
  the appeal was liberally responded to, and considering the value of
  money at that period, a large amount was raised. The epistle, with
  particulars of the collection and its disbursement, may be seen in
  Bowden’s _History of Friends in America_, vol. i., p. 58-60.

  Yearly Meetings were held in different parts of England to the number
  of twenty-six, at which were reported the number of prisoners; the
  various sufferings on account of the Truth; those who died for it; and
  the number of ministers deceased. The affairs of truth were also
  considered, and the members of the church had blessed opportunities of
  heavenly correspondence and fellowship, one with another. For full
  particulars of the setting up of General and Yearly Meetings, and of
  the institution and objects of the Discipline in the Society, see
  _Letters, &c., of Early Friends_, part ii., pp. 275-353.

I was moved by the power and Spirit of the Lord, to open unto them “the
promise of God, that it was made to the Seed, not to seeds, as many, but
to One, which Seed was Christ; and that all people, both male and
female, should feel this Seed in them, which was heir of the promise;
that so they might all witness Christ in them, the hope of glory, the
mystery, which had been hid from ages and generations, which was
revealed to the apostles, and is revealed again now, after this long
night of apostacy. So that all might come up into this Seed, Christ
Jesus, and walk in it, and sit down together in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, who was the foundation of the prophets and apostles, and
the rock of ages; and is our foundation now. All sitting down in him,
sit down in the substance, the first and the last, that changes not, the
Seed that bruises the serpent’s head, and was before he was; who ends
all types, figures, and shadows, and is the substance of them all; in
whom there is no shadow.” Now these things were upon me to open unto
all, that they might mind and see what it is they sit down in.

“For, First, They that sit down in Adam in the fall, sit down in misery,
in death, in darkness, and corruption.

“Secondly, They that sit down in types, figures, and shadows, and under
the first priesthood, law, and covenant, sit down in that which must
have an end, and which made nothing perfect.

“Thirdly, They that sit down in the apostacy, that hath got up since the
apostles’ days, sit down in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, and are drinking
of the whore’s cup, under the beast’s and dragon’s power.

“Fourthly, They that sit down in the state in which Adam was before he
fell, sit down in that which may be fallen from; for he fell from that
state, though it was perfect.

“Fifthly, They that sit down in the prophets, sit down in that which
must be fulfilled; and they that sit down in the fellowship of water,
bread, and wine, these being temporal things, sit down in that which is
short of Christ, and of his baptism.

“Sixthly, To sit down in a profession of all the Scriptures, from
Genesis to Revelations, and not to be in the power and Spirit which they
were in, that gave them forth; that was to be turned away from, by them
that came into the power and Spirit which they were in that gave forth
the Scriptures.

“Seventhly, They that sit down in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, sit
down in him that never fell nor ever changed. Here is the safe sitting
for all his elect, his church, his spiritual members, of which he is the
living head, his living stones, the household of faith; of which house
he is the corner-stone, that stands and abides all weathers. ‘For,’ as
the apostle said, ‘he hath quickened us, who were dead in sins and
trespasses, &c., and made us to sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus; that in ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of
his grace, in his kindness towards us through Jesus Christ.’ Now, the
ages are come, that his kindness and exceeding riches towards us through
Jesus Christ, are truly manifested in us, as in the apostles’ days, even
in us, who have been dead in sins and trespasses as they were, but now
are quickened, and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, the First and the Last, by whom all things were created; who is
ascended above all, and is over all, and whose glorious presence is now
known. All that sit down here in Christ Jesus, see where all other
people sit, and in what.

“The promise of God being to the Seed, which is one, Christ Jesus, every
man and woman must come to witness this Seed, _Christ in them_, that
they may be heirs of the promise; and inheriting that, they will inherit
substance. These things were largely declared of; the state of the
church, the state of the false church since the apostles’ days, opened;
and how the true church fled into the wilderness; and the state of the
false prophets, which Christ said should come, and John saw were come,
and how all the world wondered after them; how they had filled the world
with false doctrines, ways, worships, and religions; and how the
everlasting gospel was now preached again to all nations, kindreds,
tongues, and people; for all they had drunk the whore’s cup, and she was
over them, and sat upon them. In this night of apostacy, the pure
religion and worship in Spirit, which was in the apostles’ days, the way
of life and living faith, and the power and Holy Ghost were lost; but
now they came to be set up again by Christ Jesus, his messengers and
ministers of the gospel, as in the apostles’ days. For as Christ sent
his disciples to go and preach the gospel in all the world, and after
that the false prophets and antichrists went over the world, and
preached their false doctrines and traditions, and heathenish and Jewish
rudiments: so now again, the everlasting gospel must be preached to all
nations, and to every creature, that they may come into the pure
religion, to worship God in Spirit and in truth, that they may know
Christ Jesus, their way to God, and him to be the author of their faith,
and receive the gospel from heaven, and not from men; in which gospel,
received from heaven, is the heavenly fellowship, which is a mystery to
all the fellowships in the world.” Now after these things had been
largely opened, with many other things concerning Christ Jesus and his
kingdom, and the people were turned to the divine light of Christ, and
his Spirit, by which they might come both to know God and Christ, and
the Scriptures, and to have fellowship with them, and one with another
in the same Spirit, I was moved to declare and open many other things to
those Friends who had received a part of the ministry, concerning the
exercise of their spiritual gifts in the church; which, being taken in
writing by one that was present, was after this manner:—

        “FRIENDS,

  “Take heed of destroying that which ye have begotten; for that which
  destroys, goes out, and is the cast-away. And though that be true,
  yea, and may be the pure truth which such a one speaks, yet if he doth
  not remain in that, and live in that in his own particular, but goes
  out, the same which he is gone out from, cometh over him. So that
  which calms and cools the spirits, goes over the world, and brings to
  the Father, to inherit the life eternal: and reaches to the spirits in
  prison in all. Therefore in the living, immoveable word of the Lord
  God dwell, and in the renown thereof; and remain on the foundation
  that is pure, and that is sure: for whosoever goes out from the pure,
  and ministers not in and from that, comes to an end, and doth not
  remain; though he may have had a time, and may have been serviceable
  for a time, while he lived in the thing.

  “Take heed of many words; what reacheth to the life, settles in the
  life. That which cometh from the life, and is received from God,
  reaches to the life, and settles others in the life: for the work is
  not now as it was at first; the work now is, to settle and stay in the
  life. For as Friends have been led to minister in the power, and the
  power hath gone through, so that there hath grown an understanding
  among both people of the world and Friends; so Friends must be kept in
  the life which is pure, that with that they may answer the pure life
  of God in others. If Friends do not live in the pure life which they
  speak of, to answer the life in those they speak to, the other part
  steps in; and so there comes up an outward acquaintance, and such let
  that come over them. But as every one is kept living in the life of
  God, over all that which is contrary, they are in their places; then
  they do not lay hands on any suddenly, which is the danger now; for if
  any one do, he may lose his discerning, and may lay hands on the wrong
  part, and so let the deceit come too near him; and the deceit will
  steal over, so that it will be a hard thing for him to overcome it.
  There is no one who strikes his fellow-servants, but first he is gone
  from the pure in his own particular; for when he goeth from the light
  he is enlightened withal, then he strikes; and then he hath his
  reward; the light which he is gone from, Christ, comes and gives him
  his reward. This is the state of the evil servants; the boisterous,
  the hasty, and rash, beget nothing to God; but the life, which doth
  reach the life, is that which begets to God. When all are settled in
  the life, they are in that which remains for ever: and what is
  received there, is received from the Lord; and what one receiveth from
  the Lord, he keepeth; and so he sitteth still, and cool, and quiet in
  his own spirit, and gives it forth as he is moved; but to the harlots,
  judgment.

  “Friends, this is the word of the Lord to you all, be watchful and
  careful in all meetings ye come into; for where Friends are sitting
  together in silence, they are many times gathered into their own
  measures. When a man is come newly out of the world, from ministering
  to the world’s people, he cometh out of the mire; and then he had need
  take heed that he be not rash. For now, when he comes into a silent
  meeting, that is another state; then he must come, and feel his own
  spirit, how it is, when he comes to them that sit silent. If he be
  rash, they will judge him, that having been in the world, and amongst
  the world, the heat is not yet off him. For he may come in the heat of
  his spirit out of the world; whereas the others are still and cool;
  and his condition in that not being agreeable to theirs, he may rather
  do them hurt, by begetting them out of the cool state into the heating
  state, if he be not in that which commands his own spirit, and gives
  him to know it.

  “There is a great danger too in travelling abroad in the world. The
  same power that moves any to go forth, is that which must keep them.
  For it is the greatest danger to go abroad, except a man be moved of
  the Lord, and go in the power of the Lord; for then, he keeping in the
  power, is kept by it in his journey, and in his work; and it will
  enable him to answer the transgressed, and keep above the
  transgressor. Every one feeling the danger to his own particular in
  travelling abroad, there the pure fear of the Lord will be placed, and
  kept in. Though they that travel may have openings when they are
  abroad, to minister to others, yet, for their own particular growth,
  they must dwell in the life which doth open; and that will keep down
  that which would boast. For the minister comes into the death to that
  which is in the death and in prison, and so returns up again into the
  life, and into the power, and into the wisdom, to preserve him clean.

  “This is the word of the Lord God to you all; feel that ye stand in
  the presence of the Lord: for every man’s word shall be his burden;
  but the Word of the Lord is pure, and answers the pure in everyone.
  The Word of the Lord is that which was in the beginning, and brings to
  the beginning. It is a hammer, to beat down the transgressor (not the
  transgressed), and as a fire to burn up that which is contrary to it.
  Friends, come into that which is over all the spirits of the world,
  fathoms all the spirits of the world, and stands in the patience; with
  that, ye may see where others stand, and reach that which is of God in
  everyone. Here is no strife, no contention, out of transgression; for
  he that goeth into strife, and into contention, is from the pure
  Spirit. For where any goeth into contention, if anything hath been
  begotten by him before, then that contentious nature doth get a-head,
  spoileth that which was begotten, and quencheth his own prophesying.
  So if that which would arise into strife, be not subjected by the
  power in the particular, that is dangerous.

  “If any have a moving to any place, and have spoken what they were
  moved of the Lord, let them return unto their habitation again, and
  live in the pure life of God, and in the fear of the Lord; so will ye
  be kept in the life—in the solid and seasoned spirit, and preach as
  well in life, as with words (for none must be light or wild). For the
  Seed of God is weighty, brings to be solid, and leads into the wisdom
  of God, by which the wisdom of the creation is known. But if that part
  be up, which runs into imaginations, and that part be standing, in
  which the imaginations come up, and the pure spirit be not thoroughly
  come up to rule and reign, then that will run out, that will glory,
  boast, and vapour; and so will such a one spoil that which opened to
  him: this is for condemnation. Let every one mind that, which feels
  through and commands his spirit, whereby every one may know what
  spirit he is of; for he should first try his own spirit, and then he
  may try others; he should first know his own spirit, and then he may
  know others. Therefore that which doth command all these spirits,
  where the heats and burnings come in and get up, in that wait, which
  chains them down and cools: that is the elect, the heir of the promise
  of God. For no hasty, rash, brittle spirits (though they have
  prophecies) have held out, and gone through, they not being subjected
  in the prophecy. The earthly will not abide, for it is brittle; and in
  that state the ministry was another’s, not the Son’s; for the Son hath
  life in himself, and the Son hath the power, which man being obedient
  to, he may be serviceable; but if he go from the pure power, he falls,
  and abuses it. Therefore let your faith stand in the pure power of the
  Lord God, and do not abuse it; but let that search through, and work
  through; and let every one stand in the power of the Lord, which
  reacheth the seed of God; which is the heir of the promise of life
  without end. Let none be hasty to speak; for ye have time enough, and
  with an eye ye may reach the witness: neither let any be backward when
  ye are moved; for that brings destruction.

  “Now, truth hath an honour in the hearts of those who are not Friends;
  so that all Friends being kept in the truth, they are kept in the
  honour, they are honourable, for that will honour them; but if any
  lose the power, they lose the life, they lose their crown, they lose
  their honour, they lose the cross, which should crucify them, and they
  crucify the just; and by losing the power, the Lamb comes to be slain.
  And as it is here, so will it be in other nations; for all Friends,
  here and there, are as one family; the seed, the plants, they are as a
  family. Now all being kept in that which subjects all, and keeps all
  under, to wit, the Seed itself, the life itself, that is the heir of
  the promise; that is the bond of peace; for there is the unity in the
  Spirit with God, and with one another. For he that is kept in the
  life, hears God, and sees man’s condition; and with that he answers
  the life in others, that hear God also; thus one Friend that is come
  into that, comprehends the world. But that which Friends speak, they
  must live in; so may they expect, that others may come into that which
  they speak, to live in the same. For the power of the Lord God hath
  been abused by some, and the worth of truth hath not been minded;
  there hath been a trampling on, and marring with the feet, and that
  abuseth the power. But now every Friend is to keep in the power, and
  to take heed to it; for that must be kept down, which would trample
  and mar with the feet, and the pure life and power of God is to be
  lived in over that, that none with the feet may foul or mar, but every
  one may be kept in the pure power and life of the Lord. Then the water
  of life cometh in; then he that ministereth, drinketh himself, and
  giveth others to drink.

  “When any shall be moved to go and speak in a steeple-house or market,
  turn in to that which moves, and be obedient to it, that that which
  would not go, may be kept down; for that which would not go, will be
  apt to get up. And take heed on the other hand, that the lavishing
  part do not get up, for it is a bad savour; therefore that must be
  kept down, and be kept subject. Wait in the light of the Lord, that ye
  may be all kept in the wisdom of God. For when the Seed is up in every
  particular, there is no danger; but when there is an opening and
  prophecy, and the power stirs before the seed comes up, then there is
  something that will be apt to run out rashly; there is the danger, and
  there must be the patience in the fear. For it is a weighty thing to
  be in the work of the ministry of the Lord God, and to go forth in
  that. It is not as a customary preaching; but it is to bring people to
  the end of all outward preaching. For when ye have declared the truth
  to the people, and they have received it, and are come into that which
  ye speak of, the uttering of many words, and long declarations out of
  the life, may beget them into a form. And if any should run on rashly
  into words again, without the savour of life, then they that are come
  into the thing that he spoke of, will judge him; whereby he may hurt
  again that which he had raised up before. So Friends, ye must all come
  into the thing that is spoken in the openings of the heavenly life
  among you, and walk in the love of God, that ye may answer the thing
  spoken to.

  “And take heed all of running into inordinate affections; for when
  people come to own you, there is danger of the wrong part getting up.
  There was a strife among the disciples of Christ, who should be the
  greatest; Christ told them, ‘The heathen exercise lordship, and have
  dominion over one another; but it shall not be so among you.’ For
  Christ the Seed was to come up in every one of them; so then, where is
  the greatest? for that part in the disciples which looked to be the
  greatest, was the same that was in the Gentiles. But as any one comes
  here, to live in the word that sanctified him, having the heart
  sanctified, the tongue and lips sanctified, living in the word of
  wisdom that makes clean the heart, and reconciles to God, all things
  being upheld by the Word and power;—as there is an abiding in the Word
  of God, that upholds times and seasons, and gives all things increase,
  and a dwelling in the Word of wisdom; if there be but two or three
  agreed in this on earth, it shall be done for them in heaven. So in
  this must all things be ordered by the Word of wisdom and power, that
  upholds all things, the times and the seasons, that are in the
  Father’s hand, to the glory of God, whereby his blessing may be felt
  among you; and this brings to the beginning. So this is the word of
  the Lord God to you all, Keep down, keep low, that nothing may rule or
  reign in you, but life itself.

  “Now, the power being lived in, the cross is lived in; and wherever
  Friends come in this, they draw the power and the life over; they
  leave a witness behind them, answering the witness of God in others.
  And where this is lived in, there is no want of wisdom, of power, of
  knowledge; but he that ministereth in this, seeth with the eye which
  the Lord openeth in him, what is for the fire, and what for the sword,
  what must be fed with judgment, and what be nourished. This brings all
  down, and to be low, every one keeping to the power; for let a man get
  up ever so high, yet he must come down again to the power, where he
  left; what he went from, he must come down again to that. Before all
  these wicked spirits be got down, which are rambling abroad, Friends
  must have patience, must wait in patience, in the cool life; and he
  who is in this, doing the work of the Lord, hath the tasting and the
  feeling of the Lamb’s power and authority. Therefore all Friends, keep
  cool and quiet in the power of the Lord God; and all that is contrary
  will be subjected; the Lamb hath the victory, in the Seed, through the
  patience.

  “If any have been moved to speak, and have quenched that which moved
  them, let none such go forth afterwards into words, until they feel
  the power arise and move them thereto again; for after the first
  motion is quenched, the other part will be apt to get up; and if any
  go forth in that, he goeth forth in his own, and the betrayer will
  come into that. And all Friends, be careful not to meddle with the
  powers of the earth; but keep out of all such things; and as ye keep
  in the Lamb’s authority, ye will answer that of God in them, and bring
  them to do justice, which is the end of the law. Keep out of all
  jangling; for all that are in the transgression, are out from the law
  of love, but all that are in the law of love, come to the Lamb’s
  power, in the Lamb’s authority, who is the end of the law outward. For
  the law being added because of transgression, Christ, who was
  glorified with the Father, before the world began, is the end of the
  law, bringing them that live in the law of life, to live over all
  transgression; which every one must feel in himself.”

More was then spoken to many of these particulars, which was not taken
at large as delivered.

After this meeting was over, and most of the Friends were gone away, as
I was walking in John Crook’s garden, there came a party of horse, with
a constable to seize me. I heard them ask “who was in the house,” and
somebody answered, “I was there.” They said, “I was the man they looked
for;” and went forthwith into the house, where they had many words with
John Crook, and some few Friends that were with him. But the Lord’s
power so confounded them, that they never came into the garden to look
for me, but went their way in a rage. When I came into the house,
Friends were very glad to see them so confounded, and that I had escaped
them. Next day I passed thence, and after I had visited Friends in
several places as I went, came to LONDON, the Lord’s power accompanying
me, and bearing me up in his service.

I had not been long in London, before I heard that a Jesuit, who came
over with an ambassador from Spain, had challenged all the Quakers to
dispute with them at the Earl of Newport’s house:[58] whereupon Friends
let him know that some would meet him. Then he sent us word “he would
meet with twelve of the wisest and most learned men we had:” a while
after he sent us word “he would meet with but six;” and after that, he
sent us word again, “he would have but three to come.” We hastened what
we could, lest, after all his great boast, he should put it quite off at
last. When we were come to the house, I bid Nicholas Bond and Edward
Burrough go up, and enter into discourse with him; and I would walk a
while in the yard, and then come up after them. I advised them to state
this question to him, Whether or not the church of Rome, as it now
stood, was not degenerated from the true church, which was in the
primitive times, from the life and doctrine, and from the power and
Spirit that they were in? They stated the question accordingly; and the
Jesuit affirmed, “that the church of Rome now was in the virginity and
purity of the primitive church.” By this time I was come to them. Then
we asked him, “whether they had the Holy Ghost poured out upon them, as
the apostles had?” He said, “No.” “Then,” said I, “if ye have not the
same Holy Ghost poured forth upon you, and the same power and Spirit
that the apostles had, then ye are degenerated from the power and Spirit
which the primitive church was in.” There needed little more to be said
to that.

Footnote 58:

  The Earl of Newport, it would appear, was very favourably inclined
  towards Friends. In a letter from E. Burrough to F. Howgill, 4th of
  7th Month [9th Month] 1658, he observes, “This night, at Woodcock’s,
  at the meeting, was the Earl of Newport; he is truly loving to us.” In
  the same letter, E. Burrough says, “Truth spreads and grows. The Earl
  of Pembroke has been with us; there is a principle of God stirring in
  him.”

Then I asked him, “what Scripture they had for setting up cloisters for
nuns, abbeys and monasteries for men, for all their several orders; and
for their praying by beads, and to images; for making crosses, for
forbidding meats and marriages, and for putting people to death for
religion? If,” said I, “ye are in the practice of the primitive church,
in its purity and virginity, then let us see by Scriptures, wherever
they practised any such things.” (For it was agreed on both hands, that
we should make good by Scriptures what we said.) Then he told us of a
written word, and an unwritten word. I asked him “what he called his
unwritten word:” he said, “The written word is the Scriptures, and the
unwritten word is that which the apostles spoke by word of mouth;
which,” said he, “are all those traditions that we practise.” I bid him
prove that by Scripture. Then he brought the Scripture, where the
apostle says (2 Thess. ii. 5), “When I was with you, I told you these
things.” “That is,” said he, “I told you of nunneries, and monasteries,
and of putting to death for religion, and of praying by beads, and to
images, and all the rest of the practices of the church of Rome, which,”
he said, “was the unwritten word of the apostles, which they told then,
and have since been continued down by tradition unto these times.” Then
“I desired him to read that Scripture again, that he might see how he
had perverted the apostle’s words; for that which he there tells the
Thessalonians ‘he had told them before,’ is not an unwritten word, but
is there written down, namely, that the man of sin, the son of
perdition, shall be revealed, before that great and terrible day of
Christ, which he was writing of, should come: so this was not telling
them any of those things that the church of Rome practises. In like
manner the apostle, in the third chapter of that epistle, tells the
church of some disorderly persons, he heard were amongst them,
busy-bodies, who did not work at all; concerning whom he had commanded
them by his unwritten word, when he was among them, that if any would
not work, neither should he eat; which now he commands them again in his
written word in this epistle, 2 Thess. iii. So this Scripture afforded
no proof for their invented traditions; and he had no other
Scripture-proof to offer.” Therefore I told him, “this was another
degeneration of their church into such inventions and traditions as the
apostles and primitive saints never practised.”

After this he came to his sacrament of the altar, beginning at the
paschal-lamb, and the shew-bread; and so came to the words of Christ,
“This is my body,” and to what the apostle wrote of it to the
Corinthians; concluding, “that after the priest had consecrated the
bread and wine, it was immortal and divine, and he that received it,
received the whole Christ.” I followed him through the Scriptures he
brought, till I came to Christ’s words and the apostle’s; and I showed
him “that the same apostle told the Corinthians, after they had taken
bread and wine in remembrance of Christ’s death, that they were
reprobates, if Christ was not _in_ them: but if the bread they ate was
Christ, he must of necessity be in them, after they had eaten it.
Besides, if this bread and this wine, which the Corinthians ate and
drank, was Christ’s body, then how hath Christ a body in heaven?” I
observed to him also, “that both the disciples at the supper, and the
Corinthians afterwards, were to eat the bread, and drink the wine in
‘remembrance of Christ,’ and to show forth his death, till he come;
which plainly proves, the bread and wine which they took was not his
body. For if it had been his real body that they ate, then he had been
come, and was then there present; and it had been improper to have done
such a thing in remembrance of him, if he had been then present with
them; as he must have been, if that bread and wine, which they ate and
drank, had been his real body.” Then as to those words of Christ, “This
is my body,” I told him Christ calls himself a vine, and a door, and is
called in Scripture a rock; “Is Christ therefore an outward rock, door,
or vine?” “O” said the Jesuit, “those words are to be interpreted:”
“So,” said I, “are those words of Christ, ‘this is my body.’”

Now having stopped his mouth as to argument, I made the Jesuit a
proposal thus: “That seeing,” he said “the bread and wine was immortal
and divine, and the very Christ, and that whosoever received it,
received the whole Christ; let a meeting be appointed between some of
them (whom the Pope and his cardinals should appoint) and some of us;
and let a bottle of wine and a loaf of bread be brought, and divided
each into two parts, and let them consecrate which of those parts they
would. And then set the consecrated and the unconsecrated bread and wine
in a safe place, with a sure watch upon it, and let trial thus be made,
Whether the consecrated bread and wine would not lose its goodness, and
the bread grow dry and mouldy, and the wine turn dead and sour, as well
and as soon as that which was unconsecrated. By this means, said I, the
truth of this matter may be made manifest. And if the consecrated bread
and wine change not, but retain their savour and goodness, this may be a
means to draw many to your church: if they change, decay, and lose their
goodness, then ought you to confess, and forsake your error, and shed no
more blood about it: for much blood hath been shed about these things,
as in Queen Mary’s days.” To this the Jesuit made this reply: “Take,”
said he, “a piece of new cloth, and cut it into two pieces, and make two
garments of it; and put one of them upon king David’s back, and the
other upon a beggar’s, and the one garment shall wear away as well as
the other.” “Is this thy answer?” said I; “Yes,” said he. “Then,” said
I, “by this the company may all be satisfied that your consecrated bread
and wine is not Christ. Have ye told people so long that the consecrated
bread and wine was immortal and divine, and that it was the very and
real body and blood of Christ, and dost thou now say it will wear away,
or decay, as well as the other? I must tell thee, Christ remains the
same to-day as yesterday, and never decays! but is the saints’ heavenly
food in all generations, through which they have life.” He replied no
more to this, being willing to let it fall; for the people that were
present saw his error, and that he could not defend it.

Then I asked him “why their church persecuted and put people to death
for religion.” He replied, “it was not the church that did it, but the
magistrates.” I asked him “whether those magistrates were not counted
and called believers and Christians.” He said, “Yes:” “Why then,” said
I, “are they not members of your church?” “Yes,” said he. Then I left it
to the people to judge from his own concessions, whether the church of
Rome doth not persecute, and put people to death for religion. Thus we
parted; and his subtilty was comprehended by simplicity.

During the time I was at London, many services lay upon me; for it was a
time of much suffering. I was moved to write to Oliver Cromwell, and lay
before him the sufferings of Friends, both in this nation and in
Ireland. There was also a rumour about this time of making Cromwell
king: whereupon I was moved to go to him, and warned him against it, and
of divers dangers; which, if he did not avoid, “he would bring a shame
and ruin upon himself and his posterity.” He seemed to take well what I
said to him, and thanked me: yet afterwards I was moved to write to him
more fully concerning that matter.

About this time the Lady Claypole[59] (so called) was sick and much
troubled in mind, and could receive no comfort from any that came to
her; which when I heard of, I was moved to write to her the following
letter:—

        “FRIEND,

  “Be still and cool in thy own mind and spirit from thy own thoughts,
  and then thou wilt feel the principle of God to turn thy mind to the
  Lord, from whom cometh life; whereby thou mayest receive his strength
  and power to allay all storms, and tempests. That is it which works up
  into patience, innocency, soberness, into stillness, staidness,
  quietness up to God, with his power. Therefore mind; that is the word
  of the Lord God unto thee, that thou mayest feel the authority of God,
  and thy faith in that, to work down that which troubles thee; for that
  is it which keeps peace, and brings up the witness in thee, which hath
  been transgressed, to feel after God with his power and life, who is a
  God of order and peace. When thou art in the transgression of the life
  of God in thy own particular, the mind flies up in the air, the
  creature is led into the night, nature goes out of its course, an old
  garment goes on, and an uppermost clothing; and thy nature being led
  out of its course, it comes to be all on fire, in the transgression;
  and that defaceth the glory of the first body. Therefore be still a
  while from thy own thoughts, searching, seeking, desires, and
  imaginations, and be staid in the principle of God in thee, that it
  may raise thy mind up to God, and stay it upon God, and thou wilt find
  strength from him, and find him to be a God at hand, a present help in
  the time of trouble, and of need. And thou being come to the principle
  of God, which hath been transgressed, it will keep thee humble; and
  the humble, God will teach his way, which is peace, and such he doth
  exalt. Now as the principle of God in thee hath been transgressed,
  come to it, that it may keep thy mind down low to the Lord God; and
  deny thyself; for from thy own will, that is, the earthly, thou must
  be kept. Then thou wilt feel the power of God, which will bring nature
  into its course, and give thee to see the glory of the first body.
  There the wisdom of God will be received, which is Christ, by which
  all things were made and created, and thou wilt thereby be preserved
  and ordered to God’s glory. There thou wilt come to receive and feel
  the physician of value, who clothes people in their right mind,
  whereby they may serve God, and do his will. For all distractions,
  unruliness, and confusion are in the transgression; which
  transgression must be brought down, before the principle of God, which
  hath been transgressed against, be lifted up: whereby the mind may be
  seasoned, and stilled, and a right understanding of the Lord may be
  received; whereby his blessings enter, and are felt, over all that is
  contrary, in the power of the Lord God, which raises up the principle
  of God within, gives a feeling after God, and in time gives dominion.
  Therefore, keep in the fear of the Lord God; that is the word of the
  Lord unto thee. For all these things happen to thee for thy good, and
  for the good of those concerned for thee, to make you know yourselves,
  and your own weakness, and that ye may know the Lord’s strength and
  power, and may trust in him.

  “Let the time that is past be sufficient to every one, who in anything
  hath been lifted up in transgression out of the power of the Lord; for
  he can bring down and abase the mighty, and lay them in the dust of
  the earth. Therefore, all keep low in his fear, that thereby ye may
  receive the secrets of God and his wisdom, may know the shadow of the
  Almighty, and sit under it, in all tempests, and storms, and heats.
  For God is at hand, and the Most High rules in the children of men.
  This then is the word of the Lord God unto you all; whatever
  temptations, distractions, confusions, the light doth make manifest
  and discover, do not look at these temptations, confusions,
  corruptions; but look at the light, which discovers them, and makes
  them manifest; and with the same light you may feel over them, to
  receive power to stand against them. The same light which lets you see
  sin and transgression, will let you see the covenant of God, which
  blots out your sin and transgression, which gives victory and dominion
  over it, and brings into covenant with God. For looking down at sin,
  and corruption, and distraction, ye are swallowed up in it: but
  looking at the light, which discovers them, ye will see over them.
  That will give victory; and ye will find grace and strength: there is
  the first step to peace. That will bring salvation; by it ye may see
  to the beginning, and the ‘glory that was with the Father before the
  world began;’ and so come to know the Seed of God, which is the heir
  of the promise of God, and of the world which hath no end; which
  bruises the head of the serpent, who stops people from coming to God.
  That ye may feel the power of an endless life, the power of God, which
  is immortal; which brings the immortal soul up to the immortal God, in
  whom it doth rejoice. So in the name and power of the Lord Jesus
  Christ, God Almighty strengthen thee.”

                                                                G.F.

Footnote 59:

  Lady Claypole was the favourite daughter of Oliver Cromwell, who
  deeply felt her loss, for she died shortly after the period of
  receiving the letter George Fox addressed to her. Nor was it long
  before Oliver himself followed her; both he and his daughter dying in
  the same year.

When the foregoing paper was read to Lady Claypole, she said, it staid
her mind for the present. Afterwards many Friends got copies of it, both
in England and Ireland, and read it to people that were troubled in
mind; and it was made useful for the settling of the minds of several.

About this time came forth a declaration from Oliver Cromwell, the
Protector, for a collection towards the relief of divers Protestant
Churches, driven out of Poland; and of twenty Protestant families,
driven out of the confines of Bohemia. And there having been a like
declaration published some time before, to invite the nation to a day of
solemn fasting and humiliation, in order to a contribution being made
for the suffering Protestants of the valleys of Lucerne, Angrona, &c.,
who were persecuted by the Duke of Savoy, I was moved to write to the
Protector and chief magistrates on this occasion, both to show them the
nature of a true fast (such as God requires and accepts,) and to make
them sensible of their injustice and self-condemnation, in blaming the
Papists for persecuting the Protestants abroad, while they themselves,
calling themselves Protestants, were at the same time persecuting their
Protestant neighbours and friends at home. That which I wrote to them
was after this manner:—

“_To the Heads and Governors of this Nation, who have put forth a
  declaration for keeping a day of solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for
  the persecution (as you say) of divers people beyond the seas,
  professing the Reformed religion, which, ye say, hath been transmitted
  unto them from their ancestors_.

  “A profession of the Reformed religion may be transmitted to
  generations, and so holden by tradition; and in that, wherein the
  profession and tradition are holden, is the day of humiliation kept;
  which stands in the will of man. This is not the fast that the Lord
  requires, ‘to bow down the head like a bulrush for a day,’ and the day
  following be in the same condition that they were the day before. To
  the light of Christ Jesus in your consciences do I speak, which
  testifieth for God every day, and witnesseth against all sin and
  persecution; which measure of God, if ye be guided by it, doth not
  limit God to a day, but leads to the fast which the Lord requires,
  which is, ‘To loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the heavy
  burdens, to break every yoke, and to let the oppressed go free.’ Isa.
  lviii. 6, 7. This is the fast that the Lord requires; and this stands
  not in the transmission of times, nor in the traditions of men; but in
  that which was before times were, which leads out of time, and shall
  be when time shall be no more. These that teach for doctrine the
  commandments of men, are they that ever persecuted the life and power
  when it came.

  “And whereas ye mention a decree or edict that was made against the
  said persecuted Protestants, all such decrees proceed from the ground
  of the Pope’s religion and supremacy, and therein stands his tyranny
  and cruelty, acted in that will, which is in that nature which
  exerciseth lordship over one another (as ye may read, Mark x. 42; Luke
  xxii. 25), as all the heathen do, and ever did; and in the heathenish
  nature is all the tyranny and persecution exercised, by them that are
  out of the obedience to the light of Christ Jesus, which is the guide
  and leader of all who are tender of that of God in the conscience. But
  they who are not led by this, know not what it is to suffer for
  conscience’ sake. Now, whereas ye take into your consideration the sad
  persecution, tyranny, and cruelty, exercised upon them, whom ye call
  your Protestant brethren, and contribute to administer to their wants
  outwardly; this is good in its place, and we approve it; and see it
  good to administer to the necessities of others, and to do good to
  all: and we who are sufferers by a law derived from the Pope, are
  willing to join and to contribute with you to their outward
  necessities. For ‘the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof;’
  who is good and gracious to all, willing that all should be saved, and
  come to the knowledge of the truth.

  “But in the meantime, while ye are doing this, and taking notice of
  others’ cruelty, tyranny, and persecution, turn your eye upon
  yourselves, and see what ye are doing at home. To the light of Christ
  Jesus in all your consciences I speak, which cannot lie, nor err, nor
  bear false witness; but which bears witness for God, and cries for
  equity, justice, and righteousness to be executed. See what ye are
  doing, who profess the Scriptures, which were given forth by the
  saints in light, who dwelt in the light, and in the life of them. For
  them who now witness the same light, life, and power, that gave forth
  the Scriptures, which ye in words profess, ye persecute;—them ye hale
  out of your synagogues and markets;—beat, stock, and imprison. Now let
  that of God in your consciences, which is just, righteous, and equal,
  examine and try, whether ye have any example or precedent to exercise
  this persecution, which now many in this nation suffer under, who are
  a people harmless and innocent, walking in obedience towards God and
  man.

  “And though ye account the way of truth they walk in, heresy, yet
  therein do they exercise themselves, to have always ‘a conscience void
  of offence towards God and man,’ as ye may read the saints of old did
  (Acts xxiv. 14, 15, 16); wronging no man, neither giving any just
  cause of offence; only being obedient to the commands of the Lord, to
  declare, as they are moved by the Holy Ghost; and standing for the
  testimony of a good conscience, speaking the truth in Christ, their
  consciences bearing them witness that they lie not; for this do they
  suffer under you, who in words profess the same thing for which they
  suffer. Now see if any age or generation did ever persecute as ye do;
  for ye profess Christ Jesus, who reveals the Father, and persecute
  them that witness the revelation of the Father by Christ Jesus unto
  them. Ye profess Christ Jesus, who is ‘the light of the world, that
  enlightens every man that cometh into the world;’ yet persecute them
  that bear witness and give testimony to this light. Ye profess that
  the Word is become flesh, yet persecute them that witness it so. Ye
  profess that whosoever confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the
  flesh, is an anti-christ; yet persecute them that do confess him come
  in the flesh, and call them antichrists and deceivers. Ye profess that
  the kingdom of Christ is come; yet persecute them that witness it
  come. Ye profess Christ Jesus, the resurrection and the life; yet
  persecute them that witness him to be so.

  “If ye say, ‘How shall we know that these people, who say they witness
  these things, do so, or not?’ I answer, Turn your minds to the light,
  which Christ Jesus hath enlightened you withal, which is one in all;
  and if ye walk in the light, ye shall have the light of life; then ye
  will know and see what ye have done, who have persecuted the Lord of
  glory (in his people) in whom is life, and the life is the light of
  men. To no other touchstone shall we turn you, than into your own
  consciences; there shall ye find the truth of what we have declared
  unto you, and of what we bear testimony to, according to the holy
  Scriptures. When the books of consciences are opened, and all judged
  out of them, then shall ye witness us to be of God, and our testimony
  to be true. Though now ye may stop your ears, and harden your hearts,
  while it is called to-day; but then ye shall know what ye have done,
  and against whom ye have transgressed;—then ye will see that no
  persecutors, in any age or generation before you, ever transgressed
  against that light, and measure of God made manifest, in such manner
  as ye have done. For though Christ and the apostles were persecuted in
  their times, the Jews, for the most part, did not know that he was the
  Christ, when he came, notwithstanding they had the Scriptures, which
  prophesied of him; neither did they believe that he was risen again,
  when the apostles preached his resurrection. But ye say, ‘ye believe
  he is come; ye believe his resurrection;’ yet ye persecute those that
  witness him come in the flesh, those that are buried with him in
  baptism, that are conformable to his death, and know the power of his
  resurrection; these ye persecute, hale before magistrates, and suffer
  to be beaten in your synagogues; these ye cause to be whipped, and
  stocked, shamefully entreated, and cast into prison; as many jails in
  this nation at this day testify to your faces. Therefore honestly
  consider what ye are doing, while ye are taking notice of others’
  cruelties, lest ye overlook your own. There is some difference in many
  things, between the Popish religion and that which ye call the
  Protestant, but in this persecution of yours there is no difference;
  for ye will confess that the foundation of your religion is grounded
  upon the Scriptures; yet ye are persecuting them that are in the same
  life which they were in, who gave forth the Scriptures, yourselves
  being the meanwhile under a profession of the words they spoke; and
  this ye shall one day witness. So ye have a profession and form, and
  persecute them that are in the possession, life, and power.

  “Therefore know assuredly that ye must come to judgment; for he is
  made manifest, to whom all judgment is committed. Therefore to the
  light of Christ Jesus in your own consciences, which searcheth and
  trieth you, turn your minds; stand still, and wait there to receive
  the righteous law, which is according to that of God in the
  conscience, which is now rising, and is bearing witness against all
  ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and they whom ye persecute are
  manifest to God, and that of God in all consciences shall bear witness
  for us, that we are of God; this ye shall one day witness, whether ye
  will hear or forbear. Our rejoicing is in the testimony of our
  consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
  wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
  world; not handling the word of God deceitfully, but in the
  manifestation of the truth, commending ourselves to every man’s
  conscience in the sight of God; and if our gospel be hid, it is hid to
  them that are lost. For witnessing the holding of the mystery of faith
  in a pure conscience, do we suffer, and are subject for conscience’
  sake.

  “This is thankworthy, if a man, for conscience’ sake, endure griefs
  and sufferings wrongfully. In this is our joy and rejoicing, having a
  good conscience, that whereas we are evil spoken of, as evil-doers,
  they may be ashamed that falsely accuse our good conversation in
  Christ; which is not only the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
  but the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the resurrection of
  Jesus Christ. This we witness made manifest (eternal praises to the
  living God!) and bear testimony to that which spoke it in the apostle
  in life and power. Therefore do we bear witness and testify against
  those, who, being in a form and profession of it, persecute the life
  and power. To the eternal light of Christ Jesus, the searcher and
  trier of all hearts, turn your minds, and see what ye are doing; lest
  ye overturn your foundation, whereon ye pretend to stand, while ye are
  professing the Scriptures, and persecuting the life, light, and power,
  which they were in who gave them forth. For the stone, cut out of the
  mountains without hands, is now striking at the feet of the image, the
  profession, which is set up, and stands in the will of man. Now is
  that made manifest unto which all must answer; all must appear before
  the judgment-seat of Christ, that everyone may receive the things done
  in the body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or
  bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we
  are made manifest unto God, and shall be made manifest in all your
  consciences, which ye shall witness.”

                                                               G. F.

Divers times, both in the time of the Long Parliament, and of the
Protector (so called) and of the Committee of Safety, when they
proclaimed fasts, I was moved to write to them, and tell them, their
fasts were like unto Jezebel’s; for commonly, when they proclaimed
fasts, there was some mischief contrived against us. I knew their fasts
were for strife and debate, to smite with the fist of wickedness; as the
New England professors soon after did, who, before they put our Friends
to death, proclaimed a fast also.

Now it was a time of great sufferings; and many Friends being in
prisons, many other Friends were moved to go to the parliament, to offer
up themselves to lie in the same dungeon, where their friends lay, that
they that were in prison might go out, and not perish in the stinking
jails. This we did in love to God and our brethren, that they might not
die in prison; and in love to those that cast them in, that they might
not bring innocent blood upon their own heads; which we knew would cry
to the Lord, and bring his wrath, vengeance, and plagues upon them. But
little favour could we find from those professing parliaments; instead
thereof they would rage, and sometimes threaten those Friends that thus
attended them, that they would whip them, and send them home. Then
commonly soon after the Lord would turn them out, and send them home;
who had not a heart to do good in the day of their power. But they went
not off without being forewarned, for I was moved to write to them, in
their several turns, as I did to the Long Parliament, unto whom I
declared, before they were broken up, that “thick darkness was coming
over them all, even a day of darkness that should be felt.”

And because the parliament that now sat was made up mostly of high
professors, who, pretending to be more religious than others, were
indeed greater persecutors of them that were truly religious, I was
moved to send them the following lines, as a reproof of their
hypocrisy:—

  “O Friends, do not cloak and cover yourselves; there is a God that
  knoweth your hearts, and that will uncover you. He seeth your way.
  ‘Woe be to him that covereth, but not with my Spirit, saith the Lord.’
  Do ye act contrary to the law, and then put it from you? Mercy and
  true judgment ye neglect. Look, what was spoken against such: my
  Saviour spoke against such: ‘I was sick, and ye visited me not; I was
  hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; I
  was in prison, and ye visited me not.’ But they said, ‘When saw we
  thee in prison, and did not come to thee?’ ‘Inasmuch as ye did it not
  unto one of these little ones, ye did it not unto me.’ Friends, ye
  imprison them that are in the life and power of truth, and yet profess
  to be the ministers of Christ. But if Christ had sent you, ye would
  bring out of prison, and bondage, and receive strangers. Ye have lived
  in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your
  hearts, as in a day of slaughter; ye have condemned, and killed the
  just, and he doth not resist you.”

                                                               G. F.

After this, as I was going out of town, having two Friends with me, when
we were little more than a mile out of the city, there met us two
troopers belonging to Colonel Hacker’s regiment, who took me, and the
Friends that were with me, and brought us back to the Mews, and there
kept us prisoners. But the Lord’s power was so over them, that they did
not take us before any officer; but shortly after set us at liberty
again.

The same day, taking boat, I went to KINGSTON, and thence to HAMPTON
COURT, to speak with the Protector about the sufferings of Friends. I
met him riding into Hampton-Court Park, and before I came to him, as he
rode at the head of his life-guard, I saw and felt a waft (or
apparition) of death go forth against him; and when I came to him, he
looked like a dead man. After I had laid the sufferings of Friends
before him, and had warned him, according as I was moved to speak to
him, he bid me come to his house. So I returned to Kingston, and next
day went to Hampton Court, to speak further with him. But when I came,
he was sick, and —— Harvey, who was one that waited on him, told me the
doctors were not willing I should speak with him. So I passed away, and
never saw him more.

From Kingston I went to Isaac Penington’s, in BUCKINGHAMSHIRE, where I
had appointed a meeting, and the Lord’s truth and power were preciously
manifested amongst us. After I had visited Friends in those parts, I
returned to LONDON, and soon after went into ESSEX, where I had not been
long before I heard that the Protector was dead, and his son Richard
made Protector in his room. Whereupon I came up to LONDON again.

Before this time the church-faith (so called) was given forth, which was
said to have been made at the Savoy in eleven days’ time. I got a copy
before it was published, and wrote an answer to it; and when their book
of church-faith was sold in the streets, my answer to it was sold also.
This angered some of the parliament-men, so that one of them told me,
“they must have me to Smithfield.” I told him, “I was above their fires,
and feared them not.” And reasoning with him, I wished him to consider,
“Had all people been without a faith these sixteen hundred years, that
now the priests must make them one? Did not the apostle say, that Jesus
was the author and finisher of their faith? And since Christ Jesus was
the author of the apostles’ faith, of the church’s faith in primitive
times, and of the martyrs’ faith, should not all people look unto him to
be the author and finisher of their faith, and not to the priests?” Much
work we had about the priest-made faith; for they called us
house-creepers, leading silly women captive, because we met in houses,
and would not hold up their priests and temples, which they had made and
set up. I told them, that it was they who led silly women captive, and
crept into houses, who kept people always learning under them, who were
covetous, and had a form of godliness, but denied the power and Spirit
which the apostles were in. Such began to creep in the apostles’ days;
but now they had got the magistrates on their side, who upheld those
houses for them, which they had crept into, their temples, with their
tithes: whereas the apostles brought people off even from that temple,
and those tithes and offerings, which God had for a time commanded. And
the apostles met in several private houses, being to preach the gospel
to all nations; which they did freely, as Christ had commanded them.
Thus do we, who bring people off from these priests, temples, and tithes
which God never commanded, to meet in houses, or on mountains, as the
saints of old did, who were gathered in the name of Jesus, Christ being
their Prophet, Priest, and Shepherd.

Major Wiggan, a very envious man, was present, yet he bridled himself
before the parliament-men, and some others that were there in company.
He took upon him to make a speech, and said, “Christ had taken away the
guilt of sin, but had left the power of sin remaining in us.” I told
him, that was strange doctrine, for Christ came to destroy the devil and
his works, and the power of sin, and so to cleanse men from sin.

So Major Wiggan’s mouth was stopped at that time. But next day, desiring
to speak with me again, I took a friend or two with me, and went to him.
Then he vented much passion and rage, beyond the bounds of a Christian
or moral man; whereupon I reproved him; and having brought the Lord’s
power over him, and let him see what condition he was in, I left him.

After some time I passed out of London, and had a meeting at Sergeant
Birkhead’s at TWICKENHAM, to which many people came, and some of
considerable quality in the world. A glorious meeting it was, wherein
the Scriptures were largely and clearly opened, and Christ exalted above
all, to the great satisfaction of the hearers.

But there was great persecution in many places, both by imprisoning and
breaking up of meetings. At a meeting about seven miles from London, the
rude people usually came out of several parishes round about, to abuse
Friends, and often beat and bruised them exceedingly. One day they
abused about eighty Friends, who went to that meeting out of London,
tearing their coats and cloaks off their backs, and throwing them into
ditches and ponds; and when they had besmeared them with dirt, they said
they looked like witches. The next First-day, I was moved of the Lord to
go to that meeting, though I was then very weak. When I came there, I
bid Friends bring a table, and set it in the field, where they used to
meet, to stand upon. According to their wonted course, the rude people
came. Having a Bible in my hand, I showed them their and their priests’
and teachers’ fruits: and the people became ashamed, and were quiet. I
opened the Scriptures to them, and our principles agreeing therewith; I
turned the people from darkness to the light of Christ and his Spirit,
by which they might understand the Scriptures, see themselves and their
sins, and know Christ Jesus to be their Saviour. So the meeting ended
quietly, and the Lord’s power came over all to his glory. But it was a
time of great sufferings; for besides the imprisonments (through which
many died) our meetings were greatly disturbed. They have thrown rotten
eggs and wild-fire into our meetings, and have brought in drums beating,
and kettles, to make noises with, that the truth might not be heard; and
among these, the priests were as rude as any: as may be seen in the book
of the fighting priests, wherein a list is given of some of them that
had actually beaten and abused Friends.

Many also of our Friends were brought up to LONDON, prisoners, to be
tried before the committee; where Henry Vane,[60] being Chairman, would
not suffer Friends to come in, except they would put off their hats: but
at last the Lord’s power came over him, so that, through the mediation
of others, they were admitted. Many of us having been imprisoned upon
contempts (as they called them) for not putting off our hats, it was not
a likely thing that Friends, who had suffered so long for it from
others, should put off their hats to him. But the Lord’s power came over
them all, and wrought so, that several Friends were set at liberty by
them. Now inasmuch as sufferings grew very sharp, I was moved of the
Lord to write a few lines and send amongst Friends, to encourage them to
go on faithfully and boldly, through the exercises of the day; of which
a copy here follows:—

  “MY dear Friends, wherever scattered abroad, in prison or out of
  prison; fear not, because of the reports of sufferings; let not the
  evil spies of the good land make you afraid, if they tell you the
  walls are high, and there are Anakims in the land; for at the blowing
  of the rams’ horns did the walls of Jericho fall; and they that
  brought the evil report, perished in the wilderness. But dwell ye in
  the faith, patience, and hope, having the Word of Life to keep you,
  which is beyond the law; and having the oath of God, his covenant,
  Christ Jesus, which divides the waters asunder, and makes them to run
  all on heaps; in that stand: and ye will see all things work together
  for good to them that love God. In that triumph, when sufferings come,
  whatever they may be. Your faith, your shield, your helmet, your
  armour you have on; ye are ready to skip over a mountain, a wall, or a
  hill, and to walk through the deep waters, though they be as heaps
  upon heaps. The evil spies of the good land may preach up hardness;
  but Caleb, which signifies a heart, and Joshua, a Saviour, triumph
  over all.”

                                                                G.F.

Footnote 60:

  Vane was a conspicuous character at this period. He was strongly
  attached to a republican government, and opposed Cromwell in his
  progress towards assuming the reins of government as protector. He was
  said to be one of the leaders of the Independents. Bishop Burnet, the
  historian, says of him:—“Though he set up a form of religion in a way
  of his own, yet it consisted rather in a withdrawing from all other
  forms, than in any new or particular forms and opinions; from which he
  and his party were called Seekers, and seemed to wait for some new and
  clearer manifestations.” James Naylor, in a letter to Margaret Fell,
  speaks of Vane as “very loving to Friends, but drunk with
  imaginations.”

After a while I went to READING, where I was under great sufferings and
exercises, and in great travail of spirit for about ten weeks. For I saw
there was great confusion and distraction amongst the people, and that
the powers were plucking each other to pieces. And I saw how many were
destroying the simplicity, and betraying the truth. Much hypocrisy,
deceit, and strife, was got uppermost in the people, so that they were
ready to sheath their swords in one another’s bowels. There had been a
tenderness in many of them formerly, when they were low, but when they
were got up, had killed and taken possession, they came to be as bad as
others; so that we had much to do with them about our hats, and saying
Thou and Thee to them. They turned their profession of patience and
moderation into rage and madness; and many of them were like distracted
men for this hat-honour. For they had hardened themselves by persecuting
the innocent, and were at this time crucifying the Seed, Christ, both in
themselves and others; till at last they fell to biting and devouring
one another, until they were consumed one of another; who had turned
against, and judged, that which God had wrought in them, and showed unto
them. So shortly after, God overthrew them, and turned them upside down,
and brought the king over them, who were often surmising that the
Quakers met together to bring in King Charles, whereas, Friends did not
concern themselves with the outward powers, or government. But at last
the Lord brought him in, and many of them when they saw he would be
brought in, voted for bringing him in. So with heart and voice praise
the name of the Lord, to whom it doth belong; who over all hath the
supremacy, and who will rock the nations, for he is over them.

I had a sight and sense of the king’s return a good while before, and so
had some others. I wrote to Oliver several times, and let him know that
while he was persecuting God’s people, they whom he accounted his
enemies were preparing to come upon him. When some forward spirits that
came amongst us, would have bought Somerset-house, that we might have
meetings in it, I forbade them to do so; for I then foresaw the king’s
coming in again. Besides, there came a woman to me in the Strand, who
had a prophecy concerning King Charles’s coming in, three years before
he came: and she told me, she must go to him to declare it. I advised
her to wait upon the Lord, and keep it to herself; for if it should be
known that she went on such a message, they would look upon it to be
treason; but she said, she must go, and tell him, that he should be
brought into England again. I saw her prophecy was true, and that a
great stroke must come upon them in power; for they that had then got
possession were so exceeding high, and such great persecution was acted
by them, who called themselves saints, that they would take from Friends
their copyhold lands, because they could not swear in their courts.

Sometimes when we laid these sufferings before Oliver Cromwell, he would
not believe it. Wherefore Thomas Aldam[61] and Anthony Pearson were
moved to go through all the jails in England, and to get copies of
Friends’ commitments under the jailer’s hands, that they might lay the
weight of their sufferings upon Oliver Cromwell. And when he would not
give order for the releasing of them, Thomas Aldam was moved to take his
cap from off his head, and to rend it in pieces before him, and to say
unto him, “So shall thy government be rent from thee and thy house.”

Footnote 61:

  Thomas Aldam died in 1660, and as this is the last mention of him in
  this journal, the following particulars may be added:—He resided at
  Warmsworth, in Yorkshire, and was convinced by George Fox, in 1651,
  having been previously a great follower of the priests and teachers of
  the times. But his hungering and thirsting soul not being satisfied
  amongst them, he left them, and having received the Truth, became
  valiant for the same, giving up his strength and substance to serve
  the Lord. Many beatings, reproaches, imprisonments, much spoiling of
  goods and other sufferings he endured, for Christ’s sake. He was one
  of the first called a Quaker imprisoned in York castle, in 1652, where
  he was kept two years and six months, not being suffered once to go
  home, nor permitted to see his wife, children, or relatives, when they
  went to visit him. He was also fined during that imprisonment £40, at
  the assize, for appearing before the judge with his hat on, and saying
  thee and thou to him. During the same imprisonment for tithes, he was
  sued at law for treble damages, his property being taken to the value
  of £42, not leaving one cow to give milk for his young children and
  family. Many other sufferings did he undergo, which made him have a
  tender sympathy for others who were sufferers for the Truth, whose
  cause he often pleaded. He wrote several small works in defence of
  Truth, and his son, Thomas Aldam, who was also a faithful minister,
  published a testimony concerning him, in 1690. See _Piety Promoted_,
  vol. i., pp. 25-28; vol. iii., p 58.

Another Friend also, a woman, was moved to go to the parliament (that
was envious against Friends) with a pitcher in her hand, which she broke
into pieces before them, and told them, “so should they be broken to
pieces:” which came to pass shortly after.

And in my great suffering and travail of spirit for the nation, being
grievously burdened with their hypocrisy, treachery, and falsehood, I
saw God would bring that over them, which they had been above; and that
all must be brought down to that which convinced them, before they could
get over that bad spirit within and without: for it is the pure,
invisible Spirit, that doth and only can work down all deceit in people.

While I was under that sore travail at Reading, by reason of grief and
sorrow of mind, and the great exercise that was upon my spirit, my
countenance was altered, and I looked poor and thin; and there came a
company of unclean spirits to me, and told me, “the plagues of God were
upon me.” I told them, it was the same spirit spoke that in them, that
said so of Christ, when he was stricken and smitten; they hid their face
from him. But when I had travailed with the witness of God, which they
had quenched, and had got through with it, and over all that hypocrisy
which the outside professors were run into, and saw how that would be
brought down, and turned under, and that life would rise over it, I came
to have ease, and the light, power, and Spirit shone over all. And then
having recovered, and got through my travails and sufferings, my body
and face swelled, when I came abroad into the air; and then the bad
spirits said, “I was grown fat,” and they envied at that also. So I saw,
that no condition nor state would please that spirit of theirs. But the
Lord preserved me by his power and Spirit through and over all, and in
his power I came to LONDON again.

Now was there a great pother made about the image or effigy of Oliver
Cromwell lying in state; men standing and sounding with trumpets over
his image, after he was dead. At this my spirit was greatly grieved, and
the Lord, I found, was highly offended. Then did I write the following
lines, and sent among them, to reprove their wickedness, and warn them
to repent:—

  “O friends, what are ye doing! What mean ye to sound before an image!
  Will not all sober people think ye are like madmen? O, how am I
  grieved with your abominations! O, how am I wearied! My soul is
  wearied with you, saith the Lord: will I not be avenged of you, think
  ye, for your abominations? O, how have ye plucked down and set up! How
  are your hearts made whole, and not rent! How are ye turned to
  fooleries! Which things in times past, ye stood over. How have ye left
  my dread, saith the Lord! Fear therefore, and repent, lest the snare
  and the pit take you all. The great day of the Lord is come upon all
  your abominations; the swift hand of the Lord is turned against them.
  The sober people in these nations stand amazed at your doings, and are
  ashamed, as if ye would bring in Popery.”

                                                               G. F.

About this time great stirs were in the nation, the minds of people
being unsettled. Much plotting and contriving there was by the several
factions, to carry on their several interests. And a great care being
upon me, lest any young or ignorant people, that might sometimes come
amongst us, should be drawn into that snare, I was moved to give forth
the following epistle as a warning unto all such:—

  “All Friends, everywhere, keep out of plots and bustling, and the arm
  of flesh; for all these are amongst Adam’s sons in the fall, where
  they are destroying men’s lives like dogs, beasts, and swine, goring,
  rending, and biting one another, destroying one another, and wrestling
  with flesh and blood. Whence arise wars and killing but from the
  lusts? Now all this is in Adam in the fall, out of Adam that never
  fell, in whom there is peace and life. Ye are called to peace,
  therefore follow it; and that peace is in Christ, not in Adam in the
  fall. All that pretend to fight for Christ, are deceived; for his
  kingdom is not of this world, therefore his servants do not fight.
  Fighters are not of Christ’s kingdom, but are without Christ’s
  kingdom; his kingdom stands in peace and righteousness, but fighters
  are in the lust; and all that would destroy men’s lives, are not of
  Christ’s mind, who came to save men’s lives. Christ’s kingdom is not
  of this world; it is peaceable: and all that are in strife, are not of
  his kingdom. All that pretend to fight for the Gospel, are deceived;
  for the gospel is the power of God, which was before the devil, or
  fall of man was; and the gospel of peace was before fighting was.
  Therefore they that pretend fighting, are ignorant of the gospel; and
  all that talk of fighting for Sion, are in darkness; for Sion needs no
  such helpers. All such as profess themselves to be ministers of
  Christ, or Christians, and go about to beat down the whore with
  outward, carnal weapons, the flesh and the whore are got up in
  themselves, and they are in a blind zeal; for the whore got up by the
  inward ravening from the Spirit of God; and the beating down thereof,
  must be by the inward stroke of the sword of the Spirit within. All
  such as pretend Christ Jesus, and confess him, and yet run into the
  use of carnal weapons, wrestling with flesh and blood, throw away the
  spiritual weapons. They that would be wrestlers with flesh and blood,
  throw away Christ’s doctrine; the flesh is got up in them, and they
  are weary of their sufferings. Such as would revenge themselves, are
  out of Christ’s doctrine. Such as being stricken on one cheek, would
  not turn the other, are out of Christ’s doctrine: and such as do not
  love one another, nor love enemies, are out of Christ’s doctrine.

  “Therefore, ye that are heirs of the blessings of God, which were
  before the curse and the fall were, come to inherit your portions; and
  ye that are heirs of the gospel of peace, which was before the devil
  was, live in the gospel of peace, seeking the peace of all men, and
  the good of all men; and live in Christ, who came to save men’s lives,
  out of Adam in the fall, where they destroy men’s lives, and live not
  in Christ. The Jews’ sword outwardly, by which they cut down the
  heathen, was a type of the Spirit of God within, which cuts down the
  heathenish nature within. So live in the peaceable kingdom of Christ
  Jesus. Live in the peace of God, and not in the lusts, from whence
  wars arise. Live in Christ the Prince of Peace, the way of God, who is
  the second Adam, that never fell; but live not in Adam in the fall, in
  the destruction, where they destroy one another. Therefore come out of
  Adam in the fall, into the Adam that never fell. Live in love and
  peace with all men; keep out of all the bustlings in the world; meddle
  not with the powers of the earth; but mind the kingdom, the way of
  peace. Ye that are heirs of grace, heirs of the kingdom, heirs of the
  gospel, heirs of salvation, saints of the Most High, and children of
  God, whose conversation is in heaven, that is above the combustions of
  the earth; let your conversation preach to all men, and your innocent
  lives, that they who speak evil of you, beholding your godly
  conversation, may glorify your Father which is in heaven.

  “All Friends everywhere, this I charge you, which is the word of the
  Lord God unto you all, ‘Live in peace, in Christ the way of peace,’
  and therein seek the peace of all men, and no man’s hurt. In Adam in
  the fall, is no peace; but in Adam out of the fall, is peace: so, ye
  being in Adam which never fell, it is love that overcomes, and not
  hatred with hatred, nor strife with strife. Therefore live all in the
  peaceable life, doing good to all men, and seeking the good and
  welfare of all men.”

                                                               G. F.

Not long after this, George Booth rose in arms in Cheshire, and Lambert
went against him. At which time some foolish, rash spirits, that came
sometimes amongst us, were ready to take up arms; but I was moved of the
Lord to warn and forbid them, and they were quiet. In the time of the
Committee of Safety (so called), we were invited by them to take up
arms, and great places and commands were offered some of us; but we
denied them all, and declared against it both by word and writing;
testifying that our weapons and armour were not carnal, but spiritual.
And lest any that came amongst us, should be drawn into that snare, it
came upon me from the Lord, to write a few lines on that occasion, and
send them forth, as a caution to all amongst us. Of which this is a
copy:

  “All Friends everywhere, take heed to keep out of the powers of the
  earth, that run into wars and fightings, which make not for peace, but
  destroy it; such will not have the kingdom. And, Friends, take heed of
  joining with this or the other, or meddling with any, or being busy
  with other men’s matters; but mind the Lord, his power, and his
  service. Let Friends keep out of other men’s matters, and keep in that
  which answers the witness in them all, out of the man’s part, where
  they must expect wars and dishonour. Friends everywhere, dwell in your
  own, in the power of the Lord God, to keep your minds up to the Lord
  God, from falling down to the strength of Egypt, or going thither for
  strength, after ye are come out of it, like the children of Israel
  after they were come out of outward Egypt. But dwell in the power of
  the Lord God, that ye may keep over all the powers of the earth,
  amongst whom the just hand of God is come; for they have turned
  against the just, disobeyed the just, in their own particulars, and so
  gone on in one against the just; therefore the just sets them one
  against another. Now he that goes to help among them, is astray from
  the just in himself, in the unstaid state, and doth not know, by the
  All-seeing Eye (that beholdeth,) him that recompenseth and rewardeth,
  and lives not in the hand, in the power, that mangles and overturns,
  which vexeth the transgressors, that come to be blind, and zealous for
  they do not know what. Therefore keep in peace, and in the love and
  power of God, and in unity and love one to another, lest any go out,
  and fall with the uncircumcised: that is, they that are from the
  Spirit in themselves, and they that go from it, go into the pit
  together. Therefore stand (it is the word of the Lord God to you all)
  in the fear and dread of the Lord God, his power, life, light, seed,
  and wisdom, by which ye may take away the occasion of wars, and so
  know a kingdom which hath no end, and fight for that with spiritual
  weapons, which takes away the occasion of the carnal; and there gather
  men to war, as many as ye can, and set up as many as ye can with these
  weapons.”

                                                               G. F.

After I had stayed some time in London, and had visited Friends’
meetings there and thereabouts, and the Lord’s power was set over all, I
travelled into the counties again, passing through ESSEX and SUFFOLK
into NORFOLK, visiting Friends, till I came to NORWICH, where we had a
meeting about the time called Christmas. The Mayor of Norwich, having
got previous notice of the meeting I intended to have there, granted a
warrant to apprehend me. When I was come thither, and heard of the
warrant, I sent some friends to the mayor to reason with him about it.
His answer was, the soldiers should not meet; and did we think to meet?
He would have us to go and meet without the city, for he said, the
town’s-people were so rude that he could hardly order them, and he
feared that our meeting would make tumults in the town. But our friends
told him we were a peaceable people, and that he ought to keep the
peace; for we could not but meet to worship God, as our manner was. So
he became moderate, and did not send his officers to the meeting. A
large one it was, and abundance of rude people came, with an intent to
do mischief; but the Lord’s power came over them, so that they were
chained by it, though several priests were there, and professors and
Ranters.

Among the priests, one whose name was Townsend, stood up and cried,
“Error, blasphemy, and an ungodly meeting!” I bid him not burden himself
with that which he could not make good; and I asked him what was our
error and blasphemy; for I told him, he should make good his words
before I had done with him, or be shamed. As for an ungodly meeting, I
said, I believed there were many people there that feared God, and
therefore it was both unchristian and uncivil in him, to charge civil,
godly people with an ungodly meeting. He said, my error and blasphemy
was, in that I said, that people must wait upon God by his power and
Spirit, and feel his presence when they did not speak words. I asked him
then, whether the apostles and holy men of God did not hear God speak to
them in their silence, before they spoke forth the Scripture, and before
it was written? He replied, Yes, David and the prophets heard God,
before they penned the Scriptures, and felt his presence in silence
before they spoke them forth. Then said I, All people take notice, he
said this was error and blasphemy in me to say these words; and now he
hath confessed, it is no more than the holy men of God in former times
witnessed. So I showed them that as the holy men of God who gave forth
the Scripture as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, heard and learned of
God, before they spoke them forth; so must they all hearken and hear
what the Spirit saith, which will lead them into all truth, that they
may know God and Christ, and may understand the Scriptures. O, said the
priest, this is not that George Fox I would speak withal; this is a
subtle man, said he. So the Lord’s power came over all, and the rude
people were made moderate, and were reached by it; and some professors
that were there, called to the priests, saying, “prove the blasphemy and
errors which ye have charged them with; ye have spoken much against them
behind their backs, but nothing ye can prove now (said they) to their
faces.” But the priest began to get away; whereupon I told him, we had
many things to charge him withal, therefore let him set a time and place
to answer them; which he did and went his way. A glorious day this was,
for truth came over all, and people were turned to God by his power and
Spirit, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, their free teacher, who was
exalted over all. And as we passed away, people’s hearts were generally
filled with love towards us; yea, the ruder sort of them desired another
meeting, for the evil intentions they had against us were thrown out of
their hearts. At night I passed out of town to a Friends’ house, and
thence to Colonel Dennis’s, where we had a great meeting; and afterwards
travelled on, visiting Friends in NORFOLK, HUNTINGDONSHIRE, and
CAMBRIDGESHIRE. But George Whitehead and Richard Hubberthorn stayed
about Norwich to meet the priest, who was soon confounded, the Lord’s
power came so over him.

After I had travelled through many counties in the Lord’s service, and
many were convinced, notwithstanding the people in some places were very
rude, I returned to LONDON, when General Monk was come up thither, and
the gates and posts of the city were pulling down. Long before this I
had a vision, wherein I saw the city lie in heaps and the gates down;
and it was then represented to me, just as I saw it several years after,
lying in heaps, when it was burned.

Divers times, both by word and writing, had I forewarned the several
powers, both in Oliver’s time and after, of the day of recompense that
was coming upon them; but they rejecting counsel, and slighting those
visitations of love to them, I was moved now, before they were quite
overturned, to lay their backsliding, hypocrisy, and treacherous dealing
before them, thus:

  “FRIENDS, now are the prophecies fulfilled and fulfilling upon you,
  which have been spoken to you by the people of God in your courts,
  steeple-houses, towns, cities, markets, highways, and at your feasts,
  when ye were in your pleasures, and puffed up, that ye would neither
  hear God nor man; when ye were in your height of authority, though
  raised up from a mean state, none might come nigh you without bowing,
  or the respect of persons, for ye were in the world’s way,
  compliments, and fashions, which, for conscience’ sake towards God
  they could not go into, being redeemed therefrom; therefore they were
  hated by you for that cause. But how are ye brought low, who exalted
  yourselves above your brethren, and threw the just and harmless from
  among you, until at last God hath thrown you out; and when ye cast the
  innocent from among you, then ye fell to biting one another until ye
  were consumed one of another. And so the day is come upon you, which
  before was told you, though ye would not believe it. And are not your
  hearts so hardened, that ye will hardly yet believe, though ready to
  go into captivity? Was it not told you, when ye spilt the blood of the
  innocent in your steeple-houses, markets, highways, and cities, yea,
  and even in your courts also, because they said the word ‘Thou’ to
  you, and could not put off their hats to you, that if something did
  not arise up amongst yourselves, to avenge the blood of the innocent,
  there would come something from beyond the seas, which lay reserved
  there, which being brought by the arm of God, the arm of flesh and
  strongest mountain cannot withstand? Yet ye would not consider,
  regard, or hear; but cried, peace, peace, and feasted yourselves, and
  sat down in the spoil of your enemies, being treacherous both to God
  and man; and who will trust you now? Have ye not made covenants and
  oaths? and broken covenants and oaths between God and man, and made
  the nations breakers both of covenants and oaths; so that nothing but
  hypocrisy, rottenness, and falsehood under fair pretence, was amongst
  you?

  “When ye pretended to set up the old cause, it was but yourselves; for
  which ye long stuck to sober people, who saw ye would do no good. But
  it was a joy for any of you to get up into authority, that ye might
  have praise, honour, and respect; and they that were in the
  self-denial were a derision to you, from amongst whom that was
  banished. Thus ye became the nation’s masters, and not servants;
  whereas the greatest of all should be the servants of all. But there
  ye lost your authority, not considering your estates, from whence ye
  were, and to what end God had raised you up; but forgot the Lord, and
  quenched that which was good in yourselves, and persecuted them that
  lived in it; and so are grown so gross and perverse, that at last ye
  are fit for neither God nor man. Have not ye called the Quakers the
  fanatic people, and the giddy heads? But whither now are ye giddying?
  into Cain’s city Nod, which signifies fugitive, or wandering? Have not
  ye persecuted and imprisoned to death such as God had respect to, and
  is now reproving you for their sakes, by them whom ye have hated? Were
  not many amongst you cut off for your persecution, and yet the rest of
  you would not take warning? Was there not a book of examples sent out
  unto you, of what sudden and strange deaths happened to the
  persecutors of the innocent; and yet ye would not take warning, until
  the overflowing scourge is now coming upon you. Are not ye they that
  have killed like Cain, who have killed about your sacrifice, and
  mingled the blood of the innocent with it? Hath not God now vagabonded
  you, that ye should become a curse upon the earth, who have persecuted
  Friends to death? Did not the blood of the righteous cry out of the
  ground for vengeance? And will not the blood of the righteous be
  required? Could ye think that the Lord would let you sit always with
  bloody hands and fists of wickedness? Ah! what is become of all your
  feasts and your fasts, the prayers and blessings of your priests?”




                             CHAPTER XIII.

1659-1660.—Address to the Cornish people, respecting shipwrecks—the
    soldiers at Bristol are punished for disturbing Friends’
    meetings—several thousands attend a general meeting at Edward
    Pyot’s—General Monk also restrains his soldiers—great drunkenness at
    elections for Parliament-men—the Yearly Meeting is held at Balby—and
    a general meeting of discipline for several counties held at
    Skipton—a Friend goes naked (divested of the upper garments) through
    the town, declaring Truth, and is much abused—general meeting at
    Arnside for three counties—George Fox is committed to Lancaster
    Castle by Major Porter—writes an answer to his mittimus—Margaret
    Fell writes to the magistrates thereon—address on true
    religion—against persecution—to Friends, on the change of
    government—to Charles II., exhorting him to exercise mercy and
    forgiveness towards his enemies, and to restrain profaneness—the
    Sheriff of Lancashire’s return to George Fox’s writ of _Habeas
    Corpus_—M. Fell and Ann Curtis speak to the King on the subject—the
    King orders his removal to London by Habeas Corpus, and there sets
    him at liberty.


Being now clear of the City of London, and finding my spirit drawn to
visit Friends in the western parts of England, passing first into SURREY
and SUSSEX, I came to a great town where there was a large meeting, to
which several Friends from Reading came, and a blessed one it was. The
priest of the town was in a great rage, but did not come out of his
house; wherefore, hearing him make a great noise in his house, as we
were passing from the meeting, we bid him come out into the street, and
we would discourse with him; but he would not. So the Lord’s power being
over all, Friends were refreshed therein. Thence I went to another
market-town, where in the evening we had a precious meeting, and the
fresh sense of the presence of the Lord was sweetly felt amongst us.
Then turning into HAMPSHIRE and DORSETSHIRE, I went to RINGWOOD and
POOLE, visiting Friends in the Lord’s power, and had great meetings
amongst them.

At DORCHESTER we had a great meeting in the evening at our inn, which
many soldiers attended, and were pretty civil. But the constables and
officers of the town came, under pretence to look for a Jesuit, whose
head (they said) was shaved; and they would have all put off their hats,
or they would take them off, to look for the Jesuit’s shaven crown. So
they took off my hat (for I was the man they aimed at,) and looked very
narrowly, but not finding any bald or shaven place on my head they went
away with shame; and the soldiers, and other sober people, were greatly
offended with them. But it was of good service for the Lord, and all
things wrought together for good; for it affected the people; and after
the officers were gone, we had a fine meeting, and people were turned to
the Lord Jesus Christ, their teacher, who had bought them, and would
reconcile them to God.

Thence we passed into SOMERSETSHIRE, where the Presbyterians and other
professors were very wicked, and often disturbed Friends’ meetings. One
time especially (as we were then informed) there was a very wicked man,
whom they got to come to the Quakers’ meeting; this man put a bear’s
skin on his back, and undertook with that to play pranks in the meeting.
Accordingly, setting himself just opposite to the Friend that was
speaking, he lolled his tongue out of his mouth, having his bear’s skin
on his back, and so made sport to his wicked followers, and caused a
great disturbance in the meeting. But an eminent judgment overtook him,
and his punishment slumbered not; for as he went back from the meeting,
there was a bull-baiting in the way which he stayed to see; and coming
within the bull’s reach, he struck his horn under the man’s chin into
his throat, and struck his tongue out of his mouth, so that it hung
lolling out, as he had used it before, in derision in the meeting. And
the bull’s horn running up into the man’s head, he swung him about upon
his horn in a most remarkable and fearful manner. Thus he that came to
do mischief amongst God’s people, was mischiefed himself; and well would
it be, if such apparent examples of Divine vengeance, would teach others
to beware.[62]

Footnote 62:

  Many were the judgments which overtook the persecutors of the Early
  Friends, as related in their journals, and the histories of the
  Society. The following occurred in Scotland, as related in Jaffray’s
  diary:—“James Skene, who was generally known by the name of ‘White
  James,’ to distinguish him from a very abusive and wicked man of the
  same name, called ‘Black James,’ took great delight in inventing
  malicious slanders against Friends. On one occasion, whilst he was
  repeating some wicked verses, which he had composed on purpose to
  defame a worthy and innocent person, he was in that instant suddenly
  struck down as one dead, and was for some time deprived of his senses.
  When he recovered, he acknowledged the just judgment of God upon him,
  confessed the offence he had committed against this innocent people,
  and gave proof of repentance by ever after abstaining from such
  practices.”

We travelled through SOMERSETSHIRE and DEVONSHIRE, till we came to
PLYMOUTH, and so into CORNWALL, visiting the meetings of Friends to the
Land’s End. Many precious and blessed meetings we had all along as we
went, wherein they that were convinced were established, and many others
were added to them. At the LAND’S END, there was an honest fisherman
convinced, who became a faithful minister of Christ; I took notice of
him to Friends, and told them, “He was like Peter.”[63]

Footnote 63:

  The honest fisherman mentioned here was Nicholas Jose, who was a great
  sufferer for Christ’s sake, both in loss of goods and imprisonments in
  Launceston Jail, Pendennis Castle, and other places; indeed scarcely a
  year passed over without his being called on to suffer severely in
  some way or other for the testimony of a good conscience. He was
  imprisoned with twenty-four other Friends, about the year 1682, and
  continued in confinement till 1685. For an interesting account of this
  worthy man, see _Select Miscellanies_ vol. iv., 250-255.

While I was in Cornwall, there were great shipwrecks about the Land’s
End. Now it was the custom of that country, that at such a time both
rich and poor went out, to get as much of the wreck as they could, not
caring to save the people’s lives; and in some places, they call
shipwrecks, God’s grace. These things troubled me; it grieved my spirit
to hear of such unchristian actions, considering how far they were below
the heathen at Melita, who received Paul, made him a fire, and were
courteous towards him, and them that had suffered shipwreck with him.
Wherefore I was moved to write a paper, and send it to all the parishes,
priests, and magistrates, to reprove them for such greedy actions, and
to warn and exhort them that, if they could assist to save people’s
lives, and preserve their ships and goods, they should use their
diligence therein; and consider, if it had been their own condition,
they would judge it hard if they should be upon a wreck, and people
should strive to get what they could get from them, and not regard their
lives. A copy of this paper here follows:—

        “FRIENDS AND PEOPLE,

  “Take heed of greediness and covetousness, for that is idolatry; and
  the idolater must not enter into the kingdom of God. Take heed of
  drunkenness, oaths, and cursings, for such are destroyers of the
  creation, and make it to groan. Lay aside all fighting, quarrelling,
  brawling, and evil speakings, which are the works of the flesh, and
  not of the Spirit; for they who follow such things are not likely to
  inherit the kingdom of God. Put away all corrupt words, which are
  unsavoury, and misnaming one another; for ye must give an account of
  every idle word. Lay aside all profession and religion that is vain;
  and come to the possession, and the pure religion, which is to visit
  the fatherless, the widow, and the stranger, and receive them; for
  some thereby may entertain angels, or the servants of the Lord
  unawares, as Paul was entertained after the shipwreck at Melita. Do
  not take people’s goods from them by force out of their ships,
  seamen’s or other’s, neither covet ye them; but rather endeavour to
  preserve their lives, and their goods for them; for that shows a
  spirit of compassion, and the spirit of a Christian. But if ye be
  greedy and covetous of other men’s goods, not mattering what becomes
  of the men, would ye be served so yourselves? If ye should have a ship
  cast away in other places, and the people should come to tear the
  goods and ship in pieces, not regarding to save the men’s lives, but
  be ready to fight one with another for your goods, do not ye believe
  such goods would become a curse to them? And may ye not as surely
  believe, such kind of actions will become a curse unto you? When the
  spoil of one ship’s goods is idly spent, and consumed upon the lusts,
  in ale-houses, taverns, and otherwise, then ye gape for another. Is
  this to ‘do as ye would be done by,’ which is the law and the
  prophets?

  “Therefore, priest Hull, are these thy fruits? What dost thou take
  people’s labour and goods for? Hast thou taught them no better manners
  and conversation, who are so brutish and heathenish? Now all such
  things we judge in whomsoever. But if any Friend, or others, preserve
  men’s lives, and endeavour to save their goods and estates, and
  restore what they can of a wreck to the owners; if they consider such
  for their labour, doing in that case unto them what they would have
  done unto themselves, that we approve. And if they buy or sell, and do
  not make a prey, that is allowed of still, in the way of ‘doing as ye
  would be done by,’ keeping to the law and to the prophets: that is, if
  ye should be wrecked in another country, ye would have other people to
  save your lives and goods, and have your goods restored to you again,
  and you would commend them for so doing. All that do otherwise, that
  wait for a wreck, and get the goods for themselves, not regarding the
  lives of the men: but if any of them escape drowning, let them go
  begging up and down the country; and if any escape with a little,
  sometimes rob them of it;—all that do so, are not for preserving the
  creation, but for destroying it; and those goods which are so gotten,
  shall be a curse, a plague, and a judgment to them, and the judgments
  of God will follow them for acting such things; the witness in your
  consciences shall answer it. Therefore, all ye who have done such
  things, ‘do so no more lest a worse thing come unto you.’ But that
  which is good, do; preserve men’s lives and estates, and labour to
  restore the loss and breach; that the Lord requires. Be not like a
  company of greedy dogs, and worse than heathens, as if ye had never
  heard of God, nor Christ, nor the Scriptures, nor pure religion.

  “And priest Hull, have people spent their money upon thee, for that
  which is no bread? for a thing of nought, that thou hast such fruits?
  All such teachers we utterly deny as make a trade of the Scriptures,
  which are given forth from the Spirit of God, that they may be
  believed, read, and practised, and that Christ, whom they testify of,
  may be enjoyed. We own Christ, and are come off from all your
  steeple-houses, which were the old mass-houses; for there are their
  bad fruits harboured. Come to the Church which is in God (1 Thess.
  i.), and to the light which Christ Jesus hath enlightened you withal,
  which shows you all your ungodly words, ungodly thoughts, and ungodly
  actions. This will be your teacher, if ye love it; your condemnation
  if ye hate it; for the mighty day of the Lord is coming upon all
  wickedness and ungodliness; therefore lay aside your whoredoms and
  fornications.

  “And ye magistrates who are to do justice, think ye not that the hand
  of the Lord God is against you, and that his judgments will come upon
  you, who do not look after these things and stop them with the law,
  which is, ‘to do unto all men, as they would have done unto them,’
  whereby ye might be good savour in your country? Is not the law to
  preserve men’s lives and estates, ‘doing unto all men, as they would
  that men should do unto them?’ For all men would have their lives and
  estates preserved; therefore, should not ye preserve others, and not
  suffer them to be devoured and destroyed? The evil of these things
  will lie upon you, both priests and magistrates.”

                                                               G. F.

  ”_Postscript._—All dear Friends who fear the Lord, keep out of the
  ravenous world’s spirit, which leads to destroy, and which is out of
  the wisdom of God. When ships are wrecked, do not run to destroy and
  make havoc of ship and goods with the world; but to save the men, and
  the goods for them, and so deny yourselves, ‘and do unto them, as ye
  would that they should do unto you.’”

                                                               G. F.

This paper had good service among the people; and Friends have
endeavoured much to save the lives of the crews in times of wrecks, and
to preserve the ships and goods for them. And when some that have
suffered shipwreck, have been almost dead and starved, Friends have
taken them to their houses, to succour and recover them; which is an act
to be practised by all true Christians.

I had many precious, blessed, living meetings in Cornwall, several
eminent people being convinced in that county, whom neither priests nor
magistrates, by spoiling goods or imprisonments, could make to forsake
their Shepherd, the Lord Jesus, who bought them; and all Friends, who
were turned to Christ, their Teacher and Saviour, being settled in peace
and quietness upon him, their foundation, we left them to the Lord Jesus
Christ’s teaching and ordering, fresh and green. Thomas Lower, who had
accompanied me through all that county, brought me over Horse-bridge
into DEVONSHIRE again; and after several meetings there, we came into
SOMERSETSHIRE, where we had divers large and peaceable meetings; and so
passed through the county, visiting Friends, till we came to BRISTOL.

I entered BRISTOL on the seventh day of the week. The day before, the
soldiers came with their muskets into the meeting, and were exceedingly
rude, beating and striking Friends with them, and drove them out of the
orchard in a great rage, threatening what they would do, if Friends came
there again. For the mayor and the commander of the soldiers had, it
seems, combined together to make a disturbance amongst Friends. When
Friends told me what a rage there was in the town, how they were
threatened by the mayor and soldiers, and how unruly the soldiers had
been the day before, I sent for several Friends, as George Bishop,
Thomas Gouldney, Thomas Speed, and Edward Pyot, and desired them to go
to the mayor and aldermen, and request them, seeing he and they had
broken up our meetings, to let Friends have the town-hall to meet in;
and for the use of it Friends would give them twenty pounds a-year, to
be distributed amongst the poor; and when the mayor and aldermen had
business to do in it, Friends would not meet in it, but only on
First-days. These Friends were astonished at this, and said the mayor
and aldermen would think that they were mad. I said, nay; for this would
be a considerable benefit to the poor. And it was upon me from the Lord
to bid them go. At last they consented, and went, though in the cross to
their own wills. When they had laid the thing before the mayor, he said,
“for his part he could consent to it, but he was but one:” and he told
Friends of another great hall they might have, but that they did not
accept, it being inconvenient. So Friends came away, leaving the mayor
in a very loving frame towards them; for they felt the Lord’s power had
come over him. When they came back, I spoke to them to go also to the
colonel that commanded the soldiers, and lay before him the rude conduct
of his soldiers, how they came armed amongst innocent people, who were
waiting upon, and worshipping the Lord; but they were backward to go to
him.

Next morning, being first day, we went to the meeting in the orchard,
where the soldiers had so lately been so rude. After I had declared the
truth some time in the meeting, there came in many rude soldiers and
people, some with drawn swords. The innkeepers had made some of them
drunk; and one had bound himself with an oath, to cut down and kill the
man that spoke. He came pressing in, through all the crowd of people, to
within two yards of me, and stopped at those four Friends before
mentioned (who should have gone to the colonel as I would have had
them,) and began jangling with them. Suddenly I saw his sword was put up
and gone: for the Lord’s power came over all, and chained him with the
rest. We had a blessed meeting, and the Lord’s everlasting power and
presence was felt amongst us. On the day following, the four Friends
went and spoke with the colonel, and he sent for the soldiers, and cut
and slashed some of them before the Friends’ faces; which when I heard
of I blamed the Friends for letting him do so, and also that they did
not go on the seventh day, as I would have had them, which might have
prevented this cutting of the soldiers, and the trouble they gave at our
meeting. But thus the Lord’s power came over all those persecuting,
bloody minds, and the meeting there was held in peace for a good while
after without disturbance.

I had then also a general meeting at Edward Pyot’s, near Bristol, at
which it was supposed were several thousands; for besides Friends from
many parts thereabouts, some of the Baptists and Independents, with
their teachers, came to it, and many of the sober people of Bristol;
insomuch that the people that stayed behind said, “the city looked
naked,” so many were gone out of it to this meeting. It was very quiet,
many glorious truths were opened to the people, and the Lord Jesus
Christ was set up, who was the end of all figures and shadows of the
law, and the first covenant. It was declared to the people that all
figures and shadows were given to man, after he fell; and that all the
rudiments and inventions of men, which have been set up in Christendom,
many of which were Jewish and heathenish, were not set up by the command
of Christ; and all images and likenesses man has made to himself, or for
himself, whether of things in heaven or things in earth, have been since
he lost the image and likeness of God, which God made him in. But now
Christ is come to redeem, translate, convert, and regenerate man out of
all these things that he hath set up in the fall, out of the true types,
figures, and shadows also, and out of death and darkness, into the
light, life, and image of God again, which man and woman were in before
they fell. Therefore all now should come, and all might come to receive,
Christ Jesus, the substance, by his light, Spirit, grace, and faith; and
should live and walk in him, the Redeemer and Saviour.

And as we had much work with priests and professors, who pleaded for
imperfection, I was opened to declare and manifest unto them, that Adam
and Eve were perfect before they fell; and God saw that all that he had
made, was good, and he blessed it. But imperfection came in by the fall,
through man and woman’s hearkening to the devil, who was out of truth.
And though the law made nothing perfect, yet it made way for the
bringing in of the better hope, which hope is Christ, who destroys the
devil and his works, that made man and woman imperfect. Christ saith to
his disciples, “Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect:”
and he, who himself was perfect, comes to make man and woman perfect
again, and brings them again to the state which God made them in. So he
is the maker up of the breach, and the peace between God and man.

That this might the better be understood by the lowest capacities, I
used a comparison of two old people, that had their house broken down by
an enemy, so that they, with all their children, were liable to all
storms and tempests. And there came some to them that pretended to be
workmen, and offered to build up their house again, if they would give
them so much a-year: but when they had got their money, they left their
house as they found it. After this manner came a second, third, fourth,
fifth, and sixth, each with his several pretence, to build up the old
house, and each got the people’s money; and then cried, “they could not
rear up the house, nor could the breach be made up; for there is no
perfection here, cry they; the house can never be perfectly built up
again in this life;” though they had taken the people’s money for the
doing of it. For all the sect-masters in Christendom (so called) have
pretended to build up Adam and Eve’s fallen house, and when they have
got people’s money, they tell them the work cannot be perfectly done
here; and so their house lies as it did. But I told the people, Christ
was come to do it freely, who, by one offering, hath perfected for ever
all them that are sanctified, and renews them into the image of God,
which man and woman were in before they fell, and makes man and woman’s
house as perfect again as God made them at the first: and this, Christ,
the heavenly man, doth freely. Therefore all are to look unto him, and
all that have received him, are to walk in him, the life, the substance,
the first and the last, the rock of ages, and foundation of many
generations. Largely were these, and many other things, opened and
declared unto the people, the word of life was preached, which doth live
and abide; and all were exhorted to hear and obey that which liveth and
abideth, that by it all might be born again of the immortal Seed, and
feed on the milk of the Word. A glorious meeting there was, wherein the
Lord’s everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus, was set over all, and Friends
parted in the power and Spirit of the Lord, in peace and in his truth,
that is over all.

About this time the soldiers under General Monk’s command were rude and
troublesome at Friends’ meetings in many places, whereof complaint being
made to him, he gave forth the following order, which somewhat
restrained them:—

                             “_St. James’s, the 9th of March, 1659._

  “I do require all officers and soldiers to forbear to disturb the
  peaceable meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to
  the Parliament or Commonwealth of England.

                                                      “GEORGE MONK.”

After the meeting at Edward Pyot’s I passed to OLVESTON, to NAILSWORTH,
and to Nathaniel Crisp’s; where there was a large meeting, and several
soldiers at it, but quiet. From thence we passed to GLOUCESTER, visiting
meetings. In Gloucester we had a peaceable meeting, though the town was
very rude, and divided; for one part of the soldiers were for the king,
and another for the parliament. As I passed out of the town, over the
bridge, Edward Pyot being with me, the soldiers there said, “they were
for the king;” but after we were past them, and they understood it was
I, they were in a great rage that I had escaped them, and said, “had
they known it had been I, they would have shot me with hail-shot, rather
than I should have escaped them.” But the Lord prevented their devilish
design, and brought me safe to Colonel Grimes’s house, where we had a
large general meeting, and the Lord’s truth and power was set over all;
Friends were established upon the Rock, and settled under the Lord Jesus
Christ’s teaching.

We passed thence to TEWKESBURY, and so to WORCESTER, visiting Friends in
their meetings as we went. And in all my time I never saw the like
drunkenness as in the towns, for they had been choosing parliament-men.
At Worcester the Lord’s truth was set over all, people were finely
settled therein, and Friends praised the Lord; nay, I saw the very earth
rejoiced. Yet great fears and troubles were in many people, and a
looking for the king’s coming in, and all things being altered. They
would ask me what I thought of times and things. I told them the Lord’s
power was over all, and his light shone over all; that fear would take
hold only on the hypocrites, such as had not been faithful to God, and
on our persecutors. For in my travail and sufferings at Reading, when
people were at a stand, and could not tell what might come in, and who
might rule, I told them the Lord’s power was over all (for I had
travelled through in it), and his day shined, whosoever should come in;
and whether the king came in or not, all would be well to them that
loved the Lord, and were faithful to him. Therefore I bid all Friends
fear none but the Lord, and keep in his power that was over all.

From Worcester I visited Friends in their meetings, till I came to
BADDESLEY, and thence I went to DRAYTON, in Leicestershire, to visit my
relations. While there, one Burton, a justice, hearing I had a good
horse, sent a warrant to search for me and my horse; but I was gone
before they came; and so he missed of his wicked end. I passed on to
TWY-CROSS, SWANNINGTON, and DERBY, where I visited Friends, and found my
old jailer amongst them, who had formerly kept me in the house of
correction there, now convinced of the truth, which I then suffered
under him for.

Passing into Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, I came to SYNDERHILL-GREEN,
visiting Friends through all those parts in their meetings, and so on to
BALBY in Yorkshire, where our Yearly Meeting at that time was held in a
great orchard of John Killam’s, where it was supposed some thousands of
people and Friends were gathered together. In the morning I heard that a
troop of horse was sent from York, to break up our meeting, and that the
militia, newly raised, was to join them. I went into the meeting, and
stood up on a great stool, and after I had spoken some time, two
trumpeters came up, sounding their trumpets near me, and the captain of
the troop cried, “Divide to the right and left, and make way;” then they
rode up to me. I was declaring the everlasting truth, and word of life,
in the mighty power of the Lord. The captain bid me “come down, for he
was come to disperse our meeting.” After some time I told him they all
knew we were a peaceable people, and used to have such great meetings;
but if he apprehended that we met in a hostile way, I desired him to
make search among us, and if he found either sword or pistol about any
there, let such suffer. He told me, “he must see us dispersed, for he
came all night on purpose to disperse us.” I asked him, “what honour it
would be to him, to ride with swords and pistols amongst so many unarmed
men and women as there were?” If he would be still and quiet, our
meeting probably might not continue above two or three hours; and when
it was done, as we came peaceably together, so we should part; for he
might perceive the meeting was so large, that all the country
thereabouts could not entertain them, but that they intended to depart
towards their homes at night. He said “he could not stay to see the
meeting ended, but must disperse them before he went.” I desired him
then, if he himself could not stay, that he would let a dozen of his
soldiers stay, and see the order and peaceableness of our meeting. He
said, “he would permit us an hour’s time;” and left half a dozen
soldiers with us. Then he went away with his troop, and Friends of the
house gave the soldiers that stayed, and their horses, some meat. When
the captain was gone, the soldiers that were left told us, “we might
stay till night if we would.” But we stayed but about three hours after,
and had a glorious, powerful meeting; for the presence of the living God
was manifest amongst us; the Seed, Christ, was set over all, and Friends
were built upon him, the foundation, and settled under his glorious,
heavenly teaching.

After the meeting, Friends passed away in peace, greatly refreshed with
the presence of the Lord, and filled with joy and gladness, that the
Lord’s power had given them such dominion. Many of the militia soldiers
stayed also, and were much vexed that the captain and troopers had not
broken up our meeting, and cursed them. It was reported that they
intended to do us some mischief that day; but the troopers, instead of
assisting them, were rather assistant to us, in not joining with them,
as they expected, but preventing them from doing the mischief they
designed. Yet this captain was a desperate man, for it was he that had
said to me in Scotland, that “he would obey his superior’s commands; and
if it were to crucify Christ he would do it; or execute the great Turk’s
commands against the Christians, if he were under him.” So that it was
an eminent power of the Lord, which chained both him and his troopers,
and those envious militia-soldiers also, who went away, not having power
to hurt any of us, nor to break up our meeting.

Next day we had a heavenly meeting at WARMSWORTH, of Friends in the
ministry and several others; and then Friends parted. As they passed
through the country, several were taken up. For the day that our first
meeting was held on, Lambert was routed, and it made great confusion in
the country; but Friends were not kept long in prison at that time. As I
went to this meeting at Balby, there came several to me at Skegby in
Nottinghamshire, that were then going to be soldiers under Lambert, and
would have bought my horse of me; and because I would not sell him, they
were in a great rage against me, using many threatening words; but I
told them, “God would confound and scatter them;” and within two or
three days after, they were scattered indeed.

From Warmsworth, I passed in the Lord’s power to BARTON-ABBEY, [Monk
Bretton] where I had a great meeting; and thence to Thomas Taylor’s, and
so to SKIPTON, where there was a general meeting of men Friends out of
many counties, concerning the affairs of the church.[64] A Friend went
naked [divested of the upper garments] through the town, declaring
truth, and he was much beaten. Some others also came to me all bloody.
As I walked in the street, a desperate fellow had an intent to do me a
mischief; but he was prevented, and our meeting was quiet. To this
meeting came many Friends out of most parts of the nation; for it was
about business relating to the church, both in this nation and beyond
the seas.

Footnote 64:

  General Meetings and Yearly Meetings appear to have been somewhat
  similar in their character. They were held in various parts. The first
  of which we have any account took place at Swannington, in
  Leicestershire, in 1654.

Several years before, when I was in the North, I was moved to recommend
the setting up of this meeting for that service; for many Friends
suffered in divers parts of the nation, their goods were taken from them
contrary to the law, and they understood not how to help themselves, or
where to seek redress. But after this meeting was set up, several
Friends who had been magistrates, and others that understood something
of the law, came thither, and were able to inform Friends, and to assist
them in gathering up the sufferings, that they might be laid before the
justices, judges, or Parliament. This meeting had stood several years,
and divers justices and captains had come to break it up; but when they
understood the business Friends met about, and saw their books and
accounts of collections for relief of the poor, how we took care one
county to help another, and to help our friends beyond the seas, and
provide for our poor, that none of them should be chargeable to their
parishes, &c., the justices and officers confessed we did their work,
and passed away peaceably and lovingly, commending Friends’ practice.
Sometimes there would come two hundred of the poor of other people, and
wait there till the meeting was done (for all the country knew we met
about the poor,) and after the meeting, Friends would send to the bakers
for bread, and give every one of these poor people a loaf, how many
soever there were of them; for we were taught to “do good unto all;
though especially to the household of faith.”

After this meeting I visited Friends in their meetings, till I came to
LANCASTER; whence I went to Robert Widders’s, and so to ARNSIDE, where I
had a general meeting for all the Friends in Westmorland, Cumberland,
and Lancashire. It was quiet and peaceable, and the living presence of
the Lord was amongst us. I went back with Robert Widders; and Friends
all passed away, fresh in the life and power of Christ, in which they
had dominion, being settled upon him, the heavenly rock and foundation.
After the meeting, there came several rude fellows, serving-men,
belonging to one called Sir George Middleton, a justice that lived near,
to make some disturbance, as it was thought. The meeting being ended,
they did nothing there; but lighting on three women Friends going from
it, they set upon them with impudent scoffs, and one of them carried
himself very abusively and immodestly towards them. The same man abused
other Friends also, and was so outrageous that he would have cut them
with an axe; but was restrained by some of his fellows. Another time the
same man set upon six Friends that were going to meeting, at Yealand,
and beat and abused them very much, so that he bruised their faces, and
shed much of their blood, wounding them very sore, one of them in
several parts of his body; yet they lifted not up a hand against him,
but gave him their backs and their cheeks to beat.

From Robert Widders’s I went next day to SWARTHMORE, Francis Howgill and
Thomas Curtis being with me. I had not been long there before Henry
Porter, a justice, sent a warrant by the chief constable and three petty
constables to apprehend me. I had a sense of this beforehand; and being
in the parlour with Richard Richardson and Margaret Fell, her servants
came, and told her there were some come to search the house for arms;
and they went up into the chambers under that pretence. It came upon me
to go out to them; and as I was going by some of them, I spoke to them;
whereupon they asked me my name. I readily told them my name; and then
they laid hold on me, saying, “I was the man they looked for,” and led
me away to ULVERSTONE. They kept me all night at the constable’s house,
and set a guard of fifteen or sixteen men to watch me; some of whom sat
in the chimney, for fear I should go up it; such dark imaginations
possessed them. They were very rude and uncivil, and would neither
suffer me to speak to Friends, nor suffer them to bring me necessaries;
but with violence thrust them out, and kept a strong guard upon me. Very
wicked and rude they were, and a great noise they made about me. One of
the constables, whose name was Ashburnham, said, “He did not think a
thousand men could have taken me.” Another of the constables, whose name
was Mount, a very wicked man, said, “He would have served Judge Fell
himself so, if he had been alive, and he had had a warrant for him.”

Next morning, about six, I was putting on my boots and spurs to go with
them before some justice; but they pulled off the latter, took my knife
out of my pocket, and hastened me away along the town, with a party of
horse and abundance of people, not suffering me to stay till my own
horse came down. When I was gone about a quarter of a mile with them,
some Friends, with Margaret Fell and her children, came towards me; and
then a great party of horse gathered about me in a mad rage and fury,
crying out, “Will they rescue him? Will they rescue him?” Whereupon I
said unto them, “Here is my hair, here is my back, here are my cheeks,
strike on!” With these words their heat was a little assuaged. Then they
brought a little horse, and two of them took up one of my legs, and put
my foot in the stirrup, and two or three lifting over my other leg, set
me upon it behind the saddle, and so led the horse by the halter; but I
had nothing to hold by. When they were come some distance out of the
town, they beat the little horse, and made him kick and gallop;
whereupon I slipped off him, and told them, “They should not abuse the
creature.” They were much enraged at my getting off, and took me by the
legs and feet, and set me upon the same horse, behind the saddle again;
and so led it about two miles, till they came to a great water called
the CARTER-FORD. By this time my own horse was come to us, and the water
being deep, and their little horse scarcely able to carry me through,
they let me get upon my own, through the persuasion of some of their own
company, leading him through the water. One wicked fellow kneeled down,
and lifting up his hands, blessed God, that I was taken. When I was come
over the Sands, I told them I heard I had liberty to choose what justice
I would go before; but Mount and the other constables cried, “No, I
should not.” Then they led me to LANCASTER, about fourteen miles, and a
great triumph they thought to have had; but as they led me, I was moved
“to sing praises to the Lord, in his triumphing power over all.”

When I was come to Lancaster, the spirits of the people being mightily
up, I stood and looked earnestly upon them; and they cried, “Look at his
eyes!” After a while I spoke to them; and then they were pretty sober.
Then came a young man, and took me to his house; and after a little time
the officers had me to Major Porter’s, the justice, and who had sent
forth the warrant against me; he had several others with him. When I
came in, I said, “Peace be amongst you.” Porter asked me, “Why I came
down into the country that troublesome time?” I told him, “To visit my
brethren.” “Then,” said he, “you have great meetings up and down.” I
told him though we had, our meetings were known throughout the nation to
be peaceable, and we were a peaceable people. He said, “We saw the devil
in people’s faces.” I told him, “If I saw a drunkard, or a swearer, or a
peevish, heady man, I could not say I saw the Spirit of God in him.” And
I asked him, “If he could see the Spirit of God?” He said, “We cried
against their ministers.” I told him, while we were as Saul, sitting
under the priests, and running up and down with their packets of
letters, we were never called pestilent fellows, nor makers of sects;
but when we were come to exercise our consciences towards God and man,
we were called pestilent fellows, as Paul was. He said, we could express
ourselves well enough, and he would not dispute with me; but he would
restrain me. I desired to know, “for what, and by whose order he sent
his warrant for me;” and I complained to him of the abuse of the
constables and other officers, after they had taken me, and in their
bringing me thither. He would not take notice of that, but told me, “He
had an order, but would not let me see it; for he would not reveal the
king’s secrets;” and besides, “a prisoner,” he said, “was not to see for
what he was committed.” I told him, that was not reason; for how should
he make his defence then? I said, “I ought to have a copy of it;” but he
said, “There was a judge once that fined a man for letting a prisoner
have a copy of his mittimus; and,” said he, “I have an old clerk, though
I am a young justice.” Then he called to his clerk, saying, “Is it not
ready yet? Bring it,” meaning the mittimus; but it not being ready, he
said to me, “I was a disturber of the nation.” I told him, I had been a
blessing to the nation, in and through the Lord’s power and truth, and
the Spirit of God in all consciences would answer it.

Then he charged me as “an enemy to the king; that I endeavoured to raise
a new war, and imbrue the nation in blood again.” I told him, I had
never learned the postures of war, but was clear and innocent as a child
concerning those things, and therefore was bold. Then came the clerk
with the mittimus, and the jailer was sent for, and commanded to take
and put me into the Dark-house, and to let none come to me; but keep me
there a close prisoner, till I should be delivered by the king or
parliament. Then the justice asked the constables where my horse was;
“for I hear,” said he, “that he has a good horse; have ye brought it?” I
told him where my horse was, but he did not meddle with him. As they
took me to the jail, the constable gave me my knife again, and then
asked me to give it him; but I told him, nay, he had not been so civil
to me. So they put me into the jail, and the under-jailer, one Hardy, a
very wicked man, was exceedingly rude and cruel, and many times would
not let me have meat brought in, but as I could get it under the door.
Many people came to look at me, some in great rage, and very uncivil and
rude. Once there came two young priests, and very abusive they were; the
worst of people could not be worse. Amongst those that came in this
manner, old Preston’s wife, of Holker, was one. She used many abusive
words, telling me, “My tongue should be cut out,” and that “I should be
hanged;” showing me the gallows. But the Lord God cut her off, and she
died in a miserable condition.

Being now a close prisoner in the common jail at Lancaster, I desired
Thomas Cummins and Thomas Green to go to the jailer, and desire of him a
copy of my mittimus, that I might know what I stood committed for. They
went; and the jailer answered, “he could not give a copy of it, for
another had been fined for so doing:” but he gave them liberty to read
it over. To the best of their remembrance the matters therein charged
against me were, “that I was a person generally suspected to be a common
disturber of the peace of the nation, an enemy to the king, and a chief
upholder of the Quakers’ sect; and that, together with others of my
fanatic opinion, I have of late endeavoured to raise insurrections in
these parts of the country, and to embroil the whole kingdom in blood.
Wherefore the jailer was commanded to keep me in safe custody, until I
should be released by order of the king and parliament.”

When I had thus got the heads of the charge contained in the mittimus, I
wrote a plain answer, in vindication of my innocency in each particular;
as follows:—

  “I am a prisoner at Lancaster, committed by Justice Porter. A copy of
  the mittimus I cannot get, but such expressions I am told are in it,
  as are very untrue; as ‘that I am generally suspected to be a common
  disturber of the nation’s peace, an enemy to the king, and that I,
  with others, endeavour to raise insurrections to embroil the nation in
  blood;’ all of which is utterly false, and I do, in every part
  thereof, deny it. for I am not a person generally suspected to be a
  disturber of the nation’s peace, nor have I given any cause for such
  suspicion; for through the nation I have been tried for these things
  formerly. In the days of Oliver, I was taken up on pretence of raising
  arms against him, which was also false; for I meddled not with raising
  arms at all. Yet I was then carried up a prisoner to London, and
  brought before him; when I cleared myself, and denied the drawing of a
  carnal weapon against him, or any man upon the earth; for my weapons
  are spiritual, which take away the occasion of war, and lead into
  peace. Upon my declaring this to Oliver, I was set at liberty by him.

  “After this I was taken, and sent to prison by Major Ceely in
  Cornwall, who, when I was brought before the judge, informed against
  me, ‘that I took him aside, and told him, that I could raise forty
  thousand men in an hour’s time, to involve the nation in blood, and
  bring in King Charles.’ This also was utterly false, and a lie of his
  own inventing, as was then proved upon him: for I never spoke any such
  word to him. I never was found in any plot; I never took any
  engagement or oath; nor ever learned war-postures. As those were false
  charges against me then, so are these now, which come from Major
  Porter, who is lately appointed to be justice, but wanted power
  formerly to exercise his cruelty against us; which is but the
  wickedness of the old enemy. The peace of the nation I am not a
  disturber of, nor ever was; but seek the peace of it, and of all men,
  and stand for all nations’ peace, and all men’s peace upon the earth,
  and wish all knew my innocency in these things.

  “And whereas Major Porter says, ‘I am an enemy to the king:’ this is
  false; for my love is to him and to all men, though they be enemies to
  God, to themselves, and to me. And I can say, it is of the Lord that
  he is come in, to bring down many unrighteously set up; of which I had
  a sight three years before he came in. It is much he should say I am
  an enemy to the king, for I have no reason so to be, he having done
  nothing against me. But I have been often imprisoned and persecuted
  these eleven or twelve years by them that have been against both the
  king and his father, even the party that Porter was made a major by,
  and bore arms for; but not by them that were for the king. I was never
  an enemy to the king, nor to any man’s person upon the earth. I am in
  the love that fulfils the law, which thinks no evil, but loves even
  enemies, and would have the king saved, and come to the knowledge of
  the truth, and be brought into the fear of the Lord, to receive his
  wisdom from above, by which all things were made and created; that
  with that wisdom he may order all things to the glory of God.

  “Whereas he calls me, ‘a chief upholder of the Quakers’ sect.’ I
  answer: the Quakers are not a sect, but are in the power of God, which
  was before sects were; they witness the election before the world
  began, and are come to live in the life, which the prophets and
  apostles lived in, who gave forth the Scriptures; therefore are we
  hated by envious, wrathful, wicked, and persecuting men. But God is
  the upholder of us all by his mighty power, and preserves us from the
  wrath of the wicked, that would swallow us up.

  “And whereas he says, ‘that I, together with others of my fanatic
  opinion, as he calls it, have of late endeavoured to raise
  insurrections, and to embroil the whole kingdom in blood:’ I say this
  is altogether false; to these things I am as a child, and know nothing
  of them. The postures of war I never learned: my weapons are spiritual
  and not carnal: for with carnal weapons I do not fight: I am a
  follower of him who said, ‘My kingdom is not of this world.’ And
  though these lies and slanders are raised upon me, I deny the drawing
  of any carnal weapon against the king or parliament, or any man upon
  earth; for I am come to the end of the law, ‘to love enemies, and
  wrestle not with flesh and blood;’ but am in that which saves men’s
  lives. A witness I am against all murderers, plotters, and all such as
  would ‘imbrue the nation in blood;’ for it is not in my heart to have
  any man’s life destroyed. And as for the word fanatic, which signifies
  furious, foolish, mad, &c., he might have considered himself, before
  he had used that word, and have learned the humility which goes before
  honour. We are not furious, foolish, or mad; but through patience and
  meekness have borne lies and slanders, and persecutions many years,
  and have undergone great sufferings. The spiritual man that wrestles
  not with flesh and blood, and the Spirit that reproves sin in the
  gate, which is the Spirit of truth, wisdom, and sound judgment; this
  is not mad, foolish, furious, which fanatic signifies; but all are of
  a mad, furious, foolish spirit, that wrestle with flesh and blood,
  with carnal weapons, in their furiousness, foolishness, and rage. This
  is not the Spirit of God, but of error, that persecutes in a mad,
  blind zeal, like Nebuchadnezzar and Saul.

  “Now, inasmuch as I am ordered to be kept prisoner, till I be
  delivered by order from the king or parliament, therefore have I
  written these things to be laid before you, the king and parliament,
  that ye may consider of them before ye act anything therein; that ye
  may weigh, in the wisdom of God, the intent and end of men’s spirits,
  lest ye act the thing that will bring the hand of the Lord upon you,
  and against you, as many have done before, who have been in authority,
  whom God hath overthrown; in whom we trust, whom we fear and cry unto
  day and night;—who hath heard us, doth, and will hear us, and avenge
  our cause. For much innocent blood has been shed; and many have been
  persecuted to death by such as have been in authority before you, whom
  God hath vomited out, because they turned against the just. Therefore
  consider your standing, now that ye have the day, and receive this as
  a warning of love to you.

    “From an innocent sufferer in bonds, and close prisoner in Lancaster
      Castle, called

                                                       “GEORGE FOX.”

Upon my being taken and forcibly carried away from Margaret Fell’s
house, and charged with things of so high a nature, she was
concerned, looking upon it to be an injury offered to herself.
Whereupon she wrote the following lines, and distributed them:—

      _“To all Magistrates, concerning the wrong taking up, and
               imprisoning of George Fox at Lancaster._

  “I do inform the governors of this nation, that Henry Porter,
  mayor of Lancaster, sent a warrant, with four constables, to my
  house, for which he had no authority or order. They searched my
  house, and apprehended George Fox in it, who was not guilty of the
  breach of any law, or of any offence against any in the nation.
  After they had taken him, and brought him before the said Henry
  Porter, bail was offered, what he would demand, for his
  appearance, to answer what could be laid to his charge; but he
  (contrary to law, if he had taken him lawfully) refused to accept
  of any bail, and put him in close prison. After he was in prison,
  a copy of his mittimus was demanded, which ought not to be denied
  to any prisoner, so that he may see what is laid to his charge;
  but it was denied him: a copy he could not have, they were
  suffered only to read it over. Every thing that was there charged
  against him was utterly false; he was not guilty of any one charge
  in it, as will be proved and manifested to the nation. Let the
  governors consider it. I am concerned in this thing, inasmuch as
  he was apprehended in my house; and if he be guilty, I am too. So
  I desire to have this searched out.

                                                    “MARGARET FELL.”

After this Margaret Fell determined to go to London, to speak with
the king about my being taken, and to show him the manner of it, and
the unjust dealing and evil usage I had received. When Justice
Porter heard of this, he vapoured, that he would go and meet her in
the gap. But when he came before the king, having been a zealous man
for the parliament against the king, several of the courtiers spoke
to him concerning his plundering their houses; so that he quickly
had enough of the court, and soon returned into the country.
Meanwhile the jailer seemed very fearful, and said, he was afraid
Major Porter would hang him, because he had not put me in the
Dark-house. But when the jailer waited on him, after his return from
London, he was very blank and down, and asked, “how I did,”
pretending he would find a way to set me at liberty. But having
overshot himself in his mittimus, by ordering me “to be kept a
prisoner till I should be delivered by the king or parliament,” he
had put it out of his power to release me if he would. He was the
more down also upon reading a letter which I sent him; for when he
was in the height of his rage and threats against me, and thought to
ingratiate himself into the king’s favour by imprisoning me, I was
moved to write to him, and put him in mind, “how fierce he had been
against the king and his party, though now he would be thought
zealous for the king.” Among other things in my letter, I called to
his remembrance, that when he held Lancaster Castle for the
parliament against the king, he was so rough and fierce against
those that favoured the king, that he said, “he would leave them
neither dog nor cat, if they did not bring him provision to the
castle.” I asked him also, “whose great buck’s horns those were,
that were in his house; and where he had both them and the wainscot
from that he ceiled his house withal; had he them not from Hornby
Castle?”

About this time Ann Curtis, of Reading, came to see me; and
understanding how I stood committed, it was upon her also to go to
the king about it. Her father, who had been sheriff of Bristol, had
been hung near his own door for endeavouring to bring in the king;
on which consideration she had some hopes the king might hear her on
my behalf. Accordingly, when she returned to London, she and
Margaret Fell went to the king together, who, when he understood
whose daughter she was, received her kindly. And her request to him
being “to send for me up, and hear the cause himself,” he promised
her he would, and commanded his secretary to send down an order for
bringing me up. But when they came to the secretary for the order,
he, being no friend to us, said, “it was not in his power; he must
act according to law, and I must be brought up by an _habeas corpus_
before the judges.” So he wrote to the judge of the King’s Bench,
signifying that it was the king’s pleasure, that I should be sent up
by an _habeas corpus_. Accordingly a writ was sent down, and
delivered to the sheriff; but because it was directed to the
chancellor of Lancaster, the sheriff put it off to him; on the other
hand, the chancellor would not make the warrant upon it, but said
the sheriff must do that. At length both chancellor and sheriff were
got together; but being both enemies to truth, they sought occasion
for delay, and found, they said, an error in the writ, which was,
that being directed to the chancellor, it stated, “George Fox in
prison under _your_ custody,” whereas the prison I was in was not,
they said, in the chancellor’s custody, but in the sheriff’s; so the
word _your_ should have been _his_. On this they returned the writ
to London, only to have that one word altered. When it was altered,
and brought down again, the sheriff refused to carry me up, unless I
would seal a writing to him, and become bound to pay for the
sealing, and the charge of carrying me up; which I refused, telling
them I would not seal anything to them, nor be bound. So the matter
rested a while, and I continued in prison.

Meanwhile the assize came on; but as there was a writ for removing
me up, I was not brought before the judge. At the assize many people
came to see me; and I was moved to speak out of the jail window to
them, and show them “how uncertain their religion was; and that
every sort, when uppermost, had persecuted the rest. When Popery was
uppermost, people had been persecuted for not following the mass;
and they who then held up the mass cried, ‘It was the higher power,
and people must be subject to the higher power.’ Afterwards, they
that set up the Common Prayer persecuted others for not following
that; saying, ‘It was the higher power then also, and we must be
subject to that.’ Since that, the Presbyterians and Independents
cried each of them, ‘We must be subject to the higher power, and
submit to the directory of the one, and the church-faith of the
other.’ Thus all, like the apostate Jews, have cried, ‘Help, men of
Israel, against the true Christians.’ So people might see, how
uncertain they are of their religions. But I directed them to Christ
Jesus, that they might be built upon him, the rock and foundation,
that changeth not.” Much on this wise I declared to them, and they
were very quiet and very attentive.

Afterwards I gave forth a paper concerning True Religion, as
follows:

  “True Religion is the true rule, and right way of serving God; a
  pure stream of righteousness, flowing from the image of God; the
  life and power of God planted in the heart and mind by the law of
  life, which bringeth the soul, mind, spirit, and body to be
  conformable to God, the Father of spirits, and to Christ; so that
  they come to have fellowship with the Father and the Son, and with
  all his holy angels and saints. This religion is from above, pure
  and undefiled before God, leads to visit the fatherless, widows,
  and strangers, and keeps from the spots of the world. This
  religion is above all the defiled, spotted religions in the world,
  that keep not their professors from defilement, but leave them
  impure, below, and spotted; whose fatherless, and widows, and
  strangers beg up and down the streets.”

                                                               G. F.

Soon after I gave forth a paper against persecution as follows:

  “The Papists, Common-Prayer-men, Presbyterians, Independents, and
  Baptists persecute one another about their own inventions, their
  mass, common-prayer, directory, and church-faith, which they have
  made, and framed, and not for the truth; for they know not what
  spirit they are of, who persecute, and would have men’s lives
  destroyed about church-worship and religion, as saith Christ; who
  also said, ‘He came not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.’
  Now we cannot trust our bodies, souls, or spirits into the hands
  of those that know not what spirit they are of, but will persecute
  and destroy men’s lives, and not save them; they know not what
  spirit they are of themselves, therefore they are not fit to be
  trusted with others. They would destroy by a law, as the disciples
  once would have done by prayer, who would have commanded ‘fire to
  come down from heaven’ to destroy them that would not receive
  Christ. But Christ rebuked them, and told them they did not know
  what spirit they were of. If they did not know what spirit they
  were of, do these who have persecuted about church and religion
  since the apostles’ days, who would compel men’s bodies, goods,
  lives, souls, and estates, into their hands by a law, or make them
  suffer? Those that destroy men’s lives are not the ministers of
  Christ, the Saviour; and seeing they know not what spirit they are
  of, the lives, bodies, and souls of men are not to be trusted in
  their hands. And ye that persecute shall have no resurrection to
  life with God, except ye repent. But they that know what spirit
  they are of themselves, are in the unrebukable zeal, and by the
  spirit of God they offer up their spirits, souls, and bodies to
  the Lord, which are his, to keep them.”

                                                               G. F.

Whilst I was kept in Lancaster jail, I was moved to give forth the
following paper, “for staying the minds of any such as might be
hurried or troubled about the change of government”:—

  “ALL FRIENDS, let the dread and majesty of God fill you! And as
  concerning the changing of times and governments, let not that
  trouble any of you; for God hath a mighty work and hand therein.
  He will yet change again, until that come up, which must reign; in
  vain shall powers and armies withstand the Lord, for his
  determined work shall come to pass. But it is just with the Lord
  that what is now come up should be so, and he will be served by
  it. Therefore let none murmur, nor distrust God; for he will
  provoke many to zeal against unrighteousness, and for
  righteousness, through things which are suffered now to work for a
  season; yea many, whose zeal was even dead, shall revive again,
  shall see their backslidings, and bewail them bitterly. For God
  shall thunder from heaven, and break forth in a mighty noise; his
  enemies shall be astonished, the workers of iniquity confounded,
  and all that have not the garment of righteousness shall be amazed
  at the mighty and strange work of the Lord, which shall be
  certainly brought to pass. But, my babes, look ye not out, but be
  still in the light of the Lamb; and he shall fight for you. The
  Almighty Hand, which must break and divide your enemies, and take
  away peace from them, preserve and keep you whole, in unity and
  peace with itself, and one with another. Amen.”

                                                               G. F.

I was moved also to write to the king, to “exhort him to exercise
mercy and forgiveness towards his enemies, and to warn him to
restrain the profaneness and looseness that had got up in the nation
on his return.” It was thus:—

                           “_To the King._

        “KING CHARLES,

  “Thou earnest not into this nation by sword, nor by victory of
  war, but by the power of the Lord. Now if thou live not in it,
  thou wilt not prosper. If the Lord hath showed thee mercy and
  forgiven thee, and thou dost not show mercy and forgiveness, the
  Lord God will not hear thy prayers, nor them that pray for thee.
  If thou stop not persecution and persecutors, and take away all
  laws that hold up persecution about religion; if thou persist in
  them, and uphold persecution, that will make thee as blind as
  those that have gone before thee; for persecution hath always
  blinded those that have gone into it. Such, God by his power
  overthrows, doth his valiant acts upon, and bringeth salvation to
  his oppressed ones. If thou bear the sword in vain, and let
  drunkenness, oaths, plays, may-games, with such like abominations
  and vanities be encouraged or go unpunished, as setting up
  may-poles, with the image of the crown on the top of them, &c.,
  the nations will quickly turn like Sodom and Gomorrah, and be as
  bad as the old world, who grieved the Lord until he overthrew
  them; and so he will you, if these things be not suppressed.
  Hardly was there so much wickedness at liberty before, as there is
  at this day, as though there was no terror nor sword of
  magistracy; which doth not grace the government, nor is a praise
  to them that do well. Our prayers are for them that are in
  authority, that under them we may live a godly life, in which we
  have peace, and that we may not be brought into ungodliness by
  them. Hear, and consider, and do good in thy time, whilst thou
  hast power; be merciful and forgive; this is the way to overcome,
  and obtain the kingdom of Christ.”

                                                               G. F.

It was long before the sheriff would yield to remove me to London,
unless I would seal a bond to him, and bear their charges; which I
still refused to do. Then they consulted how to convey me, and first
concluded to send up a party of horse with me. I told them, “If I
were such a man as they had represented me to be, they had need send
a troop or two of horse to guard me.” When they considered what a
charge it would be to them to send up a party of horse with me, they
altered their purpose, and concluded to send me up guarded only by
the jailer and some bailiffs. But, upon further consideration, they
found that would be a great charge to them also, and therefore sent
for me to the jailer’s house, and told me, if I would put in bail,
that I would be in London such a day of the term, I should have
leave to go up with some of my own friends. I told them I would
neither put in bail, nor give one piece of silver to the jailer; for
I was an innocent man, and they had imprisoned me wrongfully, and
laid a false charge upon me. Nevertheless, I said, if they would let
me go up with one or two of my friends to bear me company, I might
go up, and be in London such a day, if the Lord should permit; and
if they desired it, I, or any of my friends that went with me, would
carry up their charge against myself. At last, when they saw they
could do no otherwise with me, the sheriff yielded, consenting that
I should come up with some of my friends, without any other
engagement than my word, to appear before the judges at London, such
a day of the term if the Lord should permit.

Whereupon I was let out of prison, and went to SWARTHMORE, where I
stayed two or three days, and then to LANCASTER again, and so to
PRESTON, having meetings amongst friends, till I came into CHESHIRE
to William Gandy’s, where there was a large meeting out of doors,
the house not being sufficient to contain it. That day the Lord’s
everlasting Seed was set over all, and Friends were turned to it,
who is the Heir of the Promise. Thence I came into STAFFORDSHIRE and
WARWICKSHIRE, to Anthony Bickliff’s; and at NUNEATON, at the house
of a priest’s widow, we had a blessed meeting, wherein the
everlasting Word of Life was powerfully declared, and many settled
in it. Then travelling on, visiting Friends’ meetings, in about
three weeks of my coming out of prison, I reached LONDON, Richard
Hubberthorn and Robert Widders being with me.

When we came to Charing-Cross, multitudes of people were gathered
together to see the burning of the bowels of some of the old king’s
judges, who had been hung, drawn, and quartered.

We went next morning to judge Mallet’s chamber, who was putting on
his red gown, to go sit upon some more of the king’s judges. He was
very peevish and froward, and said I might come another time. We
went again to his chamber, when Judge Foster was with him, who was
called the lord chief justice of England. With me was one called
Esquire Marsh, who was one of the bedchamber to the king, When we
had delivered to the judges the charge that was against me, and they
had read to those words, “that I and my friends were embroiling the
nation in blood,” &c., they struck their hands on the table.
Whereupon I told them, “I was the man whom that charge was against,
but I was as innocent of any such thing as a new-born child, and had
brought it up myself; and some of my friends came up with me without
any guard.” As yet they had not minded my hat, but now seeing it on,
they said, “What, did I stand with my hat on!” I told them I did not
so in contempt of them. They then commanded it to be taken off; and
when they called for the marshal of the King’s Bench, they said to
him, “You must take this man and secure him; but let him have a
chamber, and not put him amongst the prisoners.” “My lord,” said the
marshal, “I have no chamber to put him into; my house is so full I
cannot tell where to provide a room for him, but amongst the
prisoners.” “Nay,” said the judge, “you must not put him amongst the
prisoners.” But when he still answered, he had no other place to put
me in, Judge Foster said to me, “Will you appear to-morrow about ten
o’clock at the King’s Bench bar in Westminster Hall?” I said, “Yes,
if the Lord give me strength.” Then said Judge Foster to the other
judge, “If he says yes, and promises it, you may take his word;” so
I was dismissed.

Next day I appeared at the King’s Bench bar at the hour appointed,
Robert Widders, Richard Hubberthorn, and Esquire Marsh going with
me. I was brought into the middle of the court; and as soon as I
came in, was moved to look round, and turning to the people, said,
“Peace be among you;” and the power of the Lord sprang over the
court. The charge against me was read openly. The people were
moderate, and the judges cool and loving; and the Lord’s mercy was
to them. But when they came to that part which said, “that I and my
friends were embroiling the nation in blood, and raising a new war,
and that I was an enemy to the king,” &c., they lifted up their
hands. Then, stretching out my arms, I said, “I am the man whom that
charge is against; but I am as innocent as a child concerning the
charge, and have never learned any war postures. And,” said I, “do
ye think that if I and my friends had been such men as the charge
declares, that I would have brought it up myself against myself? Or
that I should have been suffered to come up with only one or two of
my friends with me? Had I been such a man as this charge sets forth,
I had need to have been guarded with a troop or two of horse. But
the sheriff and magistrates of Lancashire thought fit to let me and
my friends come up with it ourselves, nearly two hundred miles,
without any guard at all; which, ye may be sure, they would not have
done, had they looked upon me to be such a man.” Then the judge
asked me, whether it should be filed, or what I would do with it. I
answered, “Ye are judges, and able, I hope, to judge in this matter,
therefore do with it what ye will; for I am the man these charges
are against, and here ye see, I have brought them up myself; do ye
what ye will with them, I leave it to you.” Then Judge Twisden
beginning to speak some angry words, I appealed to Judge Foster and
Judge Mallet, who had heard me over-night. Whereupon they said,
“They did not accuse me, for they had nothing against me.” Then
stood up Esquire Marsh, who was of the king’s bedchamber, and told
the judges, “It was the king’s pleasure, that I should be set at
liberty, seeing no accuser came up against me.” They asked me,
“Whether I would put it to the king and council?” I said, “Yes, with
a good will.” Thereupon they sent the sheriff’s return, which he
made to the writ of _habeas corpus_, containing the matter charged
against me in the mittimus, to the king, that he might see for what
I was committed. The return of the sheriff of Lancaster was thus:—

  “By virtue of his Majesty’s writ, to me directed, and hereunto
  annexed, I certify, that before the receipt of the said writ,
  George Fox, in the said writ mentioned, was committed to his
  Majesty’s jail at the castle of Lancaster, in my custody, by a
  warrant from Henry Porter, Esq., one of his Majesty’s justices of
  peace within the county palatine aforesaid, bearing date the fifth
  of June now last past; for that he, the said George Fox, was
  generally suspected to be a common disturber of the peace of this
  nation, an enemy to our sovereign lord the king, and a chief
  upholder of the Quakers’ sect; and that he, together with others
  of his fanatic opinion, have of late endeavoured to make
  insurrections in these parts of the country, and to embroil the
  whole kingdom in blood. And this is the cause of his taking and
  detaining. Nevertheless, the body of the said George Fox I have
  ready before Thomas Mallet, knight, one of his Majesty’s justices,
  assigned to hold pleas before his Majesty, at his chamber in
  Serjeant’s Inn, in Fleet-street, to do and receive those things
  which his Majesty’s said justice shall determine concerning him in
  this behalf, as by the aforesaid writ is required.

                                   ‘GEORGE CHETHAM, Esq., Sheriff.’”

On perusal of this, and consideration of the whole matter, the king,
being satisfied of my innocency, commanded his secretary to send an
order to Judge Mallet for my release; which he did, thus:—

  “It is his Majesty’s pleasure, that you give order for releasing,
  and setting at full liberty, the person of George Fox, late a
  prisoner in Lancaster jail, and commanded hither by an _habeas
  corpus_. And this signification of his Majesty’s pleasure shall be
  your sufficient warrant. Dated at Whitehall, the 24th of October,
  1660.

                                                  “EDWARD NICHOLAS.”

       For Sir Thomas Mallet, Knight,
  one of the Justices of the King’s Bench.

When this order was delivered, Judge Mallet forthwith sent his
warrant to the marshal of the King’s Bench for my release, as
follows:—

  “By virtue of a warrant, which this morning I have received from
  the Right Hon. Sir Edward Nicholas, Knight, one of his Majesty’s
  principal secretaries, for the releasing and setting at liberty of
  George Fox, late a prisoner in Lancaster jail, and from thence
  brought hither by _habeas corpus_, and yesterday committed unto
  your custody; I do hereby require you accordingly to release and
  set the said prisoner, George Fox, at liberty; for which this
  shall be your warrant and discharge. Given under my hand, the 25th
  day of October, in the year of our Lord God, 1660.

                                                    “THOMAS MALLET.”

     To Sir John Lenthal, Knight,
  Marshal of the King’s Bench, or his deputy.

Thus, after being a prisoner more than twenty weeks, I was freely
set at liberty by the king’s command, the Lord’s power having
wonderfully wrought for the clearing of my innocency; Porter, who
committed me, not daring to appear to make good the charge he had
falsely suggested against me.




                              CHAPTER XIV.

1660-1662.—George Fox writes an epistle of consolation to Friends
    unjustly imprisoned in consequence of the insurrection of the
    Fifth-Monarchy Men—Friends’ declaration against war and
    plots—John Perrot and Charles Bailey create a schism—some
    Friends in New England are put to death, a sense whereof is
    given to George Fox at the time—the King’s mandamus to the
    Governor of New England and others, to restrain them from
    executing Friends—the _Battledore_ is published, showing, by
    examples from thirty languages, that “Thou” and “Thee” are
    proper to one person—on true worship—George Fox disputes with
    some Jesuits, and with _all_ other sects—John Perrot’s heresy
    condemned—on judicial swearing—George Fox and Richard
    Hubberthorn write to the King, showing the number of Friends
    imprisoned prior to, and during the first year of, the
    Restoration, and the number who died in prison during the
    Commonwealth—Thomas Sharman, jailer at Derby, convinced, and
    writes to George Fox—George Fox applies to Lord D’Aubigny on
    behalf of two Friends imprisoned in the Inquisition at Malta,
    who procures their liberation—the ground and rise of persecution
    set forth—great service at _Bristol_, where also he has a
    vision—visits Captain Brown and his wife; the former had lied
    from persecution, and was judged in himself, but afterwards
    convinced—George Fox and several others are arrested by Lord
    Beaumont, and sent to Leicester jail—they are suddenly
    liberated—to Friends on the death of Edward Burrough—escapes
    from persecutors—Friends established on Christ, the Rock of
    Ages.


When it was known I was discharged from Lancaster Castle, a company
of envious, wicked spirits were troubled, and terror took hold of
Justice Porter; for he was afraid I would take advantage of the law
against him for my wrong imprisonment, and thereby undo him, his
wife, and children. Indeed I was pressed by some in authority to
make him and the rest examples; but I said, “I should leave them to
the Lord; if the Lord forgave them, I should not trouble myself with
them.”

Now did I see the end of the travail which I had had in my sore
exercise at Reading; for the everlasting power of the Lord was over
all, and his blessed truth, life, and light shone over the nation,
and great and glorious meetings we had, and very quiet; and many
flocked in unto the truth. Richard Hubberthorn had been with the
king, who said, “None should molest us, so long as we lived
peaceably,” and promised this to us upon the word of a king, telling
him we might make use of his promise.[65] Some Friends also were
admitted into the House of Lords, and had liberty to declare their
reasons, why they could not pay tithes, swear, or go to the
steeple-house worship, or join with others in worship, and they
heard them moderately. And there being about seven hundred Friends
in prison in the nation, who had been committed under Oliver’s and
Richard’s government, upon contempts (as they call them), when the
king came in, he set them all at liberty. There seemed at that time
an inclination and intention in the government to grant Friends’
liberty, because they were sensible that we had suffered as well as
they under the former powers. But still, when anything was going
forward in order thereto, some dirty spirits or other, that would
seem to be for us, threw something in the way to stop it.

Footnote 65:

  Some interesting particulars of what passed during Richard
  Hubberthorn’s interview with the king are related in Sewell’s
  _History_, for which see the index of that work.

It was said, there was an instrument drawn up for confirming our
liberty, and that it only wanted signing; when, suddenly, that
wicked attempt of the Fifth-monarchy-people broke out, and put the
city and nation in an uproar. This was on a First-day night, and
very glorious meetings we had had that day, wherein the Lord’s truth
shone over all, and his power was exalted above all; but about
midnight, or soon after, the drums beat, and the cry was, “Arm,
Arm!” I got up out of bed, and in the morning took boat, and landing
at Whitehall-stairs, walked through Whitehall. They looked strangely
at me there, but I passed through them, and went to Pall-Mall, where
divers Friends came to me, though it had now become dangerous
passing the streets; for by this time, the city and suburbs were up
in arms, and exceedingly rude the people and soldiers were; insomuch
that Henry Fell,[66] going to a Friend’s house, the soldiers knocked
him down, and he would have been killed, had not the Duke of York
come by. Great mischief was done in the city this week; and when the
next First-day came, as Friends went to their meetings, many were
taken prisoners.

Footnote 66:

  Henry Fell was an eminent minister in the Society. In 1656 and
  1658 he visited the West India isles. During the first visit, he
  was absent from home about a year. From 1659 to 1662, he was
  mostly engaged in gospel labours in England, and from this period
  we lose all trace of him. He is mentioned in Whiting’s Catalogue
  as having died in America. His home was in Lancashire, and there
  is reason to believe he was a near relative of Judge Fell. He
  appears to have received an education considerably above most of
  his day. Some of his letters are given in Bowden’s _History of
  Friends in America_, and in Barclay’s _Letters of Early Friends_.

I stayed at Pall-Mall, intending to be at the meeting there; but on
the Seventh-day night, a company of troopers came and knocked at the
door. The servant letting them in, they rushed into the house, and
laid hold of me; and there being amongst them one that had served
under the parliament, he put his hand to my pocket, and asked,
“whether I had any pistols?” I told him he knew I did not carry
pistols, why therefore ask such a question of me, whom he knew to be
a peaceable man? Others of the soldiers ran into the chambers, and
there found in bed Esquire Marsh, who, though he was one of the
king’s bedchamber, out of his love to me, came and lodged where I
did. When they came down again, they said, “Why should we take this
man away with us? We will let him alone.” “O,” said the parliament
soldier, “he is one of the heads, and a chief ringleader.” Upon this
the soldiers were taking me away, but Esquire Marsh hearing of it,
sent for him that commanded the party, and desired him to let me
alone, for he would see me forthcoming in the morning.

In the morning before they could fetch me, and before the meeting
was gathered, there came a company of foot soldiers to the house and
one of them drawing his sword, held it over my head. I asked him,
“why he drew his sword at an unarmed man?” at which his fellows
being ashamed, bid him put up his sword. These foot soldiers took me
away to Whitehall, before the troopers came for me. As I was going
out, several friends were coming in to the meeting, whose boldness
and cheerfulness I commended, and encouraged them to persevere
therein. When I was brought to Whitehall, the soldiers and people
were exceedingly rude, yet I declared truth to them; but some great
persons coming by, who were very full of envy, “What,” said they,
“do ye let him preach? Put him into such a place, where he may not
stir.” So into that place they put me, and the soldiers watched over
me. I told them, though they could confine my body and shut that up,
yet they could not stop the Word of Life. Some came and asked me,
“What I was?” I told them, “A preacher of righteousness.” After I
had been kept there two or three hours, Esquire Marsh spoke to Lord
Gerrard, and he came and bid them set me at liberty. The marshal,
when I was discharged, demanded fees. I told him I could not give
him any, neither was it our practice; and asked him how he could
demand fees of me, who was innocent.

Then I went through the guards, the Lord’s power being over them;
and after I had declared truth to the soldiers, I went up the
streets with two Irish colonels that came from Whitehall, to an inn,
where many Friends were at that time prisoners under a guard. I
desired these colonels to speak to the guard to let me go in to
visit my friends, that were prisoners there; but they would not.
Then I stepped to the sentry, and desired him to let me go up; and
he did so. While I was there, the soldiers went to Pall-Mall again
to search for me there; but not finding me, they turned towards the
inn, and bid all come out that were not prisoners; so they went out.
But I asked the soldiers that were within, “Whether I might not stay
there a while with my friends?” They said, “Yes.” I stayed, and so
escaped their hands again. Towards night I went to Pall-Mall, to see
how it was with the Friends there; and after I had stayed a while, I
went up into the city. Great rifling of houses there was at this
time to search for people. I went to a private friend’s house, and
Richard Hubberthorn was with me. There we drew up a declaration
against plots and fightings, to be presented to the king and
council; but when finished, and sent to print, it was taken in the
press.

On this insurrection of the Fifth-monarchy men, great havoc was made
both in city and country, so that it was dangerous for sober people
to stir abroad for several weeks after; men or women could hardly go
up and down the streets to buy provisions for their families without
being abused. In the country they dragged men and women out of their
houses, and some sick men out of their beds by the legs. Nay, one
man in a fever, the soldiers dragged out of bed to prison, and when
he was brought there he died. His name was Thomas Pachyn.

Margaret Fell went to the king, and told him what sad work there was
in the city and nation, and showed him we were an innocent,
peaceable people, and that we must keep our meetings as heretofore,
whatever we suffered; but that it concerned him to see that peace
was kept, that no innocent blood might be shed. The prisons were now
everywhere filled with Friends, and others, in the city and country,
and the posts were so laid for the searching of letters, that none
could pass unsearched. We heard of several thousands of our Friends
being cast into prison in several parts of the nation, and Margaret
Fell carried an account of them to the king and council. Next week
we had an account of several thousands more being cast into prison;
and she went and laid them also before the king and council. They
wondered how we could have such intelligence, having given strict
charge for the intercepting of all letters: but the Lord so ordered
it, that we had an account, notwithstanding all their stoppings.

In the deep sense I had of the grievous suffering Friends underwent,
and of their innocency towards God and man, I was moved to send the
following epistle to them, as a word of consolation, and advised
them to send up an account of their sufferings:—

        “MY DEAR FRIENDS,

  “In the immortal seed of God, which will plead its own
  innocency, who are inheritors of an everlasting kingdom that is
  incorruptible, and of a world and riches that fade not away,
  peace and mercy be multiplied amongst you in all your
  sufferings; whose backs were not unready, but your hair and
  cheeks prepared; who never feared suffering, knowing it is your
  portion in the world, from the foundation of which the Lamb was
  slain, who reigns in his glory, which he had with his Father
  before the world began. He is your rock in all floods and waves,
  upon which ye can stand safe, with a cheerful countenance,
  beholding the Lord God of the whole earth on your side. So in
  the Seed of God, which was before the unrighteous world, in
  which sufferings are, live and feed; wherein the Bread of Life
  is felt, and no cause to complain of hunger or cold. Friends, I
  would have you all, that are or have been lately in prison, to
  send up an account of your sufferings, and how things are
  amongst you, that it may be delivered to the king and his
  council; for things are pretty well here after the storm.”

                                                               G. F.

  London, the 28th of the 11th Month, 1660.

Having lost our former declaration in the press, we hastily drew up
another against plots and fighting, got it printed, and sent some
copies to the king and council; others were sold in the streets, and
at the Exchange. Which declaration was some years after reprinted,
and is as follows:—

    _A Declaration from the harmless and innocent people of God,
  called Quakers, against all sedition, plotters, and fighters in
  the world: for removing the ground of jealousy and suspicion from
  magistrates and people concerning wars and fightings._

   Presented to the King upon the 21st day of the 11th Month, 1660.

  “Our principle is, and our practices have always been, to seek
  peace and ensue it; to follow after righteousness and the
  knowledge of God; seeking the good and welfare, and doing that
  which tends to the peace of all. We know that wars and fightings
  proceed from the lusts of men, as James iv. 1-3, out of which the
  Lord hath redeemed us, and so out of the occasion of war. The
  occasion of war, and war itself (wherein envious men, who are
  lovers of themselves more than lovers of God, lust, kill, and
  desire to have men’s lives or estates) ariseth from lust. All
  bloody principles and practices, as to our own particulars, we
  utterly deny; with all outward wars and strife, and fightings with
  outward weapons, for any end, or under any pretence whatsoever;
  this is our testimony to the whole world.

  “And whereas it is objected:

  “But although you now say ‘that you cannot fight, nor take up arms
  at all, yet if the Spirit move you, then you will change your
  principle, and you will sell your coat, and buy a sword, and fight
  for the kingdom of Christ.’

  “To this we answer, Christ said to Peter, ‘Put up thy sword in his
  place;’ though he had said before, he that had no sword might sell
  his coat and buy one (to the fulfilling of the law and the
  Scripture), yet after, when he had bid him put it up, he said, ‘he
  that taketh the sword, shall perish with the sword.’ And further,
  Christ said to Pilate, ‘Thinkest thou, that I cannot now pray to
  my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions
  of angels?’ And this might satisfy Peter, Luke xxii. 36, after he
  had put up his sword, when he said to him, ‘He that took it,
  should perish with it;’ which satisfieth us, Matt. xxvi. 51-53.
  And in the Revelation, it is said, ‘He that kills with the sword,
  shall perish with the sword; and here is the faith and the
  patience of the saints.’ And so Christ’s kingdom is not of this
  world, therefore do not his servants fight, as he told Pilate, the
  magistrate, who crucified him. And did they not look upon Christ
  as a raiser of sedition? and did not he pray, ‘Forgive them?’ But
  thus it is that we are numbered amongst transgressors, and
  fighters, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.

  “That the Spirit of Christ, by which we are guided, is not
  changeable, so as once to command us from a thing as evil, and
  again to move unto it; and we certainly know, and testify to the
  world, that the Spirit of Christ, which leads us into all truth,
  will never move us to fight and war against any man with outward
  weapons, neither for the kingdom of Christ, nor for the kingdoms
  of this world.

  “First, Because the kingdom of Christ God will exalt, according to
  his promise, and cause it to grow and flourish in righteousness;
  ‘not by might, nor by power (of outward sword), but by my Spirit,
  saith the Lord,’ Zech. iv. 6. So those that use any weapon to
  fight for Christ, or for the establishing of his kingdom or
  government,—their spirit, principle, and practice we deny.

  “Secondly, We do earnestly desire and wait, that, by the Word of
  God’s power, and its effectual operation in the hearts of men, the
  kingdoms of this world may become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of
  his Christ; that he may rule and reign in men by his Spirit and
  truth; that thereby all people, out of every profession, may be
  brought into love and unity with God, and one with another; and
  that they may all come to witness the prophet’s words, who said,
  ‘Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they
  learn war any more,’ Isa. ii. 4., Mic. iv. 3.

  “So we, whom the Lord hath called into the obedience of his truth,
  have denied wars and fightings, and cannot more learn them. This
  is a certain testimony unto all the world, of the truth of our
  hearts in this particular, that as God persuadeth every man’s
  heart to believe, so they may receive it. For we have not, as some
  others, gone about with cunningly-devised fables, nor have we ever
  denied in practice what we have professed in principle; but in
  sincerity and truth, and by the word of God, have we laboured to
  manifest unto all men, that both we and our ways might be
  witnessed in the hearts of all.

  “And whereas all manner of evil hath been falsely spoken of us, we
  hereby speak the plain truth of our hearts, to take away the
  occasion of that offence; that so being innocent, we may not
  suffer for other men’s offences, nor be made a prey of by the
  wills of men for that of which we were never guilty; but in the
  uprightness of our hearts we may, under the power ordained of God
  for the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of them that
  do well, live a peaceable and godly life, in all godliness and
  honesty. For although we have always suffered, and do now more
  abundantly suffer, yet we know that it is for righteousness’ sake;
  ‘for our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our consciences, that
  in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by
  the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world,’ 2
  Cor. i. 12, which for us is a witness for the convincing of our
  enemies. For this we can say to all the world, we have wronged no
  man, we have used no force nor violence against any man: we have
  been found in no plots, nor guilty of sedition. When we have been
  wronged, we have not sought to revenge ourselves; we have not made
  resistance against authority; but wherein we could not obey for
  conscience’ sake, we have suffered the most of any people in the
  nation. We have been counted as sheep for the slaughter,
  persecuted and despised, beaten, stoned, wounded, stocked,
  whipped, imprisoned, haled out of synagogues, cast into dungeons
  and noisome vaults, where many have died in bonds, shut up from
  our friends, denied needful sustenance for many days together,
  with other the like cruelties.

  “And the cause of all these sufferings is not for any evil, but
  for things relating to the worship of our God, and in obedience to
  his requirings. For which cause we shall freely give up our bodies
  a sacrifice, rather than disobey the Lord: for we know, as the
  Lord hath kept us innocent, so he will plead our cause, when there
  is none in the earth to plead it. So we, in obedience unto his
  truth, do not love our lives unto death, that we may do his will,
  and wrong no man in our generation, but seek the good and peace of
  all men. He who hath commanded us that we shall not swear at all,
  Matt. v. 34, hath also commanded us that we shall not kill, Matt.
  v.; so that we can neither kill men, nor swear for or against
  them. This is both our principle and practice, and has been from
  the beginning; so that if we suffer, as suspected to take up arms,
  or make war against any, it is without any ground from us; for it
  neither is, nor ever was in our hearts, since we owned the truth
  of God; neither shall we ever do it, because it is contrary to the
  Spirit of Christ, his doctrine, and the practices of his apostles;
  even contrary to him, for whom we suffer all things, and endure
  all things.

  “And whereas men come against us with clubs, staves, drawn swords,
  pistols cocked, and beat, cut, and abuse us, yet we never resisted
  them; but to them our hair, backs, and cheeks, have been ready. It
  is not an honour to manhood or nobility to run upon harmless
  people, who lift not up a hand against them, with arms and
  weapons.

  “Therefore consider these things, ye men of understanding; for
  plotters, raisers of insurrections, tumultuous ones, and fighters,
  running with swords, clubs, staves, and pistols, one against
  another; these, we say, are of the world, and have their
  foundation from this unrighteous world, from the foundation of
  which the Lamb hath been slain; which Lamb hath redeemed us from
  this unrighteous world, and we are not of it, but are heirs of a
  world of which there is no end, and of a kingdom where no
  corruptible thing enters. Our weapons are spiritual, and not
  carnal, yet mighty through God, to the pulling down of the
  strongholds of sin and Satan, who is the author of wars, fighting,
  murder, and plots. Our swords are broken into ploughshares, and
  spears into pruning-hooks, as prophesied of in Micah iv. Therefore
  we cannot learn war any more, neither rise up against nation or
  kingdom with outward weapons, though you have numbered us amongst
  the transgressors and plotters. The Lord knows our innocency
  herein, and will plead our cause with all people upon earth, at
  the day of their judgment, when all men shall have a reward
  according to their works.

  “Therefore in love we warn you for your soul’s good, not to wrong
  the innocent, nor the babes of Christ, which he hath in his hand,
  which he cares for as the apple of his eye; neither seek to
  destroy the heritage of God, nor turn your swords backward upon
  such as the law was not made for, i.e., the righteous: but for
  sinners and transgressors, to keep them down. For those are not
  peacemakers, nor lovers of enemies, neither can they overcome evil
  with good, who wrong them that are friends to you and all men, and
  wish your good, and the good of all people on the earth. If you
  oppress us, as they did the children of Israel in Egypt, and if
  you oppress us as they did when Christ was born, and as they did
  the Christians in the primitive times; we can say, ‘The Lord
  forgive you;’ and leave the Lord to deal with you, and not revenge
  ourselves. If you say, as the council said to Peter and John,
  ‘speak no more in that name;’ and if you serve us, as they served
  the three children spoken of in Daniel, God is the same that ever
  he was, that lives for ever and ever, who hath the innocent in his
  arms.

  “O, Friends! offend not the Lord and his little ones, neither
  afflict his people; but consider and be moderate. Do not run on
  hastily, but consider mercy, justice, and judgment; that is the
  way for you to prosper, and obtain favour of the Lord. Our
  meetings were stopped and broken up in the days of Oliver, under
  pretence of plotting against him; in the days of the Committee of
  Safety we were looked upon as plotters to bring in King Charles;
  and now our peaceable meetings are termed seditious. O! that men
  should lose their reason, and go contrary to their own conscience;
  knowing that we have suffered all things, and have been accounted
  plotters from the beginning, though we have declared against them
  both by word of mouth and printing, and are clear from any such
  thing! We have suffered all along, because we would not take up
  carnal weapons to fight, and are thus made a prey, because we are
  the innocent lambs of Christ, and cannot avenge ourselves! These
  things are left on your hearts to consider; but we are out of all
  those things, in the patience of the saints; and we know, as
  Christ said, ‘He that takes the sword, shall perish with the
  sword;’ Matt. xxvi. 52; Rev. xiii. 10.

      “This is given forth from the people called Quakers, to
      satisfy the king and his council, and all those that have any
      jealousy concerning us, that all occasion of suspicion may be
      taken away, and our innocency cleared.”

        “_Postscript._—Though we are numbered amongst transgressors,
  and have been given up to rude, merciless men, by whom our
  meetings are broken up, in which we edified one another in our
  holy faith, and prayed together to the Lord that lives for ever,
  yet he is our pleader in this day. The Lord saith, ‘They that
  feared his name spoke often together’ (as in Malachi); which were
  as his jewels. For this cause, and no evil-doing, are we cast into
  holes, dungeons, houses of correction, prisons (neither old nor
  young being spared, men nor women), and made a prey of in the
  sight of all nations, under the pretence of being seditious, &c.,
  so that all rude people run upon us to take possession. For which
  we say, ‘The Lord forgive them that have thus done to us;’ who
  doth, and will enable us to suffer; and never shall we lift up
  hand against any that thus use us; but desire the Lord may have
  mercy upon them, that they may consider what they have done. For
  how is it possible for them to requite us for the wrong they have
  done to us? Who to all nations have sounded us abroad as
  seditious, who were never found plotters against any, since we
  knew the life and power of Jesus Christ manifested in us, who hath
  redeemed us from the world, all works of darkness, and plotters
  therein, by which we know the election, before the world began. So
  we say, the Lord have mercy upon our enemies and forgive them, for
  what they have done unto us!

  “O! do as ye would be done by; do unto all men as you would have
  them do unto you; for this is the law and the prophets.

  “All plots, insurrections, and riotous meetings we deny, knowing
  them to be of the devil, the murderer; which we in Christ, who was
  before they were, triumph over. And all wars and fightings with
  carnal weapons we deny, who have the sword of the Spirit; and all
  that wrong us, we leave to the Lord. This is to clear our
  innocency from the aspersion cast upon us, that we are seditious
  or plotters.”

                      _Added in the reprinting._

            “COURTEOUS READER,

  “This was our testimony above twenty years ago; since then we have
  not been found acting contrary to it, nor ever shall; for the
  truth, that is our guide, is unchangeable. This is now reprinted
  to the men of this age, many of whom were then children, and doth
  stand as our certain testimony against all plotting and fighting
  with carnal weapons. And if any by departing from the truth should
  do so, this is our testimony in the truth against them, and will
  stand over them, and the truth will be clear of them.”

This declaration somewhat cleared the dark air that was over the
city and country. And soon after the king gave forth a proclamation,
“That no soldiers should search any house without a constable.” But
the jails were still full, many thousands of Friends being in
prison; which mischief was occasioned by the wicked rising of the
Fifth-monarchy-men. But when those that were taken came to be
executed, they did us the justice to clear us openly from having any
hand in or knowledge of their plot. After that, the king being
continually importuned thereunto, issued a declaration, “That
Friends should be set at liberty without paying fees.” But great
labour, travail, and pains were taken, before this was obtained; for
Thomas Moor and Margaret Fell went often to the king about it.[67]

Footnote 67:

  Among the Swarthmore collection of MSS. has been found a narrative
  of an interview Thomas Moore had with the king, which has been
  printed in _Letters of Early Friends_, p. 92, to which the reader
  is referred. It is endorsed by George Fox thus:—“What the king
  said to T. Moor, 1600, 14th of 10th month.” It will be remembered
  Thomas Moor was formerly a justice of the peace, and was convinced
  by George Fox, as related at page 260 in this volume.

Much blood was shed this year, many of the late king’s judges being
hung, drawn, and quartered. Amongst them that so suffered, Colonel
Hacker was one, who sent me prisoner from Leicester to London in
Oliver’s time, of which an account is given before. A sad day it
was, and a repaying of blood with blood. For in the time of Oliver
Cromwell, when several men were put to death by him, being hung,
drawn, and quartered, for pretended treasons, I felt from the Lord
God, that their blood would be required; and I said as much then to
several. And now upon the king’s return, when several that had been
against him were put to death, as the others that were for him had
been before by Oliver, this was sad work, destroying people contrary
to the nature of Christians, who have the nature of lambs and sheep.
But there was a secret hand in bringing this day upon that
hypocritical generation of professors, who, being got into power,
grew proud, haughty, and cruel beyond others, and persecuted the
people of God without pity.

Therefore when Friends were under cruel persecutions and sufferings
in the Commonwealth’s time, I was moved of the Lord to write to
Friends to draw up accounts of their sufferings, and lay them before
the justices at their sessions; and if they would not do justice,
then to lay them before the judges at the assize; and if they would
not do justice, then to lay them before the parliament, the
protector and his council, that they might all see what was done
under their government; and if they would not do justice, then to
lay it before the Lord, who would hear the cries of the oppressed,
and of the widows and fatherless whom they had made so. For that
which we suffered for, and for which our goods were spoiled, was our
obedience to the Lord in his Power and in his Spirit, who was able
to help and to succour, and we had no helper in the earth but him.
And he heard the cries of his people, and brought an overflowing
scourge over the heads of all our persecutors, which brought a
dread, and a fear amongst and on them all: so that those who had
nicknamed us (who are the children of light) and in scorn called us
Quakers, the Lord made to quake; and many of them would have been
glad to have hid themselves amongst us; and some of them, through
the distress that came upon them, did at length come to confess to
the truth. O! the daily reproaches, revilings, and beatings we
underwent amongst them, even in the highways, because we could not
put off our hats to them, and for saying Thou and Thee to them! O!
the havoc and spoil the priests made of our goods, because we could
not put into their mouths and give them tithes; besides casting into
prisons, and laying great fines upon us, because we could not swear!
But for all these things did the Lord God plead with them. Yet some
were so hardened in their wickedness, that when they were turned out
of their places and offices, they said, “If they had power, they
would do the same again.” And when this day of overturning was come
upon them, they said, “It was all on account of us.” Wherefore I was
moved to write to them, and ask them, “Did we ever resist them when
they took away our ploughs and plough-gears, our carts and horses,
our corn and cattle, our kettles and platters from us, whipped us,
set us in the stocks, and cast us into prison, and all this only for
serving and worshipping God in spirit and truth, and because we
could not conform to their religions, manners, customs, and
fashions? Did we ever resist them? Did we not give them our backs to
beat, and our cheeks to pull off the hair, and our faces to spit on?
Had not their priests, that prompted them on to such work, pulled
them with themselves into the ditch? Why then would they say, ‘It
was all on account of us,’ when it was owing to themselves and their
priests, their blind prophets, that followed their own spirits, and
could foresee nothing of these times and things that were come upon
them, which we had long forewarned them of, as Jeremiah and Christ
had forewarned Jerusalem. They had thought to weary us out, and undo
us, but they undid themselves. Whereas we could praise God,
notwithstanding all their plundering of us, that we had a platter, a
horse, and plough still.”

Many ways were these professors warned, by word, by writing, and by
signs; but they would believe none, till it was too late. William
Sympson[68] was moved of the Lord to go, several times for three
years, naked and barefoot before them, as a sign unto them, in
markets, courts, towns, cities, to priests’ and great men’s houses,
telling them, “So should they be stripped naked, as he was
stripped!” And sometimes he was moved to put on sackcloth, and
besmear his face, and tell them, “So would the Lord God besmear all
their religion, as he was besmeared.” Great sufferings did that poor
man undergo, sore whippings with horse-whips and coach-whips on his
bare body, grievous stonings and imprisonments, in three years’
time, before the king came in, that they might have taken warning;
but they would not: they rewarded his love with cruel usage. Only
the Mayor of Cambridge did nobly to him, for he put his gown about
him, and took him into his house.

Footnote 68:

  This is probably the Friend of whom there is some account in
  _Piety Promoted_, vol. ii., p. 71. He was born in Lancashire, and
  receiving the Truth, became a faithful minister of it, for which
  he was often imprisoned, and underwent cruel and hard sufferings.
  In 1670, he went to Barbadoes with John Burnyeat, to preach the
  gospel in that island, but after having some service there, he was
  taken ill of a fever, during which he felt great peace and
  consolation of spirit, and signified “he should die.” He was often
  praising and glorifying God after this manner: “O! all that is
  within me praise and magnify the Lord God, who is worthy for ever
  of all glory; everlasting praises to the God of my life, who only
  is worthy, and lives over all, and is above all, God blessed for
  ever. Amen.” He died in much peace and quietness.

Another Friend, Robert Huntingdon, was moved of the Lord to go into
Carlisle steeple-house, with a white sheet about him, amongst the
great Presbyterians and Independents there, to show them that the
surplice was coming up again: and he put a halter about his neck, to
show them that a halter was coming upon them; which was fulfilled
upon some of our persecutors not long after.

Another, Richard Sale, living near Chester, being constable of the
place where he lived, had a Friend sent to him with a pass, whom
those wicked professors had taken up for a vagabond, because he
travelled in the work of the ministry; and this constable being
convinced by the Friend that was thus brought to him, gave him his
pass and liberty, and was afterwards himself cast into prison. After
this, on a lecture-day, Richard Sale was moved to go to the
steeple-house, in the time of their worship, and carry to those
persecuting priests and people, a lantern and candle, as a figure of
their darkness; but they cruelly abused him, and like dark
professors as they were, put him into their prison called
Little-Ease; and so squeezed his body therein, that not long after
he died.[69]

Footnote 69:

  Richard Sale, the constable who became convinced, was an undaunted
  reprover of vice. The place in which he lost his life, called
  “Little Ease,” is described to have been “a hole hewed out in a
  rock; the breadth across, seventeen inches; from the back to the
  inside of the great door, at the top, seven inches; at the
  shoulders, eight inches; at the breast, nine inches and a half;
  from the top to the bottom, one yard and a half, with a device to
  lessen the height, as they are minded to torment the persons put
  in, by drawboards which shoot over the two sides to a yard height,
  or thereabout.”

  Into this place was Richard Sale put several times, in 1656-1657,
  for three, four, five and eight hours together. Being corpulent,
  it required the strength of four men to thrust him in. In doing
  which they crushed him till the blood gushed out of his mouth and
  nose. He survived the last torture but two months, and died
  imputing his death to the cruelty of his persecutors.

  In this place they tormented many of those who were induced, with,
  Christian courage, to reprove the vices, either of ministers,
  magistrates, or people. Richard Costrop, for preaching repentance
  in the streets, was put in Little Ease till next day, and then, by
  the Mayor, sent to Bridewell. Thomas Yarwood, who, as the Mayor
  and Aldermen were going to a customary feast, with music playing
  before them, dared to remind them wherein real Christianity stood,
  viz., _in true holiness and the fear of the Lord_, was sent to
  Little Ease, and kept there five hours; by which he, being but a
  weak sickly man was much bruised and hurt. William Sympson,
  attempting, in Christian love, to exhort the people, after their
  public preacher had ended his sermon, was first put in the stocks,
  and afterwards kept in Little Ease nine hours. When, next morning,
  he complained to the Mayor of his cruel usage, he was sent again
  to the same place, after the Sheriff, in the Mayor’s presence, had
  struck him in the face, so that he bled very much. Edward Morgan,
  complaining to the Mayor against a drunken fellow who had grossly
  abused him, was sent to Little Ease for not putting off his hat
  when he made that complaint, and the drunkard went unpunished; as
  did also a servant who had robbed his master, a Friend, the master
  being, by this same magistrate, imprisoned eleven weeks, because
  he would not swear to the fact of the robbery.

Many warnings of many sorts were Friends moved, in the power of the
Lord, to give to that generation; which they not only rejected, but
abused Friends, calling us giddy-headed Quakers; but God brought his
judgments upon those persecuting priests and magistrates. For when
the king came in, most of them were turned out of their places and
benefices, and the spoilers were spoiled: and then we could ask
them, “Who were the giddy heads now?” Then many confessed we had
been true prophets to the nation, and said, “Had we cried against
some priests only, they should have liked us then; but crying
against all made them dislike us.” But now they saw those priests,
which were then looked upon to be the best, were as bad as the rest.
For indeed, some of those that were counted the most eminent, were
the bitterest and greatest stirrers up of the magistrates to
persecution; and it was a judgment upon them to be denied the free
liberty of their consciences when the king came in, because when
they were uppermost, they would not have liberty of conscience
granted to others. One Hewes, of Plymouth, a priest of great note in
Oliver’s days, when some liberty was granted, prayed “that God would
put it into the hearts of the chief magistrates of the nation, to
remove this cursed toleration.” Others prayed against it under the
name of Intolerable Toleration. But a while after when the king was
come in and priest Hewes turned out of his great benefice for not
conforming to the Common Prayer, a Friend of Plymouth meeting with
him, asked, “Whether he would account toleration accursed now?” and
“whether he would not now be glad of a toleration?” To which the
priest returned no answer save by the shaking of his head. But as
stiff as these men were then against toleration, it is well known
many of them petitioned the king for toleration, and for
meeting-places, and paid for licenses too. But to return to the
present time, the latter end of the year 1660 and beginning of 1661.

Although those Friends that had been imprisoned on the rising of the
Monarchy-men were set at liberty, meetings were much disturbed, and
great sufferings Friends underwent. For besides what was done by
officers and soldiers, many wild fellows and rude people often came
in. There came one time, when I was at Pall Mall, an ambassador with
a company of Irishmen and rude fellows; the meeting was over before
they came, and I was gone up into a chamber, where I heard one of
them say, “He would kill all the Quakers.” I went down to him, and
was moved in the power of the Lord to speak to him. I told him, “The
law said, ‘an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth;’ but thou
threatenest to kill all the Quakers, though they have done thee no
hurt. But,” said I, “Here is gospel for thee: here is my hair, here
is my cheek, and here is my shoulder,” turning it to him. This came
so over him, that he and his companions stood as men amazed, and
said, if that was our principle, and if we were as we said, they
never saw the like in their lives. I told them, what I was in words,
I was the same in life. Then the ambassador, who had stood without,
came in: for he said that Irish colonel was such a desperate man,
that he durst not come in with him, for fear he should do us some
mischief; but truth came over him, and he carried himself lovingly
towards us; as also did the ambassador; for the Lord’s power was
over them all.

At Mile-End, Friends were kept out of their meeting-place by
soldiers, but they stood nobly in the truth, valiant for the Lord’s
name; and at last the truth gave them dominion.

About this time we had an account that John Love, a Friend, that was
moved to go and bear testimony against the idolatry of the Papists,
was dead in prison at Rome: it was suspected he was privately put to
death in prison. John Perrot was also a prisoner there, and being
released came over again; but after his arrival here, he with
Charles Baily and others, turned aside from the unity of Friends and
truth. Whereupon I was moved to issue a paper, declaring how the
Lord would blast him and his followers, if they did not repent and
return; and that they should wither like the grass on the housetop,
which many of them did; but others returned and repented.

Also before this time we received account from New England, “that
the government there had made a law to banish the Quakers out of
their colonies, upon pain of death, in case they returned; and that
several Friends, having been so banished, and returning, were taken,
and actually hung; and that many more were in prison, in danger of
the like sentence being executed upon them.”[70] When those were put
to death, I was in prison at Lancaster, and had a perfect sense of
their sufferings, as though it had been myself, and as though the
halter had been put about my own neck; though we had not at that
time heard of it.

Footnote 70:

  The persecution of the Quakers in New England, by the Puritans and
  Independents, who had themselves fled from home to enjoy religious
  liberty, forms a dreadful story, the very recital of which is
  revolting to humanity. Some they caused to have their ears cut
  off; and, amongst many other cruelties, which would fill a volume,
  they ordered three Quaker women to be stripped to the waist, and
  flogged through eleven towns, a distance of eighty miles, in all
  the severity of frost and snow. But, as if this was not enough,
  they actually hanged three men and one woman for Christ’s sake,
  who all acquitted themselves, at their awful exit, with that
  firmness and submission which a Christian martyr is enabled to
  sustain at such an hour of nature’s extremity, giving full proof
  of their sincerity and trust in the goodness and support of Him,
  who had called them to make a public profession of his name before
  a wicked and perverse generation. Their names were—William
  Robinson, Marmaduke Stevenson, William Leddra, and Mary Dyer.

  On the day appointed for the execution of these innocent victims,
  they were led to the gallows by military officers, accompanied by
  a band of about 200 armed men, besides many horsemen—a measure
  which plainly indicated that some fear of popular indignation was
  apprehended; and, that no appeal might be made to the feelings of
  the multitude, a drummer was appointed to march before the
  condemned persons, to beat the drum, especially when any of them
  attempted to speak.

  Glorious signs of heavenly joy and gladness were visible in the
  countenances of these holy martyrs, who walked hand in hand to the
  place where they were to suffer. “This is to me an hour of the
  greatest joy,” exclaimed Mary Dyer; adding, that no eye could see,
  no ear could hear, no tongue could utter, no heart could
  understand, the sweet refreshings of the Spirit of the Lord which
  she then felt.

  Being come to the ladder, and having taken leave of each other
  with tender affection, they yielded up their lives into the hands
  of their enemies, Robinson’s last words being, “I suffer for
  Christ, in whom I live, and for whom I die;” and those of
  Stevenson, “This day shall we be at rest with the Lord.” William
  Leddra, patiently submitting himself whilst the executioner put
  the halter round his neck, said, “I commit my righteous cause unto
  thee, O God;” and, as he was turned off, died with these words,
  “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” When Mary Dyer ascended the
  ladder, she was told by some of the standers-by that even now, if
  she would obey them, she might come down and save her life. But
  this magnanimous sufferer shrank not from her doom, well knowing
  in whom, and for whom she was about to die; she contentedly laid
  down her life, saying, “In obedience to the will of the Lord, I
  abide faithful unto death.”

       “We too, have had our martyrs. Such wert thou,
         Illustrious woman! though the starry crown
       Of martyrdom has sat on many a brow,
         In the world’s eye, of far more wide renown.

       Yet the same spirit graced thy fameless end,
         Which shone in Latimer and his compeers;
       Upon whose hallowed memories still attend
         Manhood’s warm reverence, childhood’s guileless tears.

       Well did they win them; may they keep them long!
         Their names require not praise obscure as mine,
       Nor does my muse their cherish’d memories wrong,
         By this imperfect aim to honour thine.

       Heroic martyr of a sect despised!
         Thy name and memory to my heart are dear:
       Thy fearless zeal (in artless childhood prized)
         The lapse of years has taught me to revere.

       Thy Christian worth demands no poet’s lay,
         Historian’s pen, nor sculptor’s boasted art;
       What could the proudest tribute these can pay
         To thy immortal spirit, now impart?

       Yet seems it like a sacred debt to give
         The brief memorial thou mayst well supply;
       Whose life display’d how Christians ought to live,
         Whose death—how Christian martyrs calmly die.”

  For further particulars of the New England persecution, the reader
  is referred to Sewell’s _History_; Bowden’s _History of Friends in
  America_; Kelty’s _Early Days in the Society of Friends_;
  Hodgson’s _Historical Memoirs, &c._

But as soon as we heard of it, Edward Burrough went to the king, and
told him, “There was a vein of innocent blood opened in his
dominions, which, if it were not stopped, would overrun all.” To
which the king replied, “But I will stop that vein.” Edward Burrough
said, “Then do it speedily, for we do not know how many may soon be
put to death.” The king answered, “As speedily as ye will. Call,”
said he to some present, “the secretary, and I will do it
presently.” The secretary being called, a mandamus was forthwith
granted. A day or two after, Edward Burrough going again to the
king, to desire the matter might be expedited, the king said, “He
had no occasion at present to send a ship thither, but if we would
send one, we might do it as soon as we chose.” Edward Burrough then
asked the king, “if it would please him to grant his deputation to
one called a Quaker, to carry the mandamus to New England?” He said,
“Yes, to whom ye will.” Whereupon E. B. named Samuel Shattock, who
being an inhabitant of New England, was banished by their law, to be
hung if he came again; and to him the deputation was granted. Then
he sent for Ralph Goldsmith, an honest Friend, who was master of a
good ship, and agreed with him for £300, goods or no goods, to sail
in ten days. He forthwith prepared to set sail, and, with a
prosperous gale, in about six weeks arrived before the town of
Boston, in New England, upon a First-day morning. Many passengers
went with him, both of New and Old England, Friends, whom the Lord
moved to go to bear testimony against those bloody persecutors, who
had exceeded all the world in that age in their persecutions.

The townsmen at Boston seeing a ship come into the bay with English
colours, soon came on board, and asked for the captain. Ralph
Goldsmith told them, he was the commander. They asked him, if he had
any letters? He said, “Yes.” They asked, if he would deliver them?
He said, “No, not to-day.” So they went on shore, and reported there
was a ship full of Quakers, and that Samuel Shattock was among them,
who, they knew, was, by their law, to be put to death, for coming
again after banishment; but they knew not his errand, nor his
authority.

So all being kept close that day, and none of the ship’s company
suffered to land, next morning, Samuel Shattock, the king’s deputy,
and Ralph Goldsmith, the commander of the vessel, went on shore; and
sending back to the ship the men that landed them, they two went
through the town to the governor’s (John Endicott’s) door, and
knocked. He sent out a man to know their business. They sent him
word, their business was from the king of England, and they would
deliver their message to none but the governor himself. They were
then admitted, and the governor came to them; and having received
the deputation and the mandamus, he put off his hat, and looked upon
them. Then going out, he bid the Friends follow him. He went to the
deputy-governor, and after a short consultation, came out to the
Friends, and said, “We shall obey his Majesty’s commands.” After
this the master gave liberty to the passengers to land; and
presently the noise of the business flew about the town, and the
Friends of the town and the passengers of the ship met together, to
offer up their praises and thanksgivings to God, who had so
wonderfully delivered them from the teeth of the devourer. While
they were thus met, a poor Friend came in, who, being sentenced by
their bloody law to die, had lain some time in irons, expecting
execution. This added to their joy, and caused them to lift up their
hearts in high praises to God, who is worthy for ever to have the
praise, the glory, and the honour; for he only is able to deliver,
to save, and to support all that sincerely put their trust in him.

Here follows a copy of the mandamus:—

          “CHARLES R.

  “Trusty and well beloved, we greet you well. Having been informed
  that several of our subjects amongst you, called Quakers, have
  been and are imprisoned by you, whereof some have been executed,
  and others, as hath been represented unto us, are in danger to
  undergo the like, we have thought fit to signify our pleasure in
  that behalf for the future; and do hereby require, that if there
  be any of those people called Quakers amongst you, now already
  condemned to suffer death or other corporal punishment, or that
  are imprisoned, and obnoxious to the like condemnation, you are to
  forbear to proceed any further therein; but that you forthwith
  send the said persons, whether condemned or imprisoned, over into
  this our kingdom of England, together with the respective crimes
  or offences laid to their charge: to the end such course may be
  taken with them here, as shall be agreeable to our laws and their
  demerits. And for so doing, these our letters shall be your
  sufficient warrant and discharge. Given at our Court at Whitehall,
  the 9th day of September, 1661, in the thirteenth year of our
  reign.”

  Subscribed: “To our trusty and well beloved John Endicott, Esq.,
    and to all and every other the governor or governors of our
    plantations of New England, and of all the colonies thereunto
    belonging, that now are, or hereafter shall be: and to all and
    every the ministers and officers of our plantations and colonies
    whatsoever, within the continent of New England.

                                          “By his Majesty’s command.
                                                  “WILLIAM MORRIS.”

Some time after this several New England magistrates came over, with
one of their priests. We had several discourses with them concerning
their murdering our Friends, the servants of the Lord; but they were
ashamed to stand to their bloody actions. On one of these occasions
I asked Simon Broadstreet, one of the New England magistrates,
“Whether he had not a hand in putting to death those four servants
of God, whom they hung for being Quakers only, as they had nicknamed
them?” He confessed he had. I then asked him and the rest of his
associates that were present, “Whether they would acknowledge
themselves to be subject to the laws of England; and if they did, by
what laws they had put our Friends to death?” They said, “They were
subject to the laws of England; and had put our Friends to death by
the same law that the Jesuits were put to death in England.” I asked
them then, “Whether they believed those Friends of ours, whom they
had put to death, were Jesuits or jesuitically affected?” They said,
nay. “Then,” said I, “ye have murdered them, if ye have put them to
death by the law that Jesuits are put to death here in England, and
yet confess they were no Jesuits. By this it plainly appears ye have
put them to death in your own wills, without any law.” Then Simon
Broadstreet, finding himself and his company ensnared by their own
words, asked, “Did we come to catch them?” I told them, they had
caught themselves, and they might justly be questioned for their
lives; and if the father of William Robinson, one of them that were
put to death, were in town, it was probable he would question them,
and bring their lives into jeopardy. Here they began to excuse
themselves, saying, “There was no persecution now amongst them:” but
next morning we had letters from New England, giving us account that
our Friends were persecuted there afresh. We went again, and showed
them our letters, which put them both to silence and to shame; and
in great fear they seemed to be, lest someone should call them to
account, and prosecute them for their lives, especially Simon
Broadstreet; for he had at first, before so many witnesses,
confessed he had a hand in putting our Friends to death, that he
could not get off from it; though he afterwards through fear
shuffled, and would have unsaid it again. After this, he and the
rest soon returned to New England again.

I went also to Governor Winthrop, and discoursed with him on these
matters; he assured me, “He had no hand in putting our Friends to
death, or in any way persecuting them; but was one of them that
protested against it.” These stingy persecutors of New England were
a people that fled thither out of Old England, from the persecution
of the bishops here; but when they had got power into their own
hands, they so far exceeded the bishops in severity and cruelty,
that whereas the bishops had made them pay twelve pence a Sunday (so
called) for not coming to their worship here, they imposed a fine of
five shillings a-day upon such as should not conform to their
will-worship there; and spoiled the goods of Friends that could not
(for conscience’ sake) pay it. Besides, many they imprisoned, divers
they whipped, and that most cruelly; of some they cut off the ears,
and some they hanged; as the books of Friends’ sufferings in New
England largely show, particularly that written by George Bishop, of
Bristol, entitled, _New England Judged_. Some of the old royalists
were earnest with Friends to prosecute them, but we told them, we
left them to the Lord, to whom vengeance belongeth, and he would
repay it. And the judgments of God have since fallen heavy on them;
for the Indians have been raised up against them, and have cut off
many of them.

About this time I lost a very good book, being taken in the
printer’s hands; it was a useful teaching work, containing the
signification and explanation of names, parables, types, and figures
in the Scriptures. They who took it were so affected with it, that
they were loth to destroy it; but thinking to make a great advantage
of it, they would have let us have it again, if we would have given
them a great sum of money for it; which we were not free to do.

Before this, while I was a prisoner in Lancaster castle, the book
called _The Battledore_ was published, which was written to show,
that in all languages Thou and Thee is the proper and usual form of
speech to a single person; and You to more than one. This was set
forth in examples or instances taken from the Scriptures, and books
of teaching, in about thirty languages. J. Stubbs and Benjamin Furly
took great pains in compiling it, which I set them upon; and some
things I added to it. When it was finished, copies were presented to
the king and his council, to the bishops of Canterbury and London,
and to the two universities one each; and many purchased them. The
king said, it was the proper language of all nations; and the bishop
of Canterbury, being asked what he thought of it, was at a stand,
and could not tell what to say to it. For it did so inform and
convince people, that few afterwards were so rugged toward us, for
saying Thou and Thee to a single person, for which before they were
exceedingly fierce against us. Thou and Thee was a sore cut to proud
flesh, and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say
it to God and Christ, could not endure to have it said to
themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and sometimes
in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who
would say, “What! you ill-bred clown, do you Thou me?” as though
Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which is contrary
to all their grammars and teaching books, by which they instruct
their youth.

Now the bishops and priests being busy and eager to set up their
form of worship, and compel all to come to it, I was moved to give
forth the following paper, to open _the nature of the true worship_,
which Christ set up, and which God accepts:—

  “Christ’s worship is free in the Spirit to all men; and such as
  worship in Spirit and in truth, are they whom God seeks to worship
  him; for he is the God of truth, and is a Spirit, and the God of
  the spirits of all flesh. He hath given to all nations of men and
  women breath and life, to live, and move, and have their being in
  him: and hath put into them an immortal soul. So all are to be
  temples for him to dwell in; and they that defile his temple will
  he destroy. Now as the outward Jews, while they had their outward
  temple at Jerusalem, were to go up thither to worship (which
  temple God hath long since thrown down, and destroyed that
  Jerusalem, the vision of peace; and cast off the Jews and their
  worship; and instead thereof hath set up his gospel-worship in the
  Spirit and in the truth), so now all are to worship in Spirit and
  in truth. This is a free worship; for where the Spirit of the Lord
  is, and ruleth, there is liberty; the fruits of the Spirit are
  seen, and will manifest themselves; and the Spirit is not to be
  limited, but lived and walked in, that its fruits may appear. The
  tares are such as hang upon the wheat, and thereby draw it down to
  the earth; yet the tares and the wheat must grow together, till
  the harvest, lest they that take upon them to pluck up the tares,
  should pluck up the wheat with the tares. The tares are such as
  worship not God in Spirit and in truth; but grieve the Spirit, vex
  and quench it in themselves, and walk not in the truth; yet will
  hang about the wheat, the true worshippers in the Spirit and in
  the truth.

  “Christ’s church was never established by blood, nor held up by
  prisons: neither was the foundation of it laid by carnal-weaponed
  men, nor is it preserved by such. But when men departed from the
  Spirit and truth, they took up carnal weapons to maintain their
  outward forms, and yet they cannot preserve them with their carnal
  weapons; for one plucketh down another’s form with his outward
  weapons. And this work hath been among nominal Christians, since
  they lost the Spirit, and spiritual weapons, and the true worship
  which Christ set up, that is in Spirit and in truth, which they
  that worship in, are over all the tares. All that would be
  plucking up the tares are forbidden by Christ, who hath all power
  in heaven and earth given to him; for the tares and the wheat must
  grow together till the harvest, as Christ hath commanded. The
  stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the
  whole earth; now, if the stone fill the whole earth, all nations
  must be temples for the stone. All that say they travail for the
  seed, and yet bring forth nothing but a birth of strife,
  contention, and confusion, their fruit shows their travail to be
  wrong; for by the fruit, the end of every one’s work is seen, of
  what sort it is.”

                                                               G. F.

About this time many Papists and Jesuits began to fawn upon Friends,
and talked where they came, that of all sects the Quakers were the
best and most self-denying people; and said, “It was a great pity
they did not return to the holy mother church.” Thus they made a
buzz among the people, and said, “They would willingly discourse
with Friends.” But Friends were loth to meddle with them, because
they were Jesuits, looking upon it to be both dangerous and
scandalous. But when I understood it, I said to Friends, “Let us
discourse with them, be they what they will.” So a time being
appointed at Gerrard Roberts’s house, there came two of them like
courtiers. When we were met together, they asked our names, which we
told them; but we did not ask their names, for we understood they
were called Papists, and they knew we were called Quakers. I asked
them the same question that I had formerly asked a Jesuit, namely,
“Whether the church of Rome was not degenerated from the primitive
church, from the Spirit, power, and practice, of the apostles’
times?” He to whom I put this question being subtle, said, “He would
not answer it.” I asked him, “Why?” But he would show no reason. His
companion said, he would answer me; and said, “They were not
degenerated from the primitive church times.” I asked the other,
whether he was of the same mind? He said, “Yes.” Then I told them
that for better understanding one another, and that there might be
no mistake, I would repeat my question over again after this manner,
“Whether the church of Rome now was in the same purity, practice,
power, and Spirit, that the church in the apostles’ time was in?”
When they saw we would be exact with them, they flew off, and denied
that, saying, “It was presumption in any to say, they had the same
power and spirit that the apostles had.” “But I told them, it was
presumption in them to meddle with the words of Christ and his
apostles, and make people believe they succeeded the apostles, and
yet be forced to confess they were not in the same power and Spirit
the apostles were in. This,” said I, “is a spirit of presumption,
and rebuked by the apostles’ Spirit.” I showed them how different
their fruits and practices were from those of the apostles.

Then one of them said, “Ye are a company of dreamers.” “Nay,” said I,
“ye are the filthy dreamers, who dream ye are the apostles successors;
and yet confess ye have not the same power and Spirit they were in. And
are not they defilers of the flesh, who say, ‘It is presumption in any
to say, they have the same power and Spirit the apostles had?’ Now,”
said I, “if ye have not the same power and Spirit the apostles had,
then it is manifest that ye are led by another power and spirit than
the apostles and primitive church were led by.” Then I began to tell
them how that evil spirit, which they were led by, had led them to pray
by beads and to images; to set up nunneries, friaries, and monasteries,
and to put people to death for religion; and this practice of theirs, I
showed them, was below the law, and far short of the gospel, in which
is liberty. They were soon weary of this discourse, went away, and gave
a charge, as we heard, to the Papists, “That they should not dispute
with us, or read any of our books;” so we were rid of them. But we had
reasonings with all the other sects as Presbyterians, Independents,
Seekers, Baptists, Episcopalians, Socinians, Brownists, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Arminians, Fifth-monarchy-men, Familists, Muggletonians and
Ranters; none of which would affirm they had the same power and Spirit
the apostles had, and were in; so in that power and Spirit the Lord
gave us dominion over them all.

As for the Fifth-monarchy men, I was moved to give forth a paper, to
manifest their error to them; for they looked for Christ’s personal
coming in an outward form and manner, and fixed the time to the year
1666; at which time some of them prepared themselves when it
thundered and rained, thinking Christ was then come to set up his
kingdom; and they imagined they were to kill the whore without them.
But I told them the whore was alive in them, and was not burned with
God’s fire, nor judged in them with the same power and Spirit the
apostles were in. And their looking for Christ’s coming outwardly to
set up his kingdom, was like the Pharisees’ “Lo here” and “Lo
there.” But Christ was come, and had set up his kingdom above
sixteen hundred years ago (according to Nebuchadnezzar’s dream and
Daniel’s prophecy), and he had dashed to pieces the four monarchies,
the great image, with its head of gold, breast and arms of silver,
belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and feet part of iron and
part of clay; and they were all blown away with God’s wind, as the
chaff in the summer thrashing-floor. And when Christ was on earth,
he said, “His kingdom was not of this world:” if it had been, his
servants would have fought, but it was not; therefore his servants
did not fight. Therefore all the Fifth-monarchy-men, that are
fighters with carnal weapons, are none of Christ’s servants, but the
beast’s and the whore’s. Christ said, “All power in heaven and in
earth is given to me:” so then his kingdom was set up above sixteen
hundred years ago, and he reigns. “And we see Jesus Christ reign,”
said the apostle; and he shall reign till all things be put under
his feet; though all things are not yet put under his feet, nor
subdued.

This year several Friends were moved to go beyond the seas, to
publish Truth in foreign countries. John Stubbs, and Henry Fell, and
Richard Costrop were moved to go towards China and Prester John’s
country; but no masters of ships would carry them. With much ado
they got a warrant from the king; but the East India Company found
ways to avoid it, and masters of their ships would not carry them.
Then they went into Holland, hoping to get passage there, but none
could they get there either. Then John Stubbs and Henry Fell took
shipping for Alexandria in Egypt, intending to go by the caravans
from thence. Meanwhile Daniel Baker being to go to Smyrna, drew
Richard Costrop,[71] contrary to his own freedom, to go along with
him, and in the passage Richard falling sick, Daniel Baker left him
so in the ship, where he died: but that hard-hearted man afterwards
lost his own condition.

Footnote 71:

  This Richard Costrop (or Scostrop) was born in 1628. He was
  originally a sore persecutor of Friends, but becoming convinced of
  the soundness of their principles, he at length joined the
  Society, and preached the faith which once he destroyed,
  travelling for this object into various parts of Europe. he seems
  to have been chiefly instrumental in establishing the meeting at
  Scalehouse. He appears to have been a man of some estate, but left
  all, and spent his days in the service of the gospel. In a
  document issued by Friends of Settle Monthly Meeting in 1704, it
  is said of him, “his memory is sweet this day among the brethren.”
  See _Life, &c., of William and Alice Ellis_, by James Backhouse,
  pp. 278, 279, &c.

John Stubbs and Henry Fell reached Alexandria; but they had not been
there long before the English consul banished them: yet before they
came away, they dispersed many books and papers, for opening the
principles and way of truth to the Turks and Grecians. They gave the
book called, _The Pope’s Strength Broken_, to an old friar, for him
to give or send to the Pope; which when the friar had perused, he
placed his hand on his breast, and confessed, “What was written
therein was truth; but” said he, “if I should confess it openly,
they would burn me.” John Stubbs and Henry Fell, not being suffered
to go further, returned to England, and came to London again. John
had a vision that the English and Dutch, who had joined together not
to carry them, would fall out one with the other; and so it came to
pass.

Having now stayed in London some time, I felt drawings to visit
Friends in Essex. So I went down to COLCHESTER, where I had very
large meetings; and thence to COGGESHALL; not far from which a
priest was convinced, and I had a meeting at his house. Travelling a
little up and down in those parts, and visiting Friends in their
meetings, I returned pretty quickly to LONDON, where I found great
service for the Lord; for a large door was opened, many flocked in
to our meetings, and the Lord’s truth spread mightily this year.

Yet Friends had great travail and sore labour, the rude people
having been so heightened by the Monarchy-men’s rising a little
before. But the Lord’s power was over all, and in it Friends had
dominion; though we had not only those sufferings without, but
sufferings within also, by John Perrot and his company; who, giving
heed to a spirit of delusion, sought to introduce among Friends that
evil and uncomely practice of “keeping on the hat in time of public
prayers.” Friends had spoken to him and many of his followers about
it, and I had written to them concerning it; but he and some others
rather strengthened themselves against us.[72] Wherefore feeling the
judgment of truth rise against it, I gave forth the following as a
warning to all that were concerned therein:—

  “Whosoever is tainted with this spirit of John Perrot, it will
  perish. Mark his and their end, who are turned into those outward
  things and janglings about them, and that which is not savoury;
  all which is for perpetual judgment—is to be swept and cleansed
  out of the camp of God’s elect. This is to that spirit, that is
  gone into jangling about that which is below (the rotten principle
  of the old Ranters)—gone from the invisible power of God, in which
  is the everlasting fellowship; and thus many who now clamour and
  speak against them that are in the power of God, are become like
  the untimely figs, and like the corn on the house-top. O!
  consider! the light and power of God goes over you all, and leaves
  you in the fretting nature, out of the unity which is in the
  everlasting light, life, and power of God. Consider this, before
  the day be gone from you; and take heed, that your memorial be not
  rooted out from among the righteous.”

                                                               G. F.

Footnote 72:

  John Perrot was one who at this time caused great distress and
  trouble to the faithful members of the Society, from giving way to
  self-importance and extravagant notions. For particulars, the
  reader is referred to Sewell’s _History_; and to Hodgson’s
  _Historical Memoirs_.

  Whilst the Society kept steadily pursuing its path, and increasing
  in numbers, notwithstanding the persecutions to which its members
  were everywhere subjected, it was not to be expected that every
  individual who was found within its precincts should have been
  rightly prepared for the station which he might have assumed. It
  would have been indeed remarkable, if, in the multitude of those
  who went forth in that day of zeal, in the service of the
  ministry, there had not been instances of men who had taken upon
  them (perhaps mistakenly) the office of a gospel minister, without
  waiting for the preparation and the call. And it would have been
  still more surprising if such forward spirits had proved firm in
  the day of outward trial, or of inward fascinations and snares of
  the enemy.

Among the exercises and troubles Friends had from without, one was
regarding Friends’ marriages, which sometimes were called in
question. This year there was a cause tried at the assize at
Nottingham concerning one. The case was thus. Some years before, two
Friends were joined together in marriage amongst Friends, and lived
together as man and wife about two years. Then the man died, leaving
his wife with child, and an estate in lands of copyhold. When the
woman was delivered, the jury presented the child heir to its
father’s lands, and accordingly the child was admitted; afterwards
another Friend married the widow. After that, a man that was near of
kin to her former husband, brought his action against the Friend
that had last married her, endeavouring to dispossess them, and
deprive the child of the inheritance, and to possess himself thereof
as next heir to the woman’s first husband. To effect this, he
endeavoured to prove the child illegitimate, alleging, “the marriage
was not according to law.” In opening the cause, the plaintiff’s
counsel used unseemly words concerning Friends, saying, “That they
went together like brute beasts,” with other ill expressions. After
the counsels on both sides had pleaded, the judge (viz., Judge
Archer) took the matter in hand, and opened it to the jury, telling
them, that “There was a marriage in Paradise when Adam took Eve, and
Eve took Adam; and that it was the consent of the parties that made
a marriage. As for the Quakers,” he said, “he did not know their
opinions, but he did not believe they went together as brute beasts,
as had been said of them, but as Christians and therefore he
believed the marriage was lawful, and the child lawful heir.” And
the better to satisfy the jury, he brought them a case to this
purpose:—“A man that was weak of body, and kept his bed, had a
desire in that condition to marry, and declared before witnesses
that he took such a woman to be his wife, and the woman declared
that she took that man to be her husband. This marriage was
afterwards called in question; and (as the judge said) all the
bishops at that time concluded it to be a lawful marriage.” Hereupon
the jury gave in their verdict for the Friend’s child, against the
man that would have deprived it of its inheritance.

About this time the oaths of allegiance and supremacy were tendered
to Friends, as a snare, because it was known we could not swear, and
thereupon many were imprisoned, and divers premunired. Upon that
occasion Friends published in print “_The grounds and reasons why
they refused to swear_;” besides which I was moved to issue these
few lines, to be given to the magistrates:—

  “The world saith, ‘Kiss the book;’ but the book saith, ‘Kiss the
  Son, lest he be angry.’ And the Son saith, ‘Swear not at all,’ but
  keep to Yea and Nay in all your communications; for whatsoever is
  more than this cometh of evil. Again, the world saith, ‘Lay your
  hand on the book,’ but the book saith, ‘Handle the word;’ and the
  word saith, ‘Handle not the traditions,’ nor the inventions, nor
  the rudiments of the world. And God saith, ‘This is my beloved
  Son, hear Him,’ who is the life, the truth, the light, and the way
  to God.”

                                                               G. F.

Now their being very many Friends in prison in the nation, Richard
Hubberthorn and I drew up paper concerning them,[73] and got it
delivered to the king, that he might understand how we were dealt
with by his officers. It was directed thus:—

                           “_For the King._

        “FRIEND,

  “Who art the chief ruler of these dominions, here is a list of
  some of the sufferings of the people of God, in scorn called
  Quakers, that have suffered under the changeable powers before
  thee, by whom there have been imprisoned, and under whom there
  have suffered for good conscience’ sake, and for bearing testimony
  to the truth as it is in Jesus, ‘three thousand one hundred and
  seventy-three persons,’ and there lie yet in prison in the name of
  the Commonwealth ‘seventy-three persons,’ that we know of. And
  there died in prison in the time of the Commonwealth, and of
  Oliver and Richard, the protectors, through cruel and hard
  imprisonments, upon nasty straw, and in dungeons, ‘thirty-two
  persons.’ There have been also imprisoned in thy name, since thy
  arrival, by such as thought to ingratiate themselves thereby with
  thee, ‘three thousand, sixty and eight persons.’ Besides this, our
  meetings are daily broken up by men with clubs and arms, though we
  meet peaceably, according to the practice of God’s people in the
  primitive times, and our Friends are thrown into waters, and trod
  upon, till the very blood gushes out of them; the number of which
  abuses can hardly be uttered.

  “Now this we would have of thee, to set them at liberty that lie
  in prison in the names of the Commonwealth, and of the two
  Protectors, and them that lie in thy own name, for speaking the
  truth, and for good conscience’ sake, who have not lifted up a
  hand against thee or any man; and that the meetings of our
  Friends, who meet peaceably together in the fear of God, to
  worship him, may not be broken up by rude people, with their
  clubs, swords, and staves. One of the greatest things that we have
  suffered for formerly, was, because we could not swear to the
  Protectors and all the changeable governments; and now we are
  imprisoned because we cannot take the oath of allegiance. Now, if
  our yea be not yea, and nay, nay, to thee, and to all men upon the
  earth, let us suffer as much for breaking that, as others do for
  breaking an oath. We have suffered these many years, both in lives
  and estates, under these changeable governments, because we cannot
  swear, but obey Christ’s doctrine, who commands, ‘we should not
  swear at all’ (Matt. v. James v.), and this we seal with our lives
  and estates, with our yea and nay, according to the doctrine of
  Christ. Hearken to these things, and so consider them in the
  wisdom of God, that by it such actions may be stopped; thou that
  hast the government and mayest do it. We desire that all that are
  in prison may be set at liberty, and that for the time to come
  they may not be imprisoned for conscience and for truth’s sake;
  and if thou question the innocency of their sufferings, let them
  and their accusers be brought up before thee, and we shall produce
  a more particular and full account of their sufferings if
  required.”

                                                       G.F. and R.H.

Footnote 73:

  About this time persecution was very hot, and from estimates
  deduced from documents of the period, it is probable that, in 1661
  or 1662, there were no less than 4,500 Friends in prison, in
  England and Wales, at one time, for meeting to worship God,
  refusing to swear, &c. And in such prisons too! They who would
  know what the miseries of prisoners have been in England, let them
  read Sewell’s _History_, which exhibits such a scene of savage
  persecution on the one hand, and firmness and patience in
  suffering on the other, as is not easily paralleled. Little known
  as these things are, it will hardly be credited now, that to such
  a length was hatred carried against the Quakers, that few of them,
  except those below the cognizance of the magistrates, were not in
  prison, at one time or other, for their religious faith.

  The interruption of family ties, the breaking up of households,
  the loss to many of all means of support, were hard and cruel
  sufferings for conscience’ sake, but they were grievously
  aggravated at this period by the damp and filthy condition of the
  prisons, holes, and dungeons in which the sufferers were confined,
  as well as by their very crowded condition. And to all these
  circumstances of trial, must be added those of personal abuse,
  fines, distraints, and, it may strictly be said, of wholesale
  robberies they endured. Some died of the beatings which they
  received in the breaking up of their meetings, and many from the
  filthy and close state of the prisons, in some of which they were
  so closely packed that they had to take it by turns to stand up,
  whilst others sat or lay down. They were also often overrun with
  lice and other vermin.

I mentioned before, that in the year 1650, I was kept prisoner six
months in the house of correction at Derby, and that the keeper of
the prison, a cruel man, and one that had dealt very wickedly
towards me, was smitten in himself, the plagues and terrors of the
Lord falling upon him because thereof (p. 57.). This man, being
afterwards convinced of truth, wrote me the following letter:—

        “DEAR FRIEND,

  “Having such a convenient messenger, I could do no less than give
  thee an account of my present condition, remembering, that in the
  first awakening of me to a sense of life, and of the inward
  principle, God was pleased to make use of thee as an instrument.
  So that sometimes I am taken with admiration that it should come
  by such a means as it did; that is to say, that providence should
  order thee to be my prisoner, to give me my first real sight of
  the truth. It makes me many times think of the jailer’s conversion
  by the apostles. O happy George Fox! that first breathed that
  breath of life within the walls of my habitation! Notwithstanding
  my outward losses are since that time such, that I am become
  nothing in the world, yet I hope I shall find that all these light
  afflictions, which are but for a moment, will work for me a far
  more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. They have taken all
  from me, and now, instead of keeping a prison, I am rather waiting
  the time when I shall become a prisoner myself. Pray for me, that
  my faith fail not, but that I may hold out unto death, that I may
  receive a crown of life. I earnestly desire to hear from thee, and
  of thy condition, which would very much rejoice me. Not having
  else at present but my kind love unto thee, and all Christian
  Friends with thee, in haste, I rest, thine, in Christ Jesus,

                                                    THOMAS SHARMAN.”

  Derby, 22nd of 4th Month, 1662.

There were two of our friends in prison in the Inquisition at Malta,
both women; Katherine Evans and Sarah Chevers.[74] I was told that
one called the Lord D’Aubigny [a Roman Catholic priest], could
procure their liberty, so I went to him; and having informed him
concerning their imprisonment, desired him to write to the
magistrates there for their release. He readily promised he would;
and, “if I would come again within a month, he would tell me of
their discharge.” I went again about that time, and he said, “he
thought his letters had miscarried, because he had received no
answer.” But he promised he would write again, and he did so; and
they were both set at liberty.

-----

Footnote 74:

  Katherine Evans and Sarah Chevers suffered a dreadful confinement
  for about four years in the Inquisition at Malta, of which a full
  account has been published. A more condensed one may be seen in
  _Select Miscellanies_, v. p. 50-68.

            “——These ministers of Christ did leave
            Their homes in England, faithfully to bear
            The Saviour’s message into Eastern lands;
            And here, at Malta, they were seized upon
            By bigoted intolerance, and shut
            Within this fearful engine of the Pope.
            Priests and inquisitors assail them there,
            And urge the claims of Popery. The rack
            And cruel deaths are threatened; and again
            Sweet liberty is offered, as the price
            Of their apostacy. All, all in vain!
              For years these tender women have been thus
            Victims of cruelty. At times apart,
            Confined in gloomy, solitary cells.
            But all these efforts to convert them failed;
            The inquisition had not power enough
            To shake their faith and confidence in Him,
            Whose holy presence anciently was seen
            To save his children from devouring flames;
            He from this furnace of affliction brought
            These persecuted women, who came forth
            Out of the burning, with no smell of fire
            Upon their garments, and again they trod
            Their native land, rejoicing.”

  Some idea of the sufferings of these poor creatures may be formed
  from the fact of their _often lying down before the crevice of
  their prison-door, to inhale what air could be obtained from it_.
  In this state their skin was parched, the hair fell off their
  heads, and, they frequently fainted; and, in moments when the
  strength and glory of the Divine presence was not so feelingly
  experienced as at others, it cannot occasion surprise that,
  through human weakness, they wished for death; their distress
  sometimes being such, that when it was day they longed for night,
  and yet when night came it was only to prompt the constant sigh
  for returning light. Yet the heavenly content which, on the whole,
  was the portion of these sufferers for Christ’s sake, in this dark
  and cloudy day, was remarkable. One of them, in writing to her
  relatives in England, says, “We are witnesses that the Lord can
  provide a table in the wilderness, both spiritual and temporal. In
  all our afflictions and miseries, the Lord remembered mercy, and
  did not leave nor forsake us, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail;
  but caused the sweet drops of his mercy to distil upon us, and the
  brightness of his glorious countenance to shine into our hearts.”

  The other of these suffering captives writes that she could not,
  by pen and paper, set forth the extent of the love of God to her
  soul, in fulfilling his gracious promises to her in the
  wilderness. They were indeed enabled to “sing the Lord’s song in a
  strange land;” and in the midst of heaviness, “their mouths were
  often filled with laughter, and their tongues with joy,” being
  strong in the faith, giving praises and glory to God.

  The following, composed by them in the Inquisition, affords a view
  of the motives and abilities of these devoted women:—

                “In prisons strong, and dungeons deep,
                To God alone we cry and weep;
                Our sorrows none can learn nor read,
                But those that in our path do tread.
                  But he whose beauty shineth bright,
                Who turneth darkness into light,
                Makes cedars bow, and oaks to bend,
                To him that’s sent to the same end;
                He is a fountain pure and clear,
                His crystal streams run far and near
                To cleanse all those that come to him
                For to be healed of their sin:
                All them that patiently abide,
                And never swerve nor go aside,
                The Lord will free them out of all
                Bondage, captivity, and thrall.”

  It was not in the Inquisition only that these women suffered, but
  much also in England. In 1657, Katherine Evans was stripped, and
  tied to a whipping-post in the market-place at Salisbury, and
  there whipped, for exhorting the people to repentance. Her
  husband, a man of property, also suffered several imprisonments,
  and at last died in prison for obeying our Saviour’s command,
  “Swear not at all.”

-----

With this great man I had much reasoning about religion, and he
confessed that “Christ hath enlightened every man that cometh into
the world, with his spiritual light; that he tasted death for every
man; that the grace of God, which brings salvation, hath appeared to
all men, and that it would teach them and bring their salvation, if
they obeyed it.” Then I asked him, “what would they (the Papists) do
with all their relics and images, if they should own and believe in
this light, and receive the grace to teach and bring their
salvation?” He said, “those things were but policies, to keep people
in subjection.” He was very free in discourse; I never heard a
Papist confess so much as he did.

Though several about the court began to grow loving to Friends, yet
persecution was very hot, and several Friends died in prison.
Whereupon I gave forth a little paper _concerning the grounds and
rise of persecution_; which was thus:—

  “All the sufferings of the people of God in all ages were, because
  they could not join in the national religions and worships, which
  men had made and set up; and because they would not forsake God’s
  religion and his worship, which he had set up. You may see through
  all chronicles and histories, that the priests joined with the
  powers of the nation; the magistrates, soothsayers, and
  fortune-tellers, all united against the people of God, and
  imagined vain things against them in their councils. When the Jews
  did wickedly, they turned against Moses; and when the Jewish kings
  transgressed the law of God, they persecuted the prophets, as may
  be seen in the prophets’ writings. When Christ, the substance,
  came, the Jews persecuted Christ, his apostles, and disciples. And
  when the Jews had not power enough of themselves to persecute
  answerably to their wills, they got the heathen Gentiles to help
  them against Christ, and against his apostles and disciples, who
  were in the Spirit and power of Christ.”

                                                               G. F.

After I had made some stay in London, and had cleared myself of
those services that at that time lay upon me there, I went into the
country, having with me Alexander Parker and John Stubbs. We
travelled through the country, visiting Friends’ meetings, till we
came to BRISTOL. There we understood the officers were likely to
come and break up the meeting. Yet on First-day we went to the
meeting at Broadmead, and Alexander Parker standing up first, while
he was speaking the officers came and took him away. After he was
gone, I stood up, and declared the everlasting truth of the Lord God
in his eternal power, which came over all; the meeting was quiet the
rest of the time, and broke up peaceably. I tarried till the
First-day following, visiting Friends, and being visited by them.

On First-day morning several Friends came to Edward Pyot’s house
(where I lay the night before,) and used great endeavours to
persuade me not to go to the meeting that day, for the magistrates,
they said, had threatened to take me, and had raised the trained
bands. I wished them to go to the meeting, not telling them what I
intended to do; but I told Edward Pyot I intended to go, and he sent
his son to show me the way from his house by the fields. As I went I
met divers Friends who were coming to me to prevent my going, and
did what they could to stop me. “What!” said one, “wilt thou go into
the mouth of the beast?” “Wilt thou go into the mouth of the
dragon?” said another. I put them by and went on. When I came to the
meeting, Margaret Thomas was speaking; and when she had done, I
stood up. I saw a concern and fear upon Friends for me; but the
power of the Lord, in which I declared, soon struck the fear out of
them; life sprang, and a glorious heavenly meeting we had. After I
had cleared myself of what was upon me from the Lord to the meeting,
I was moved to pray; and after that to stand up again, and tell
Friends, “Now they might see there was a God in Israel that could
deliver.” A very large meeting this was, and very hot; but truth was
over all, the life was exalted, which carried through all, and the
meeting broke up in peace. The officers and soldiers had been
breaking up another meeting, which had taken up their time, so that
our meeting was ended before they came. But I understood afterwards
they were in a great rage, because they had missed me; for they were
heard to say one to another before, “I’ll warrant we shall have
him;” but the Lord prevented them.

I went from the meeting to Joan Hily’s, where many Friends came to
see me, rejoicing and blessing God for our deliverance. In the
evening I had a fine fresh meeting among Friends at a Friend’s house
over the water, where we were much refreshed in the Lord. After this
I stayed most part of that week in Bristol, and at Edward Pyot’s.
Edward was brought so low and weak with an ague, that when I first
came, he was looked upon as a dying man; but it pleased the Lord to
raise him up again, so that before I went away, his ague left him,
and he was finely well.

Having been two First-days together at the meeting at Broadmead, and
feeling my spirit clear of Bristol, I went next First-day to a
meeting in the country not far distant. And after the meeting, some
Friends from Bristol told me, that the soldiers that day had beset
the meeting house round at Bristol, and then went up, saying, “they
would be sure to have me now;” but when they came, and found me not
there, they were in a great rage, and kept the Friends in the
meeting-house most part of the day, before they would let them go
home; and queried of them, which way I was gone, and how they might
send after me; “for the mayor,” they said, “would fain have spoken
with me.” I had a vision of a great mastiff dog, that would have
bitten me, but I put one hand above his jaws, and the other hand
below, and tore his jaws in pieces. So the Lord by his power tore
their power to pieces, and made way for me to escape them.

Then I passed through the country, visiting Friends in WILTSHIRE and
BERKSHIRE, till I came to LONDON, having great meetings amongst
Friends as I went. The Lord’s power was over all, and a blessed time
it was for the spreading of his glorious truth. It was indeed his
immediate hand and power that preserved me out of their hands at
Bristol, and over the heads of all our persecutors; and the Lord
alone is worthy of all the glory, who did uphold and preserve for
his name and truth’s sake.

At London I did not stay long, being drawn in spirit to visit
Friends northward, as far as LEICESTERSHIRE, John Stubbs being with
me. So we travelled, having meetings amongst Friends as we went; at
SKEGBY we had a great one. Thence passing on, we came to a place
called BARNET-HILLS, where lived Captain Brown, a Baptist, whose
wife was convinced of truth. This Captain Brown, after the act for
breaking up meetings came forth, being afraid lest his wife should
go to meetings, and be cast into prison, left his house at Barrow,
and took one on these hills, saying, “his wife should not go to
prison.” And this being a free place, many, both priests and others,
got thither as well as he, But he who would neither stand to truth
himself, nor suffer his wife, was, in this place where he thought to
be safe, found out by the Lord, whose hand fell heavy upon him for
his unfaithfulness; so that he was sorely plagued, and grievously
judged in himself for flying, and drawing his wife into that private
place. We went to see his wife, and being come into the house, I
asked him, “how he did?” “How do I?” said he, “the plagues and
vengeance of God are upon me, a runagate, a Cain as I am. God may
look for a witness for me, and such as me; for if all were not more
faithful than I, God would have no witness left in the earth.” In
this condition he lived on bread and water, and thought it was too
good for him. At length he returned again with his wife to his own
house at Barrow, where he afterwards came to be convinced of God’s
eternal truth, and died in it. A little before his death he said,
“though he had not borne a testimony for truth in his life, he would
bear a testimony in his death, and would be buried in his orchard;”
and he was so. He was an example to all the flying Baptists in the
time of persecution, who could not bear persecution themselves, yet
persecuted us when they had power.

From Barnet-Hills we came to SWANNINGTON in LEICESTERSHIRE, where
William Smith and some other Friends came to me; but they went away
towards night, leaving me at a Friend’s house in Swannington. At
night, as I was sitting in the hall, speaking to a widow woman and
her daughter, there came one called Lord Beaumont with a company of
soldiers, who, slapping their swords on the door, rushed into the
house with swords and pistols in their hands, crying, “Put out the
candles, and make fast the doors.” Then they seized upon the friends
in the house, and asked, “if there were no more about the house?”
The Friends told them, there was one man more in the hall. There
were some Friends out of Derbyshire, one of whom was named Thomas
Fauks; and this Lord Beaumont, after he had asked all their names,
bid his man set down that man’s name Thomas Fox; but the Friend
said, his name was not Fox, but Fauks. In the meantime some of the
soldiers came, and brought me out of the hall to him. He asked me my
name; I told him, my name was George Fox, and that I was well known
by that name. “Ay,” said he, “you are known all the world over.” I
said, “I was known for no hurt, but for good.” Then he put his hand
into my pockets to search them, and pulled out my comb-case, and
afterwards commanded one of his officers to search further for
letters, as he pretended. I told him, I was no letter-carrier, and
asked him, Why he came amongst a peaceable people with swords and
pistols, without a constable, contrary to the king’s proclamation,
and to the late act? For he could not say there was a meeting, I
being only talking with a poor widow woman and her daughter. By
reasoning thus with them, he came somewhat down; yet sending for the
constables, he gave them charge of us, and to bring us before him
next morning. Accordingly the constables set a watch of the
town’s-people upon us that night, and had us next morning to his
house, about a mile from Swannington.

When we came before him, he told us “we met contrary to the act.” I
desired him to show us the act. “Why,” says he, “you have it in your
pocket.” I told him, he did not find us in a meeting. Then he asked
us, “whether we would take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy?” I
told him, I never took any oath in my life, nor engagement, nor
covenant. Yet still he would force the oath upon us. I desired him
to show us the oath, that we might see whether we were the persons
it was to be tendered to, and whether it was not for the discovery
of Popish recusants. At length he brought a little book; but we
called for the statute-book. He would not show us that, but caused a
mittimus to be made, which mentioned, “that we were to have had a
meeting.” With this he delivered us to the constables to convey us
to Leicester jail. But when they had brought us back to Swannington,
being harvest time, it was hard to get anybody to go with us; for
the people were loath to go with their neighbours to prison,
especially in such a busy time. They would have given us our
mittimus, to carry it ourselves to the jail; for it had been usual
for constables to give Friends their own mittimuses (for they durst
trust Friends,) and they have gone themselves with them to the
jailer. But we told them, though our Friends had sometimes done so,
yet we would not take this mittimus, but some of them should go with
us to the jail. At last they hired a poor labouring man to go with
us, who was loath to go, though hired. So we rode to LEICESTER,
being five in number; some carried their Bibles open in their hands,
declaring the truth to the people, as we rode, in the fields, and
through the towns, and telling them, “we were prisoners of the Lord
Jesus Christ, going to suffer bonds for his name and truth’s sake.”
One woman Friend carried her wheel on her lap to spin on in prison;
and the people were mightily affected.

At Leicester we went to an inn. The master of the house seemed
troubled that we should go to the prison; and being himself in
commission, he sent for lawyers in the town to advise with, and
would have taken up the mittimus, and kept us in his own house, and
not have let us go into the jail. But I told Friends, it would be a
great charge to lie at an inn; and many Friends and people would be
coming to visit us, and it might he hard for him to bear our having
meetings in his house besides, we had many Friends in the prison
already, and we had rather be with them. So we let the man know that
we were sensible of his kindness, and to prison we went: the poor
man that brought us thither, delivering both the mittimus and us to
the jailer. This jailer had been a very wicked, cruel man. Six or
seven Friends being in prison before we came, he had taken some
occasion to quarrel with them, and thrust them into the dungeon
amongst the felons, where there was hardly room for them to lie
down. We stayed all that day in the prison-yard, and desired the
jailer to let us have some straw. He surlily answered, “you do not
look like men that would lie on straw.” After a while, William
Smith, a Friend, came to me, and he being acquainted in the house, I
asked him, “what rooms there were in it, and what rooms Friends had
usually been put into, before they were put into the dungeon?” I
asked him also, Whether the jailer or his wife was master? He said,
The wife was master; and though she was lame, and sat mostly in her
chair, being only able to go on crutches, yet she would beat her
husband when he came within her reach, if he did not do as she would
have him. I considered, probably, many Friends might come to visit
us, and that if we had a room to ourselves, it would be better for
them to speak to me, and me to them, as there should be occasion.
Wherefore I desired William Smith to go speak with the woman, and
acquaint her, if she would let us have a room, suffer our Friends to
come out of the dungeon, and leave it to us to give her what we
would, it might be better for her. He went, and after some reasoning
with her, she consented; and we were had into a room. Then we were
told, that the jailer would not suffer us to have any drink out of
the town into the prison, but that what beer we drank, we must take
of him. I told them I would remedy that, for we would get a pail of
water and a little wormwood once a day, and that might serve us; so
we should have none of his beer, and the water he could not deny us.

Before we came, when the few Friends that were prisoners there, met
together on First-days, if any of them was moved to pray to the
Lord, the jailer would come up with his quarter-staff in his hand,
and his mastiff dog at his heels, and pluck them down by the hair of
the head, and strike them with his staff; but when he struck
Friends, the mastiff dog, instead of falling upon them, would take
the staff out of his hand. When the First-day came, I spoke to one
of my fellow prisoners, to carry a stool and set it in the yard, and
give notice to the debtors and felons, that there would be a meeting
in the yard, and they that would hear the word of the Lord declared
might come thither. So the debtors and prisoners gathered in the
yard, and we went down, and had a very precious meeting, the jailer
not meddling. Thus every First-day we had a meeting as long as we
stayed in prison; and several came in out of the town and country.
Many were convinced, and some received the Lord’s truth there, who
have stood faithful witnesses for it ever since.

When the sessions came, we were brought before the justices, with
many more Friends sent to prison whilst we were there, to the number
of about twenty. Being brought into the court, the jailer put us
into the place where the thieves were put, and then some of the
justices began to tender the oaths of allegiance and supremacy to
us. I told them, I never took any oath in my life, and they knew we
could not swear, because Christ and his apostle forbade it;
therefore they put it but as a snare to us. We told them, if they
could prove, that after Christ and the apostle had forbid swearing,
they did ever command Christians to swear, then we would take these
oaths; otherwise we were resolved to obey Christ’s command and the
apostle’s exhortation. They said, “we must take the oath, that we
might manifest our allegiance to the king.” I told them, I had been
formerly sent up a prisoner by Colonel Hacker, from that town to
London, under pretence that I held meetings to plot to bring in King
Charles. I also desired them to read our mittimus, which set forth
the cause of our commitment to be, that “we were to have had a
meeting;” and I said, Lord Beaumont could not by that act send us to
jail, unless we had been taken at a meeting, and found to be such
persons as the act speaks of; therefore we desired they would read
the mittimus, and see how wrongfully we were imprisoned. They would
not take notice of the mittimus, but called a jury, and indicted us
for refusing to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. When the
jury was sworn and instructed, as they were going out, one that had
been an alderman of the city, spoke to them, and bid them, “have a
good conscience;” and one of the jury, being a peevish man, told the
justices, there was one affronted the jury; whereupon they called
him up, and tendered him the oath also, and he took it.

While we were standing where the thieves used to stand, a cut-purse
had his hand in several Friends’ pockets. Friends declared it to the
justices, and showed them the man. They called him up before them,
and upon examination he could not deny it; yet they set him at
liberty.[75]

Footnote 75:

  Cases similar to the above are not rare in the early history of
  the Society; even thieves being allowed to escape, whilst the
  party robbed, being unwilling to swear to the known fact, have
  been made to suffer. In 1660, the following occurrence took place
  at Reading assizes:—Henry Hodges, a poor smith, lost three cows,
  which were found in the possession of the thief who stole them, he
  was brought to trial, and Hodges appeared to claim his cows. The
  judge told him they must be proved on oath before he could have
  them again. He replied that he could not swear for conscience
  sake. The judge said if any of his neighbours would swear they
  were his, they should be returned to him; upon which one of his
  neighbours took his oath, and the judge promised that they should
  be returned. Thus far, the proceedings appeared just and equal,
  but many thought the judge too rigorous, when, having observed the
  sincerity and tenderness of the poor man’s conscience, who could
  not swear in a case of his own property, he caused the oath of
  allegiance to be tendered him in court; and, for his refusing to
  take it, sent him to jail.—(Besse.)

It was not long before the jury returned, and brought us in guilty;
and then, after some words the justices whispered together, and bid
the jailer take us down to prison again; but the Lord’s power was
over them and his everlasting truth, which we declared boldly
amongst them. There being a great concourse of people, most of them
followed us; so that the cryer and bailiffs were fain to call the
people back again to the court. We declared the truth as we went
down the streets all along till we came to the jail, the streets
being full of people. When we were in our chamber again, after some
time the jailer came to us, and desired all to go forth that were
not prisoners. When they were gone, he said, “Gentlemen, it is the
court’s pleasure that ye all should be set at liberty, except those
that are in for tithes; and you know, there are fees due to me; but
I shall leave it to you to give to me what you will.”

Thus we were all set at liberty suddenly, and passed everyone into
his service. Leonard Fell stayed with me, and we two went again to
SWANNINGTON. I had a letter from Lord Hastings, who hearing of my
imprisonment, had written from London to the justices of the
sessions to set me at liberty. I had not delivered this letter to
the justices, but whether they had any knowledge of his mind from
any other hand, which made them discharge us so suddenly, I know
not. But this letter I carried to Lord Beaumont who had sent us to
prison; and when he had broken it open and read it, he seemed much
troubled; but at last came a little lower; yet threatened us, if we
had any more meetings at Swannington, he would break them up and
send us to prison again. But notwithstanding his threats we went to
Swannington, and had a meeting with Friends there, and he neither
came, nor sent to break it up.

From Swannington we went to TWY-CROSS, where that great man formerly
mentioned, whom the Lord God raised up from his sickness, in the
year 1649 (and whose serving-man came at me with a drawn sword to do
me a mischief,) and his wife came to see me. Thence we travelled
through WARWICKSHIRE, where we had brave meetings; and into
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE and BEDFORDSHIRE, visiting Friends till we came to
LONDON.

I stayed not long in London, but went into ESSEX, and so into
NORFOLK, having great meetings. At NORWICH, when I came to Captain
Lawrence’s,[76] there was a great threatening of disturbance; but
the meeting was quiet. Passing thence to SUTTON, and so into
CAMBRIDGESHIRE, I heard of Edward Burrough’s decease. And being
sensible how great a grief and exercise it would be to Friends to
part with him, I wrote the following lines for the staying and
settling of their minds;—

        “FRIENDS,

  “Be still and quiet in your own conditions, and settle in the Seed
  of God that doth not change, that in that ye may feel dear E.B.
  among you in the Seed, in which and by which he begat you to God,
  with whom he is; and that in the Seed ye may all see and feel him,
  in which is the unity with him in the life: and so enjoy him in
  the life that doth not change, which is invisible.”

                                                                G.F.

Footnote 76:

  This Captain Lawrence, who has been mentioned before, was a man of
  some note in the days of the Commonwealth. After he joined
  Friends, he became a faithful sufferer for Christ. In 1660, with
  his brother, Joseph Lawrence, and George Whitehead, he was
  imprisoned in Norwich castle, in a small narrow cell called the
  Vice, where they endured much hardship. In speaking of this
  imprisonment, George Whitehead says, “I remember one morning,
  Joseph Lawrence, after his pleasant manner, said to his brother
  John, ‘O, Captain Lawrence, I have seen the day thou wouldst not
  have lain there!’”

Thence I passed to LITTLE PORT and the ISLE OF ELY; where the
ex-mayor with his wife, and the wife of the then mayor of
Cambridge, came to the meeting. Travelling into LINCOLNSHIRE and
HUNTINGDONSHIRE, I came to Thomas Parnell’s, where the mayor of
Huntingdon came to see me, and was very loving. Thence I came into
the FEN-COUNTY, where we had large and quiet meetings. While I was
in that country, there came so great a flood that it was dangerous
to go out, yet we did get out, and went to LYNN, where we had a
blessed meeting.

Next morning I went to visit some prisoners there; and then back to
the inn, and took horse. As I was riding out of the yard, the
officers came to search the inn for me. I knew nothing of it then,
only I felt a great burden come upon me as I rode out of the town,
till without the gates. When some Friends that came after, overtook
me, they told me, that the officers had been searching for me in the
inn, as soon as I was gone out of the yard. So by the good hand of
the Lord, I escaped their cruel hands. After this we passed through
the countries, visiting Friends in their meetings.

The Lord’s power carried us over persecuting spirits, and through
many dangers; his truth spread and grew, and Friends were
established therein; praises and glory to his name for ever.

                           END OF VOL. I.








------------------------------------------------------------------------

       HEADLEY BROTHERS, PRINTERS, LONDON AND ASHFORD, KENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         Transcriber’s Note

The handling of hyphenation of compound words across line breaks is
governed by the frequency with which they are hyphenated midline.

‘Steeple-house’ is nearly always hyphenated in midline, and the few
outliers that were not have been corrected. The exceptions are where
‘steeplehouse’ occurs in the editorial apparatus. See footnote 6,
and (arguably) in the parenthetical phrase at 25.28.

As one can see from the list below, the printer was not consistent
in the use of the opening quote mark in long, multi-paragraph
passages. There were also a number of occasions where a closing
quote mark either was missing or illogically added. On rarer
occasions, a single quote was employed matching a double quote (and
vice versa). These have been added where missing, emoved where they
were deemed spurious, and corrected where appropriate:

61.15 [“]The (added); 63.3 saved,[’] (added); 75.1 wise.[’] (added);
142.5 [“]There (added); 150.20 [‘/“]Consider (added); 198.33
him,[’](added); 208.9 order.[”](added); 210.14 [“]But (added); 217.8
me.[’] (added); 217.47 [“]The (added); 218.41 [“]Sing (added);
219.48 [“]Where (added); 220.36 [“]Now (added); 221.11 [“]But
(added); 224.13 [“]Christ (added); 224.35 [“]There (added); 232.29
inn;[”] (added); 281.8 [“]doth (added); 288.21 land.[”/’]
(replaced); 297.2 therein;[’] (added) 298.2 [“]O! abominable
(added); 305.13 [“]Noah, (added); 305.44 [“]You say (added); 307.21
[“]Beware,(added); 307.38 [“]Therefore (added); 309.19 [“]Now
(added); 379.24 God.[”] (added); 336.30 church;[’] (removed); 353.6
world,[’] (added); 367.28 peace.[”/’](replaced); 368.43 many.[”]
(added); 374.10 town.[’] (added); 405.5 [“]I will (added); 411.6
would.[”] (added); 416.14 could.[”] (added); 430.8 [“/‘]remembrance
(replaced); 486.21 myself?[”] (removed); 507.1 them.[”] (added);
522.11 [“/‘]three (replaced); 522.17 persons.[”/’] (replaced);
526.10 it.[”] (added).

The word ‘chace’ at 4.8, is likely an obsolete spelling of ‘chase’,
which refers to a large wooded estate.

A quotation beginning at line 114.1 (“amongst whom I declared...)
has no closing mark. The voice seems to shift on line 114.15 (..to
dwell in.”). and the closing mark was added there.

A quoted passage ending on p. 122 most likely should have been
opened at 121.32 (“was their first step to peace...), and an opening
quote was added.

A sentence beginning at 208.22 (“Whereupon I kneeled...)and ending
at 208.26, (...what I had said to him.”) seems an error. It does not
seem to be part of the dialogue and the surrounding quote marks have
been removed.

A lonely closing quote appears at 421.12 (...fellowships in the
world.”) A logical point for this quote to open is on the previous
page at 420.19 ([“]The promise of God...). Judging by the context,
the paragraph is a continuation of the previous quoted passage.

The word ‘throughly’ (xxv.2) is likely an obsolete spelling of
‘thoroughly’.

Other errors, deemed most likely to be the printer’s, have been
corrected, and are noted here. The references are to the page and
line in the original.

  xviii.13 to Charles II.[./,] exhorting him              Replaced.
  xx.22    and instructed Noah to salvation[.]            Added.
  xxvii.3  their exceeding great co[m/n]firmation         Replaced.
  25.17    steeple[-]house                                Inserted.
  56.37    Doth it [d/p]urify you                         Inverted.
  93.5     to preach in the steeple-house[.]              Added.
  142.21   in all things may [h/b]e his praise.           Replaced.
  142.44   plotted tog[e]ther to draw                     Inserted.
  147.30   who had raised pers[e]cution before            Inserted.
  151.28   Matt, xxiii.[,];                               Removed.
  164.28   with the Lord’s truth[,/.]                     Replaced.
  176.13   ye would[ would] fear and tremble              Removed.
  178.25   who are contemned and dispised                 _Sic._
  179.40   in great pea[e/c]e in 1686                     Replaced.
  210.25   could not but declare[t] agains[t]             Deleted/Added.
  222.43   and unrighteou[s]ness of men                   Inserted.
  258.1    SWANINGTON an[d] HIGHAM                        Added.
  261.28   On[e] one occasion                             Removed.
  283.39   and the corr[r]uption                          Removed.
  287.8    against me[,];                                 Removed.
  352.16   given to every man to profit withal[,/.]’      Replaced.
  407.34   pp. 62[–]68.                                   Added.
  490.8    steeple[-]house                                Inserted.
  412.17   brings fo[r]th heavenly and spiritual fruit    Inserted.
  480.30   continued in prison[.]                         Added.
  508.25   childhood’s guileless tears[.]                 Added.
  535.28   yet threaten[en]ed us                          Removed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF GEORGE FOX, VOL. 1 OF 2 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


