The Project Gutenberg eBook of The blue scarab
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The blue scarab

Author: R. Austin Freeman

Release date: May 19, 2025 [eBook #76116]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Dodd, Mead and Company, 1924

Credits: an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE SCARAB ***





 THE BLUE
 SCARAB

 BY
 R. AUSTIN FREEMAN
 AUTHOR OF
 “THE SINGING BONE,” ETC.




 NEW YORK
 DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
 1924




 [COPYRIGHT]

 Copyright, 1923,
 By DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY, Inc.

 Published, January, 1924
 Second Printing, January, 1924




 CONTENTS

 I. The Blue Scarab
 II. The Case of the White Foot-Prints
 III. The New Jersey Sphinx
 IV. The Touchstone
 V. A Fisher of Men
 VI. The Stolen Ingots
 VII. The Funeral Pyre




 THE BLUE SCARAB

 I.
 THE BLUE SCARAB

Medico-legal practice is largely concerned with crimes against the
person, the details of which are often sordid, gruesome and
unpleasant. Hence the curious and romantic case of the Blue Scarab
(though really outside our specialty) came as somewhat of a relief.
But to me it is of interest principally as illustrating two of those
remarkable gifts which made my friend, Thorndyke, unique as an
investigator: his uncanny power of picking out the one essential fact
at a glance, and his capacity to produce, when required, inexhaustible
stores of unexpected knowledge of the most out-of-the-way subjects.

It was late in the afternoon when Mr. James Blowgrave arrived, by
appointment, at our chambers, accompanied by his daughter, a rather
strikingly pretty girl of about twenty-two; and when we had mutually
introduced ourselves, the consultation began without preamble.

“I didn’t give any details in my letter to you,” said Mr. Blowgrave.
“I thought it better not to, for fear you might decline the case. It
is really a matter of a robbery, but not quite an ordinary robbery.
There are some unusual and rather mysterious features in the case. And
as the police hold out very little hope, I have come to ask if you
will give me your opinion on the case and perhaps look into it for me.
But first I had better tell you how the affair happened.

“The robbery occurred just a fortnight ago, about half-past nine
o’clock in the evening. I was sitting in my study with my daughter,
looking over some things that I had taken from a small deed-box, when
a servant rushed in to tell us that one of the outbuildings was on
fire. Now my study opens by a French window on the garden at the back,
and, as the outbuilding was in a meadow at the side of the garden, I
went out that way, leaving the French window open; but before going I
hastily put the things back in the deed-box and locked it.

“The building--which I used partly as a lumber store and partly as a
workshop--was well alight and the whole household was already on the
spot, the boy working the pump and the two maids carrying the buckets
and throwing water on the fire. My daughter and I joined the party and
helped to carry the buckets and take out what goods we could reach
from the burning building. But it was nearly half an hour before we
got the fire completely extinguished, and then my daughter and I went
to our rooms to wash and tidy ourselves up. We returned to the study
together, and when I had shut the French window my daughter proposed
that we should resume our interrupted occupation. Thereupon I took out
of my pocket the key of the deed-box and turned to the cabinet on
which the box always stood.

“But there was no deed-box there!

“For a moment I thought I must have moved it, and cast my eyes round
the room in search of it. But it was nowhere to be seen, and a
moment’s reflection reminded me that I had left it in its usual place.
The only possible conclusion was that during our absence at the fire,
somebody must have come in by the window and taken it. And it looked
as if that somebody had deliberately set fire to the outbuilding for
the express purpose of luring us all out of the house.”

“That is what the appearances suggest,” Thorndyke agreed. “Is the
study window furnished with a blind or curtains?”

“Curtains,” replied Mr. Blowgrave. “But they were not drawn. Any one
in the garden could have seen into the room; and the garden is easily
accessible to an active person who could climb over a low wall.”

“So far, then,” said Thorndyke, “the robbery might be the work of a
casual prowler who had got into the garden and watched you through the
window, and assuming that the things you had taken from the box were
of value, seized an easy opportunity to make off with them. Were the
things of any considerable value?”

“To a thief they were of no value at all. There were a number of share
certificates, a lease, one or two agreements, some family photographs
and a small box containing an old letter and a scarab. Nothing worth
stealing, you see, for the certificates were made out in my name and
were therefore unnegotiable.”

“And the scarab?”

“That may have been lapis lazuli, but more probably it was a blue
glass imitation. In any case it was of no considerable value. It was
about an inch and a half long. But before you come to any conclusion,
I had better finish the story. The robbery was on Tuesday, the 7th of
June. I gave information to the police, with a description of the
missing property, but nothing happened until Wednesday, the 15th, when
I received a registered parcel bearing the Southampton postmark. On
opening it I found, to my astonishment, the entire contents of the
deed-box, with the exception of the scarab, and this rather mysterious
communication.”

He took from his pocket-book and handed to Thorndyke an ordinary
envelope addressed in typewritten characters, and sealed with a large,
elliptical seal, the face of which was covered with minute
hieroglyphics.

“This,” said Thorndyke, “I take to be an impression of the scarab; and
an excellent impression it is.”

“Yes,” replied Mr. Blowgrave, “I have no doubt that it is the scarab.
It is about the same size.”

Thorndyke looked quickly at our client with an expression of surprise.
“But,” he asked, “don’t you recognize the hieroglyphics on it?”

Mr. Blowgrave smiled deprecatingly. “The fact is,” said he, “I don’t
know anything about hieroglyphics, but I should say, as far as I can
judge, these look the same. What do you think, Nellie?”

Miss Blowgrave looked at the seal--rather vaguely--and replied, “I am
in the same position. Hieroglyphics are to me just funny-looking
things that don’t mean anything. But these look the same to me as
those on our scarab, though I expect any other hieroglyphics would,
for that matter.”

Thorndyke made no comment on this statement, but examined the seal
attentively through his lens. Then he drew out the contents of the
envelope, consisting of two letters, one typewritten and the other in
a faded brown handwriting. The former he read through and then
inspected the paper closely, holding it up to the light to observe the
watermark.

“The paper appears to be of Belgian manufacture,” he remarked, passing
it to me. I confirmed this observation and then read the letter, which
was headed “Southampton” and ran thus:--


 _Dear old pal,_

 _I am sending you back some trifles removed in error. The ancient
 document is enclosed with this, but the curio is at present in the
 custody of my respected uncle. Hope its temporary loss will not
 inconvenience you, and that I may be able to return it to you later.
 Meanwhile, believe me,_

                                          _Your ever affectionate,
                                          Rudolpho._


“Who is Rudolpho?” I asked.

“The Lord knows,” replied Mr. Blowgrave. “A pseudonym of our absent
friend, I presume. He seems to be a facetious sort of person.”

“He does,” agreed Thorndyke. “This letter and the seal appear to be
what the schoolboys would call a leg-pull. But still, this is all
quite normal. He has returned you the worthless things and has kept
the one thing that has any sort of negotiable value. Are you quite
clear that the scarab is not more valuable than you have assumed?”

“Well,” said Mr. Blowgrave, “I have had an expert opinion on it. I
showed it to M. Fouquet, the Egyptologist, when he was over here from
Brussels a few months ago, and his opinion was that it was a worthless
imitation. Not only was it not a genuine scarab, but the inscription
was a sham, too; just a collection of hieroglyphic characters jumbled
together without sense or meaning.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, taking another look at the seal through his
lens, “it would seem that Rudolpho, or Rudolpho’s uncle, has got a bad
bargain. Which doesn’t throw much light on the affair.”

At this point Miss Blowgrave intervened. “I think, father,” said she,
“you have not given Dr. Thorndyke quite all the facts about the
scarab. He ought to be told about its connection with Uncle Reuben.”

As the girl spoke Thorndyke looked at her with a curious expression of
suddenly awakened interest. Later I understood the meaning of that
look, but at the time there seemed to me nothing particularly
arresting in her words.

“It is just a family tradition,” Mr. Blowgrave said deprecatingly.
“Probably it is all nonsense.”

“Well, let us have it, at any rate,” said Thorndyke. “We may get some
light from it.”

Thus urged, Mr. Blowgrave hemmed a little shyly and began:

“The story concerns my great-grandfather, Silas Blowgrave, and his
doings during the war with France. It seems that he commanded a
privateer, of which he and his brother Reuben were the joint owners,
and that in the course of their last cruise, they acquired a very
remarkable and valuable collection of jewels. Goodness knows how they
got them; not very honestly, I suspect, for they appear to have been a
pair of precious rascals. Something has been said about the loot from
a South American church or cathedral, but there is really nothing
known about the affair. There are no documents. It is mere oral
tradition and very vague and sketchy. The story goes that when they
had sold off the ship, they came down to live at Shawstead in
Hertfordshire, Silas occupying the manor house--in which I live at
present--and Reuben a farm-house adjoining. The bulk of the loot they
shared out at the end of the cruise, but the jewels were kept apart to
be dealt with later--perhaps when the circumstances under which they
had been acquired had been forgotten. However, both men were
inveterate gamblers, and it seems--according to the testimony of a
servant of Reuben’s who overheard them--that on a certain night when
they had been playing heavily, they decided to finish up by playing
for the whole collection of jewels as a single stake. Silas, who had
the jewels in his custody, was seen to go to the manor house and
return to Reuben’s house carrying a small, iron-bound chest.

“Apparently they played late into the night, after every one else but
the servant had gone to bed, and the luck was with Reuben, though it
seems probable that he gave luck some assistance. At any rate, when
the play was finished and the chest handed over, Silas roundly accused
him of cheating, and we may assume that a pretty serious quarrel took
place. Exactly what happened is not clear, for when the quarrel began
Reuben dismissed the servant, who retired to her bedroom in a distant
part of the house. But in the morning it was discovered that Reuben
and the chest of jewels had both disappeared, and there were distinct
traces of blood in the room in which the two men had been playing.
Silas professed to know nothing about the disappearance; but a
strong--and probably just--suspicion arose that he had murdered his
brother and made away with the jewels. The result was that Silas also
disappeared, and for a long time his whereabouts was not known even by
his wife. Later it transpired that he had taken up his abode, under an
assumed name, in Egypt, and that he had developed an enthusiastic
interest in the then new science of Egyptology--the Rosetta Stone had
been deciphered only a few years previously. After a time he resumed
communication with his wife, but never made any statement as to the
mystery of his brother’s disappearance. A few months before his death
he visited his home in disguise and he then handed to his wife a
little sealed packet which was to be delivered to his only son,
William, on his attaining the age of twenty-one. That packet contained
the scarab and the letter which you have taken from the envelope.”

“Am I to read it?” asked Thorndyke.

“Certainly, if you think it worth while,” was the reply.

Thorndyke opened the yellow sheet of paper and, glancing through the
brown and faded writing, read aloud:


                                    _Cairo_, 4_th March_, 1833.

 _My dear Son,_

 _I am sending you, as my last gift, a valuable scarab, and a few words
 of counsel on which I would bid you meditate. Believe me, there is
 much wisdom in the lore of Old Egypt. Make it your own. Treasure the
 scarab as a precious inheritance. Handle it often but show it to none.
 Give your Uncle Reuben Christian burial. It is your duty, and you will
 have your reward. He robbed your father, but he shall make
 restitution._

 _Farewell!_

                                       _Your affectionate father,
                                       Silas Blowgrave._


As Thorndyke laid down the letter he looked inquiringly at our client.

“Well,” he said, “here are some plain instructions. How have they been
carried out?”

“They haven’t been carried out at all,” replied Mr. Blowgrave. “As to
his son William, my grandfather, he was not disposed to meddle in the
matter. This seemed to be a frank admission that Silas killed his
brother and concealed the body, and William didn’t choose to reopen
the scandal. Besides, the instructions are not so very plain. It is
all very well to say, ‘Give your Uncle Reuben Christian burial,’ but
where the deuce is Uncle Reuben?”

“It is plainly hinted,” said Thorndyke, “that whoever gives the body
Christian burial will stand to benefit, and the word ‘restitution’
seems to suggest a clue to the whereabouts of the jewels. Has no one
thought it worth while to find out where the body is deposited?”

“But how could they?” demanded Blowgrave. “He doesn’t give the
faintest clue. He talks as if his son knew where the body was. And
then, you know, even supposing Silas did not take the jewels with him,
there was the question, whose property were they? To begin with, they
were pretty certainly stolen property, though no one knows where they
came from. Then Reuben apparently got them from Silas by fraud, and
Silas got them back by robbery and murder. If William had discovered
them he would have had to give them up to Reuben’s sons, and yet they
weren’t strictly Reuben’s property. No one had an undeniable claim to
them, even if they could have found them.”

“But that is not the case now,” said Miss Blowgrave.

“No,” said Mr. Blowgrave, in answer to Thorndyke’s look of inquiry.
“The position is quite clear now. Reuben’s grandson, my cousin Arthur,
has died recently, and as he had no children, he has dispersed his
property. The old farm-house and the bulk of his estate he has left to
a nephew, but he made a small bequest to my daughter and named her as
the residuary legatee. So that whatever rights Reuben had to the
jewels are now vested in her, and on my death she will be Silas’s
heir, too. As a matter of fact,” Mr. Blowgrave continued, “we were
discussing this very question on the night of the robbery. I may as
well tell you that my girl will be left pretty poorly off when I go,
for there is a heavy mortgage on our property and mighty little
capital. Uncle Reuben’s jewels would have made the old home secure for
her if we could have laid our hands on them. However, I mustn’t take
up your time with our domestic affairs.”

“Your domestic affairs are not entirely irrelevant,” said Thorndyke.
“But what is it that you want me to do in the matter?”

“Well,” said Blowgrave, “my house has been robbed and my premises set
fire to. The police can apparently do nothing. They say there is no
clue at all unless the robbery was committed by somebody in the house,
which is absurd, seeing that the servants were all engaged in putting
out the fire. But I want the robber traced and punished, and I want to
get the scarab back. It may be intrinsically valueless, as M. Fouquet
said, but Silas’s testamentary letter seems to indicate that it had
some value. At any rate, it is an heirloom, and I am loath to lose it.
It seems a presumptuous thing to ask you to investigate a trumpery
robbery, but I should take it as a great kindness if you would look
into the matter.”

“Cases of robbery pure and simple,” replied Thorndyke, “are rather
alien to my ordinary practice, but in this one there are certain
curious features that seem to make an investigation worth while. Yes,
Mr. Blowgrave, I will look into the case, and I have some hope that we
may be able to lay our hands on the robber, in spite of the apparent
absence of clues. I will ask you to leave both these letters for me to
examine more minutely, and I shall probably want to make an inspection
of the premises--perhaps to-morrow.”

“Whenever you like,” said Blowgrave. “I am delighted that you are
willing to undertake the inquiry. I have heard so much about you from
my friend Stalker, of the Griffin Life Assurance Company, for whom you
have acted on several occasions.”

“Before you go,” said Thorndyke, “there is one point that we must
clear up. Who is there besides yourselves that knows of the existence
of the scarab and this letter and the history attaching to them?”

“I really can’t say,” replied Blowgrave. “No one has seen them but my
cousin Arthur. I once showed them to him, and he may have talked about
them in the family. I didn’t treat the matter as a secret.”

 * * * * * * *

When our visitors had gone we discussed the bearings of the case.

“It is quite a romantic story,” said I, “and the robbery has its
points of interest, but I am rather inclined to agree with the
police--there is mighty little to go on.”

“There would have been less,” said Thorndyke, “if our sporting friend
hadn’t been so pleased with himself. That typewritten letter was a
piece of gratuitous impudence. Our gentleman overrated his security
and crowed too loud.”

“I don’t see that there is much to be gleaned from the letter, all the
same,” said I.

“I am sorry to hear you say that, Jervis,” he exclaimed, “because I
was proposing to hand the letter over to you to examine and report
on.”

“I was only referring to the superficial appearances,” I said hastily.
“No doubt a detailed examination will bring something more distinctive
into view.”

“I have no doubt it will,” he said, “and as there are reasons for
pushing on the investigation as quickly as possible, I suggest that
you get to work at once. I shall occupy myself with the old letter and
the envelope.”

On this I began my examination without delay, and as a preliminary I
proceeded to take a facsimile photograph of the letter by putting it
in a large printing-frame with a sensitive plate and a plate of clear
glass. The resulting negative showed not only the typewritten
lettering, but also the watermark and wire lines of the paper, and a
faint grease spot. Next I turned my attention to the lettering itself,
and here I soon began to accumulate quite a number of identifiable
peculiarities. The machine was apparently a Corona, fitted with the
small “Elite” type, and the alignment was markedly defective. The
“lower case”--or small--“a” was well below the line, although the
capital “A” appeared to be correctly placed; the “u” was slightly
above the line, and the small “m” was partly clogged with dirt.

Up to this point I had been careful to manipulate the letter with
forceps (although it had been handled by at least three persons, to my
knowledge), and I now proceeded to examine it for finger-prints. As I
could detect none by mere inspection, I dusted the back of the paper
with finely-powdered fuchsin, and distributed the powder by tapping
the paper lightly. This brought into view quite a number of
finger-prints, especially round the edges of the letter, and though
most of them were very faint and shadowy, it was possible to make out
the ridge pattern well enough for our purpose. Having blown off the
excess of powder, I took the letter to the room where the large
copying camera was set up, to photograph it before developing the
finger-prints on the front. But here I found our laboratory assistant,
Polton, in possession, with the sealed envelope fixed to the copying
easel.

“I shan’t be a minute, sir,” said he. “The doctor wants an enlarged
photograph of this seal. I’ve got the plate in.”

I waited while he made his exposure and then proceeded to take the
photograph of the letter, or rather of the finger-prints on the back
of it. When I had developed the negative I powdered the front of the
letter and brought out several more finger-prints--mostly thumbs this
time. They were a little difficult to see where they were imposed on
the lettering, but, as the latter was bright blue and the fuchsin
powder was red, this confusion disappeared in the photograph, in which
the lettering was almost invisible while the finger-prints were more
distinct than they had appeared to the eye. This completed my
examination, and when I had verified the make of typewriter by
reference to our album of specimens of typewriting, I left the
negatives for Polton to dry and print and went down to the
sitting-room to draw up my little report. I had just finished this and
was speculating on what had become of Thorndyke, when I heard his
quick step on the stair and a few moments later he entered with a roll
of paper in his hand. This he unrolled on the table, fixing it open
with one or two lead paper-weights, and I came round to inspect it,
when I found it to be a sheet of the Ordnance map on the scale of
twenty-five inches to the mile.

“Here is the Blowgraves’ place,” said Thorndyke, “nearly in the middle
of the sheet. This is his house--Shawstead Manor--and that will
probably be the outbuilding that was on fire. I take it that the house
marked Dingle Farm is the one that Uncle Reuben occupied.”

“Probably,” I agreed. “But I don’t see why you wanted this map if you
are going down to the place itself to-morrow.”

“The advantage of a map,” said Thorndyke, “is that you can see all
over it at once and get the lie of the land well into your mind; and
you can measure all distances accurately and quickly with a scale and
a pair of dividers. When we go down to-morrow, we shall know our way
about as well as Blowgrave himself.”

“And what use will that be?” I asked. “Where does the topography come
into the case?”

“Well, Jervis,” he replied, “there is the robber, for instance; he
came from somewhere and he went somewhere. A study of the map may give
us a hint as to his movements. But here comes Polton ‘with the
documents,’ as poor Miss Flite would say. What have you got for us,
Polton?”

“They aren’t quite dry, sir,” said Polton, laying four large bromide
prints on the table. “There’s the


 image: img_017
 caption:
 Thorndyke’s tracing of the impression of the Scarab


enlargement of the seal--ten by eight, mounted--and three unmounted
prints of Dr. Jervis’s.”

Thorndyke looked at my photographs critically. “They’re excellent,
Jervis,” said he. “The finger-prints are perfectly legible, though
faint. I only hope some of them are the right ones. That is my left
thumb. I don’t see yours. The small one is presumably Miss
Blowgrave’s. We must take her finger-prints to-morrow, and her
father’s, too. Then we shall know if we have got any of the robber’s.”
He ran his eye over my report and nodded approvingly. “There is plenty
there to enable us to identify the typewriter if we can get hold of
it, and the paper is very distinctive. What do you think of the seal?”
he added, laying the enlarged photograph before me.

“It is magnificent,” I replied, with a grin. “Perfectly monumental.”

“What are you grinning at?” he demanded.

“I was thinking that you seem to be counting your chickens in pretty
good time,” said I. “You are making elaborate preparations to identify
the scarab, but you are rather disregarding the classical advice of
the prudent Mrs. Glasse.”

“I have a presentiment that we shall get that scarab,” said he. “At
any rate we ought to be in a position to identify it instantly and
certainly if we are able to get a sight of it.”

“We are not likely to,” said I. “Still, there is no harm in providing
for the improbable.”

This was evidently Thorndyke’s view, and he certainly made ample
provision for this most improbable contingency; for, having furnished
himself with a drawing-board and a sheet of tracing-paper, he pinned
the latter over the photograph on the board and proceeded, with a fine
pen and hectograph ink, to make a careful and minute tracing of the
intricate and bewildering hieroglyphic inscription on the seal. When
he had finished it he transferred it to a clay duplicator and took off
half a dozen copies, one of which he handed to me. I looked at it
dubiously and remarked: “You have said that the medical jurist must
make all knowledge his province. Has he got to be an Egyptologist,
too?”

“He will be the better medical jurist if he is,” was the reply, of
which I made a mental note for my future guidance. But meanwhile
Thorndyke’s proceedings were, to me, perfectly incomprehensible. What
was his object in making this minute tracing? The seal itself was
sufficient for identification. I lingered awhile hoping that some
fresh development might throw a light on the mystery. But his next
proceeding was like to have reduced me to stupefaction. I saw him go
to the bookshelves and take down a book. As he laid it on the table I
glanced at the title, and when I saw that it was Raper’s “Navigation
Tables” I stole softly out into the lobby, put on my hat and went for
a walk.

When I returned the investigation was apparently concluded, for
Thorndyke was seated in his easy chair, placidly reading “The Compleat
Angler.” On the table lay a large circular protractor, a
straight-edge, an architect’s scale and a sheet of tracing-paper on
which was a tracing in hectograph ink of Shawstead Manor.

“Why did you make this tracing?” I asked. “Why not take the map
itself?”

“We don’t want the whole of it,” he replied, “and I dislike cutting up
maps.”


By taking an informal lunch in the train, we arrived at Shawstead
Manor by half-past two. Our approach up the drive had evidently been
observed, for Blowgrave and his daughter were waiting at the porch to
receive us. The former came forward with outstretched hand, but a
distinctly woebegone expression, and exclaimed: “It is most kind of
you to come down; but alas! you are too late.”

“Too late for what?” demanded Thorndyke.

“I will show you,” replied Blowgrave, and seizing my colleague by the
arm, he strode off excitedly to a little wicket at the side of the
house, and, passing through it, hurried along a narrow alley that
skirted the garden wall and ended in a large meadow, at one end of
which stood a dilapidated windmill. Across this meadow he bustled,
dragging my colleague with him, until he reached a heap of
freshly-turned earth, where he halted and pointed tragically to a spot
where the turf had evidently been raised and untidily replaced.

“There!” he exclaimed, stooping to pull up the loose turfs and thereby
exposing what was evidently a large hole, recently and hastily filled
in. “That was done last night or early this morning, for I walked over
this meadow only yesterday evening and there was no sign of disturbed
ground then.”

Thorndyke stood looking down at the hole with a faint smile. “And what
do you infer from that?” he asked.

“Infer!” shrieked Blowgrave. “Why, I infer that whoever dug this hole
was searching for Uncle Reuben and the lost jewels!”

“I am inclined to agree with you,” Thorndyke said calmly. “He happened
to search in the wrong place, but that is his affair.”

“The wrong place!” Blowgrave and his daughter exclaimed in unison.
“How do you know it is the wrong place?”

“Because,” replied Thorndyke, “I believe I know the right place, and
this is not it. But we can put the matter to the test, and we had
better do so. Can you get a couple of men with picks and shovels? Or
shall we handle the tools ourselves?”

“I think that would be better,” said Blowgrave, who was quivering with
excitement. “We don’t want to take any one into our confidence if we
can help it.”

“No,” Thorndyke agreed. “Then I suggest that you fetch the tools while
I locate the spot.”

Blowgrave assented eagerly and went off at a brisk trot, while the
young lady remained with us and watched Thorndyke with intense
curiosity.

“I mustn’t interrupt you with questions,” said she, “but I can’t
imagine how you found out where Uncle Reuben was buried.”

“We will go into that later,” he replied; “but first we have got to
find Uncle Reuben.” He laid his research-case down on the ground, and
opening it, took out three sheets of paper, each bearing a duplicate
of his tracing of the map; and on each was marked a spot on this
meadow from which a number of lines radiated like the spokes of a
wheel.

“You see, Jervis,” he said, exhibiting them to me, “the advantage of a
map. I have been able to rule off these sets of bearings regardless of
obstructions, such as those young trees, which have arisen since
Silas’s day, and mark the spot in its correct place. If the recent
obstructions prevent us from taking the bearings, we can still find
the spot by measurements with the land-chain or tape.”

“Why have you got three plans?” I asked.

“Because there are three imaginable places. No. 1 is the most likely;
No. 2 less likely, but possible; No. 3 is impossible. That is the one
that our friend tried last night. No. 1 is among those young trees,
and we will now see if we can pick up the bearings in spite of them.”

We moved on to the clump of young trees, where Thorndyke took from the
research-case a tall, folding camera-tripod and a large prismatic
compass with an aluminium dial. With the latter he took one or two
trial bearings and then, setting up the tripod, fixed the compass on
it. For some minutes Miss Blowgrave and I watched him as he shifted
the tripod from spot to spot, peering through the sight-vane of the
compass and glancing occasionally at the map. At length he turned to
us and said:

“We are in luck. None of these trees interferes with our bearings.” He
took from the research-case a surveyor’s arrow, and sticking it in the
ground under the tripod, added: “That is the spot. But we may have to
dig a good way round it, for a compass is only a rough instrument.”

At this moment Mr. Blowgrave staggered up, breathing hard, and flung
down on the ground three picks, two shovels and a spade. “I won’t
hinder you, Doctor, by asking for explanations,” said he, “but I am
utterly mystified. You must tell us what it all means when we have
finished our work.”

This Thorndyke promised to do, but meanwhile he took off his coat, and
rolling up his shirt sleeves, seized the spade and began cutting out a
large square of turf. As the soil was uncovered, Blowgrave and I
attacked it with picks and Miss Blowgrave shovelled away the loose
earth.

“Do you know how far down we have to go?” I asked.

“The body lies six feet below the surface,” Thorndyke replied; and as
he spoke he laid down his spade, and taking a telescope from the
research-case, swept it round the margin of the meadow and finally
pointed it at a farm-house some six hundred yards distant, of which he
made a somewhat prolonged inspection, after which he took the
remaining pick and fell to work on the opposite corner of the exposed
square of earth.

For nearly half an hour we worked on steadily, gradually eating our
way downwards, plying pick and shovel alternately, while Miss
Blowgrave cleared the loose earth away from the edges of the deepening
pit. Then a halt was called and we came to the surface, wiping our
faces.

“I think, Nellie,” said Blowgrave, divesting himself of his waistcoat,
“a jug of lemonade and four tumblers would be useful, unless our
visitors would prefer beer.”

We both gave our votes for lemonade, and Miss Nellie tripped away
towards the house, while Thorndyke, taking up his telescope, once more
inspected the farm-house.

“You seem greatly interested in that house,” I remarked.

“I am,” he replied, handing me the telescope. “Just take a look at the
window in the right hand gable, but keep under the tree.”

I pointed the telescope at the gable and there observed an open window
at which a man was seated. He held a binocular glass to his eyes and
the instrument appeared to be directed at us.

“We are being spied on, I fancy,” said I, passing the telescope to
Blowgrave, “but I suppose it doesn’t matter. This is your land, isn’t
it?”

“Yes,” replied Blowgrave, “but still, we didn’t want any spectators.
That is Harold Bowker,” he added, steadying the telescope against a
tree, “my cousin Arthur’s nephew, whom I told you about as having
inherited the farm-house. He seems mighty interested in us; but small
things interest one in the country.”

Here the appearance of Miss Nellie, advancing across the meadow with
an inviting looking basket, diverted our attention from our
inquisitive watcher. Six thirsty eyes were riveted on that basket
until it drew near and presently disgorged a great glass jug and four
tumblers, when we each took off a long and delicious draught and then
jumped down into the pit to resume our labours.

Another half-hour passed. We had excavated in some places to nearly
the full depth and were just discussing the advisability of another
short rest when Blowgrave, who was working in one corner, uttered a
loud cry and stood up suddenly, holding something in his fingers. A
glance at the object showed it to be a bone, brown and earth-stained,
but evidently a bone. Evidently, too, a human bone, as Thorndyke
decided when Blowgrave handed it to him triumphantly.

“We have been very fortunate,” said he, “to get so near at the first
trial. This is from the right great toe, so we may assume that the
skeleton lies just outside this pit, but we had better excavate
carefully in your corner and see exactly how the bones lie.” This he
proceeded to do himself, probing cautiously with the spade and
clearing the earth away from the corner. Very soon the remaining bones
of the right foot came into view and then the ends of the two
leg-bones and a portion of the left foot.

“We can see now,” said he, “how the skeleton lies, and all we have to
do is to extend the excavation in that direction. But there is only
room for one to work down here. I think you and Mr. Blowgrave had
better dig down from the surface.”

On this, I climbed out of the pit, followed reluctantly by Blowgrave,
who still held the little brown bone in his hand and was in a state of
wild excitement and exultation that somewhat scandalized his daughter.

“It seems rather ghoulish,” she remarked, “to be gloating over poor
Uncle Reuben’s body in this way.”

“I know,” said Blowgrave, “it isn’t reverent. But I didn’t kill Uncle
Reuben, you know, whereas--well it was a long time ago.” With this
rather inconsequent conclusion he took a draught of lemonade, seized
his pick and fell to work with a will. I, too, indulged in a draught
and passed a full tumbler down to Thorndyke. But before resuming my
labours I picked up the telescope and once more inspected the
farm-house. The window was still open, but the watcher had apparently
become bored with the not very thrilling spectacle. At any rate he had
disappeared.

From this time onward every few minutes brought some discovery. First,
a pair of deeply rusted steel shoe buckles; then one or two buttons,
and presently a fine gold watch with a fob-chain and a bunch of seals,
looking uncannily new and fresh and seeming more fraught with tragedy
than even the bones themselves. In his cautious digging, Thorndyke was
careful not to disturb the skeleton; and looking down into the narrow
trench that was growing from the corner of the pit, I could see both
legs, with only the right foot missing, projecting from the miniature
cliff. Meanwhile our part of the trench was deepening rapidly, so that
Thorndyke presently warned us to stop digging and bade us come down
and shovel away the earth as he disengaged it.

At length the whole skeleton, excepting the head, was uncovered,
though it lay undisturbed as it might have lain in its coffin. And
now, as Thorndyke picked away the earth around the head, we could see
that the skull was propped forward as if it rested on a high pillow. A
little more careful probing with the pick-point served to explain this
appearance. For as the earth fell away and disclosed the grinning
skull, there came into view the edge and iron-bound corners of a small
chest.

It was an impressive spectacle; weird, solemn and rather dreadful.
There for over a century the ill-fated gambler had lain, his
mouldering head pillowed on the booty of unrecorded villainy, booty
that had been won by fraud, retrieved by violence, and hidden at last
by the final winner with the witness of his crime.

“Here is a fine text for a moralist who would preach on the vanity of
riches,” said Thorndyke.

We all stood silent for a while, gazing, not without awe, at the stark
figure that lay guarding the ill-gotten treasure. Miss Blowgrave--who
had been helped down when we descended--crept closer to her father and
murmured that it was “rather awful”; while Blowgrave himself displayed
a queer mixture of exultation and shuddering distaste.

Suddenly the silence was broken by a voice from above, and we all
looked up with a start. A youngish man was standing on the brink of
the pit, looking down on us with very evident disapproval.

“It seems that I have come just in the nick of time,” observed the
new-comer. “I shall have to take possession of that chest, you know,
and of the remains, too, I suppose. That is my ancestor, Reuben
Blowgrave.”

“Well, Harold,” said Blowgrave, “you can have Uncle Reuben if you want
him. But the chest belongs to Nellie.”

Here Mr. Harold Bowker--I recognized him now as the watcher from the
window--dropped down into the pit and advanced with something of a
swagger.

“I am Reuben’s heir,” said he, “through my Uncle Arthur, and I take
possession of this property and the remains.”

“Pardon me, Harold,” said Blowgrave, “but Nellie is Arthur’s residuary
legatee, and this is the residue of the estate.”

“Rubbish!” exclaimed Bowker. “By the way, how did you find out where
he was buried?”

“Oh, that was quite simple,” replied Thorndyke with unexpected
geniality. “I’ll show you the plan.” He climbed up to the surface and
returned in a few moments with the three tracings and his letter-case.
“This is how we located the spot.” He handed the plan marked No. 3 to
Bowker, who took it from him and stood looking at it with a puzzled
frown.

“But this isn’t the place,” he said at length.

“Isn’t it?” queried Thorndyke. “No, of course; I’ve given you the
wrong one. This is the plan.” He handed Bowker the plan marked No. 1,
and took the other from him, laying it down on a heap of earth. Then,
as Bowker pored gloomily over No. 1, he took a knife and a pencil from
his pocket, and with his back to our visitor, scraped the lead of the
pencil, letting the black powder fall on the plan that he had just
laid down. I watched him with some curiosity; and when I observed that
the black scrapings fell on two spots near the edges of the paper, a
sudden suspicion flashed into my mind, which was confirmed when I saw
him tap the paper lightly with his pencil, gently blow away the
powder, and quickly producing my photograph of the typewritten letter
from his case, hold it for a moment beside the plan.

“This is all very well,” said Bowker, looking up from the plan, “but
how did you find out about these bearings?”

Thorndyke swiftly replaced the letter in his case, and turning round,
replied, “I am afraid I can’t give you any further information.”

“Can’t you, indeed!” Bowker exclaimed insolently. “Perhaps I shall
compel you to. But, at any rate, I forbid any of you to lay hands on
my property.”

Thorndyke looked at him steadily and said in an ominously quiet tone:

“Now, listen to me, Mr. Bowker. Let us have an end of this nonsense.
You have played a risky game and you have lost. How much you have lost
I can’t say until I know whether Mr. Blowgrave intends to prosecute.”

“To prosecute!” shouted Bowker. “What the deuce do you mean by
prosecute?”

“I mean,” said Thorndyke, “that on the 7th of June, after nine o’clock
at night, you entered the dwelling-house of Mr. Blowgrave and stole
and carried away certain of his goods and chattels. A part of them you
have restored, but you are still in possession of some of the stolen
property, to wit, a scarab and a deed-box.”

As Thorndyke made this statement in his calm, level tones, Bowker’s
face blanched to a tallowy white, and he stood staring at my
colleague, the very picture of astonishment and dismay. But he fired a
last shot.

“This is sheer midsummer madness,” he exclaimed huskily; “and you know
it.”

Thorndyke turned to our host. “It is for you to settle, Mr.
Blowgrave,” said he. “I hold conclusive evidence that Mr. Bowker stole
your deed-box. If you decide to prosecute I shall produce that
evidence in court and he will certainly be convicted.”

Blowgrave and his daughter looked at the accused man with an
embarrassment almost equal to his own.

“I am astounded,” the former said at length; “but I don’t want to be
vindictive. Look here, Harold, hand over the scarab and we’ll say no
more about it.”

“You can’t do that,” said Thorndyke. “The law doesn’t allow you to
compound a robbery. He can return the property if he pleases and you
can do as you think best about prosecuting. But you can’t make
conditions.”

There was silence for some seconds; then, without another word, the
crestfallen adventurer turned, and scrambling up out of the pit, took
a hasty departure.


It was nearly a couple of hours later that, after a leisurely wash and
a hasty, nondescript meal, we carried the little chest from the
dining-room to the study. Here, when he had closed the French window
and drawn the curtains, Mr. Blowgrave produced a set of tools and we
fell to work on the iron fastenings of the chest. It was no light
task, though a century’s rust had thinned the stout bands, but at
length the lid yielded to the thrust of a long case-opener and rose
with a protesting creak. The chest was lined with a double thickness
of canvas, apparently part of a sail, and contained a number of small
leathern bags, which, as we lifted them out, one by one, felt as if
they were filled with pebbles. But when we untied the thongs of one
and emptied its contents into a wooden bowl, Blowgrave heaved a sigh
of ecstasy and Miss Nellie uttered a little scream of delight. They
were all cut stones, and most of them of exceptional size; rubies,
emeralds, sapphires, and a few diamonds. As to their value, we could
form but the vaguest guess; but Thorndyke, who was a fair judge of
gem-stones, gave it as his opinion that they were fine specimens of
their kind, though roughly cut, and that they had probably formed the
enrichment of some shrine.

“The question is,” said Blowgrave, gazing gloatingly on the bowl of
sparkling gems, “what are we to do with them?”

“I suggest,” said Thorndyke, “that Dr. Jervis stays here to-night to
help you to guard them and that in the morning you take them up to
London and deposit them at your bank.”

Blowgrave fell in eagerly with this suggestion, which I seconded.
“But,” said he, “that chest is a queer-looking package to be carrying
abroad. Now, if we only had that confounded deed-box----”

“There’s a deed-box on the cabinet behind you,” said Thorndyke.

Blowgrave turned round sharply. “God bless us!” he exclaimed. “It has
come back the way it went. Harold must have slipped in at the window
while we were at tea. Well, I’m glad he has made restitution. When I
look at that bowl and think what he must have narrowly missed, I don’t
feel inclined to be hard on him. I suppose the scarab is inside--not
that it matters much now.”

The scarab was inside in an envelope; and as Thorndyke turned it over
in his hand and examined the hieroglyphics on it through his lens,
Miss Blowgrave asked: “Is it of any value, Dr. Thorndyke? It can’t
have any connection with the secret of the hiding-place, because you
found the jewels without it.

“By the way, Doctor, I don’t know whether it is permissible for me to
ask, but how on earth _did_ you find out where the jewels were hidden?
To me it looks like black magic.”

Thorndyke laughed in a quiet, inward fashion. “There is nothing
magical about it,” said he. “It was a perfectly simple,
straightforward problem. But Miss Nellie is wrong. We had the scarab;
that is to say we had the wax impression of it, which is the same
thing. And the scarab was the key to the riddle. You see,” he
continued, “Silas’s letter and the scarab formed together a sort of
intelligence test.”

“Did they?” said Blowgrave. “Then he drew a blank every time.”

Thorndyke chuckled. “His descendants were certainly a little lacking
in enterprise,” he admitted. “Silas’s instructions were perfectly
plain and explicit. Whoever would find the treasure must first acquire
some knowledge of Egyptian lore and must study the scarab attentively.
It was the broadest of hints, but no one--excepting Harold Bowker, who
must have heard about the scarab from his Uncle Arthur--seems to have
paid any attention to it.

“Now it happens that I have just enough elementary knowledge of the
hieroglyphic characters to enable me to spell them out when they are
used alphabetically; and as soon as I saw the seal, I could see that
these hieroglyphics formed English words. My attention was first
attracted by the second group of signs, which spelled the word
‘Reuben,’ and then I saw that the first group spelled ‘Uncle.’ Of
course, the instant I heard Miss Nellie speak of the connection
between the scarab and Uncle Reuben, the murder was out. I saw at a
glance that the scarab contained all the required information. Last
night I made a careful tracing of the hieroglyphics and then rendered
them into our own alphabet. This is the result.”

He took from his letter-case and spread out on the table a duplicate
of the tracing which I had seen him make, and of which he had given me
a copy. But since I had last seen it, it had received an addition;
under each group of signs the equivalents in modern Roman lettering
had been written, and these made the following words:


 “UNKL RUBN IS IN TH MILL FIELD SKS FT DOWN CHURCH SPIR NORTH TEN
 THIRTY EAST DINGL SOUTH GABL NORTH ATY FORTY FIF WST GOD SAF KING
 JORJ.”


 image: img_035
 caption:
 The transliteration of the hieroglyphics.


Our two friends gazed at Thorndyke’s transliteration in blank
astonishment. At length Blowgrave remarked: “But this translation must
have demanded a very profound knowledge of the Egyptian writing.”

“Not at all,” replied Thorndyke. “Any intelligent person could master
the Egyptian alphabet in an hour. The language, of course, is quite
another matter. The spelling of this is a little crude, but it is
quite intelligible and does Silas great credit, considering how little
was known in his time.”

“How do you suppose M. Fouquet came to overlook this?” Blowgrave
asked.

“Naturally enough,” was the reply. “He was looking for an Egyptian
inscription. But this is not an Egyptian inscription. Does he speak
English?”

“Very little. Practically not at all.”

“Then, as the words are English words and imperfectly spelt, the
hieroglyphics must have appeared to him mere nonsense. And he was
right as to the scarab being an imitation.”

“There is another point,” said Blowgrave. “How was it that Harold made
that extraordinary mistake about the place? The directions are clear
enough. All you had to do was to go out there with a compass and take
the bearings just as they were given.”

“But,” said Thorndyke, “that is exactly what he did, and hence the
mistake. He was apparently unaware of the phenomenon known as the
Secular Variation of the Compass. As you know, the compass does
not--usually--point to true north, but to the Magnetic North; and the
Magnetic North is continually changing its position. When Reuben was
buried--about 1810--it was twenty-four degrees, twenty-six minutes
west of true north; at the present time it is fourteen degrees,
forty-eight minutes west of true north. So Harold’s bearings would be
no less than ten degrees out, which, of course, gave him a totally
wrong position. But Silas was a ship-master, a navigator, and of
course, knew all about the vagaries of the compass; and, as his
directions were intended for use at some date unknown to him, I
assumed that the bearings that he gave were true bearings--that when
he said ‘north’ he meant true north, which is always the same; and
this turned out to be the case. But I also prepared a plan with
magnetic bearings corrected up to date. Here are the three plans: No.
1--the one we used--showing true bearings; No. 2, showing corrected
magnetic bearings which might have given us the correct spot; and No.
3, with uncorrected magnetic bearings, giving us the spot where Harold
dug, and which could not possibly have been the right spot.”


On the following morning I escorted the deed-box, filled with the
booty and tied up and sealed with the scarab, to Mr. Blowgrave’s bank.
And that ended our connection with the case; excepting that, a month
or two later, we attended by request the unveiling in Shawstead
churchyard of a fine monument to Reuben Blowgrave. This took the
slightly inappropriate form of an obelisk, on which were cut the name
and approximate dates, with the added inscription: “Cast thy bread
upon the waters and it shall return after many days”; concerning which
Thorndyke remarked dryly that he supposed the exhortation applied
equally even if the bread happened to belong to some one else.




 II.
 THE CASE OF THE WHITE FOOT-PRINTS

“Well,” said my friend Foxton, pursuing a familiar and apparently
inexhaustible topic, “I’d sooner have your job than my own.”

“I’ve no doubt you would,” was my unsympathetic reply. “I never met a
man who wouldn’t. We all tend to consider other men’s jobs in terms of
their advantages and our own in terms of their drawbacks. It is human
nature.”

“Oh, it’s all very well for you to be so beastly philosophical,”
retorted Foxton. “You wouldn’t be if you were in my place. Here, in
Margate, it’s measles, chicken-pox and scarlatina all the summer, and
bronchitis, colds and rheumatism all the winter. A deadly monotony.
Whereas you and Thorndyke sit there in your chambers and let your
clients feed you up with the raw material of romance. Why, your life
is a sort of everlasting Adelphi drama.”

“You exaggerate, Foxton,” said I. “We, like you, have our routine
work, only it is never heard of outside the Law Courts; and you, like
every other doctor, must run up against mystery and romance from time
to time.”

Foxton shook his head as he held out his hand for my cup. “I don’t,”
said he. “My practice yields nothing but an endless round of dull
routine.”

And then, as if in commentary on this last statement, the housemaid
burst into the room and, with hardly dissembled agitation, exclaimed:

“If you please, sir, the page from Beddingfield’s Boarding House says
that a lady has been found dead in her bed and would you go round
there immediately.”

“Very well, Jane,” said Foxton, and as the maid retired, he
deliberately helped himself to another fried egg and, looking across
the table at me, exclaimed: “Isn’t that always the way? Come
immediately--now--this very instant, although the patient may have
been considering for a day or two whether he’ll send for you or not.
But directly he decides, you must spring out of bed, or jump up from
your breakfast, and run.”

“That’s quite true,” I agreed; “but this really does seem to be an
urgent case.”

“What’s the urgency?” demanded Foxton. “The woman is already dead. Any
one would think she was in imminent danger of coming to life again and
that my instant arrival was the only thing that could prevent such a
catastrophe.”

“You’ve only a third-hand statement that she is dead,” said I. “It is
just possible that she isn’t; and even if she is, as you will have to
give evidence at the inquest, you don’t want the police to get there
first and turn out the room before you’ve made your inspection.”

“Gad!” exclaimed Foxton. “I hadn’t thought of that. Yes. You’re right.
I’ll hop round at once.”

He swallowed the remainder of the egg at a single gulp and rose from
the table. Then he paused and stood for a few moments looking down at
me irresolutely.

“I wonder, Jervis,” he said, “if you would mind coming round with me.
You know all the medico-legal ropes, and I don’t. What do you say?”

I agreed instantly, having, in fact, been restrained only by delicacy
from making the suggestion myself; and when I had fetched from my room
my pocket camera and telescopic tripod, we set forth together without
further delay.

Beddingfield’s Boarding House was but a few minutes’ walk from
Foxton’s residence, being situated near the middle of Ethelred Road,
Cliftonville, a quiet, suburban street which abounded in similar
establishments, many of which, I noticed, were undergoing a
spring-cleaning and renovation to prepare them for the approaching
season.

“That’s the house,” said Foxton, “where that woman is standing at the
front door. Look at the boarders, collected at the dining-room window.
There’s a rare commotion in that house, I’ll warrant.”

Here, arriving at the house, he ran up the steps and accosted in
sympathetic tones the elderly woman who stood by the open street door.

“What a dreadful thing this is, Mrs. Beddingfield! Terrible! Most
distressing for you!”

“Ah, you’re right, Dr. Foxton,” she replied. “It’s an awful affair.
Shocking. So bad for business, too. I do hope and trust there won’t be
any scandal.”

“I’m sure I hope not,” said Foxton. “There shan’t be if I can help it.
And as my friend, Dr. Jervis, who is staying with me for a few days,
is a lawyer as well as a doctor, we shall have the best advice. When
was the affair discovered?”

“Just before I sent for you, Dr. Foxton. The maid noticed that Mrs.
Toussaint--that is the poor creature’s name--had not taken in her hot
water, so she knocked at the door. As she couldn’t get any answer, she
tried the door and found it bolted on the inside, and then she came
and told me. I went up and knocked loudly, and then, as I couldn’t get
any reply, I told our boy, James, to force the door open with a
case-opener, which he did quite easily as the bolt was only a small
one. Then I went in, all of a tremble, for I had a presentiment that
there was something wrong; and there she was, lying stone dead, with a
most ’orrible stare on her face and an empty bottle in her hand.”

“A bottle, eh!” said Foxton.

“Yes. She’d made away with herself, poor thing; and all on account of
some silly love affair--and it was hardly even that.”

“Ah,” said Foxton. “The usual thing. You must tell us about that
later. Now we’d better go up and see the patient--at least
the--er--perhaps you’ll show us the room, Mrs. Beddingfield.”

The landlady turned and preceded us up the stairs to the first-floor
back, where she paused, and softly opening a door, peered nervously
into the room. As we stepped past her and entered, she seemed inclined
to follow, but, at a significant glance from me, Foxton persuasively
ejected her and closed the door. Then we stood silent for a while and
looked about us.

In the aspect of the room there was something strangely incongruous
with the tragedy that had been enacted within its walls; a mingling of
the commonplace and the terrible that almost amounted to anticlimax.
Through the wide-open window the bright spring sunshine streamed in on
the garish wall-paper and cheap furniture; from the street below, the
periodic shouts of a man selling “sole and mack-ro!” broke into the
brisk staccato of a barrel-organ and both sounds mingled with a
raucous voice close at hand, cheerfully trolling a popular song, and
accounted for by a linen-clad elbow that bobbed in front of the window
and evidently appertained to a house painter on an adjacent ladder.

It was all very commonplace and familiar and discordantly out of
character with the stark figure that lay on the bed like a waxen
effigy symbolic of tragedy. Here was none of that gracious somnolence
in which death often presents itself with a suggestion of eternal
repose. This woman was dead; horribly, aggressively dead. The thin,
sallow face was rigid as stone, the dark eyes stared into infinite
space with a horrid fixity that was quite disturbing to look on. And
yet the posture of the corpse was not uneasy, being, in fact, rather
curiously symmetrical, with both arms outside the bed-clothes and both
hands closed, the right grasping, as Mrs. Beddingfield had said, an
empty bottle.

“Well,” said Foxton, as he stood looking down on the dead woman, “it
seems a pretty clear case. She appears to have laid herself out and
kept hold of the bottle so that there should be no mistake. How long
do you suppose this woman has been dead, Jervis?”

I felt the rigid limbs and tested the temperature of the body surface.

“Not less than six hours,” I replied. “Probably more. I should say
that she died about two o’clock this morning.”

“And that is about all we can say,” said Foxton, “until the
post-mortem has been made. Everything looks quite straightforward. No
signs of a struggle or marks of violence. That blood on the mouth is
probably due to her biting her lip when she drank from the bottle.
Yes; here’s a little cut on the inside of the lip, corresponding to
the upper incisors. By the way, I wonder if there is anything left in
the bottle.”

As he spoke, he drew the small, unlabelled, green glass phial from the
closed hand--out of which it slipped quite easily--and held it up to
the light.

“Yes,” he exclaimed, “there’s more than a drachm left; quite enough
for an analysis. But I don’t recognize the smell. Do you?”

I sniffed at the bottle and was aware of a faint unfamiliar vegetable
odour.

“No,” I answered. “It appears to be a watery solution of some kind,
but I can’t give it a name. Where is the cork?”

“I haven’t seen it,” he replied. “Probably it is on the floor
somewhere.”

We both stooped to look for the missing cork and presently found it in
the shadow, under the little bedside table. But, in the course of that
brief search, I found something else, which had indeed been lying in
full view all the time--a wax match. Now a wax match is a perfectly
innocent and very commonplace object, but yet the presence of this one
gave me pause. In the first place, women do not, as a rule, use wax
matches, though there was not much in that. What was more to the point
was that the candlestick by the bedside contained a box of safety
matches, and that, as the burned remains of one lay in the tray, it
appeared to have been used to light the candle. Then why the wax
match?

While I was turning over this problem Foxton had corked the bottle,
wrapped it carefully in a piece of paper which he took from the
dressing table and bestowed it in his pocket.

“Well, Jervis,” said he, “I think we’ve seen everything. The analysis
and the post-mortem will complete the case. Shall we go down and hear
what Mrs. Beddingfield has to say?”

But that wax match, slight as was its significance, taken alone, had
presented itself to me as the last of a succession of phenomena each
of which was susceptible of a sinister interpretation, and the
cumulative effect of these slight suggestions began to impress me
somewhat strongly.

“One moment, Foxton,” said I. “Don’t let us take anything for granted.
We are here to collect evidence, and we must go warily. There is such
a thing as homicidal poisoning, you know.”

“Yes, of course,” he replied, “but there is nothing to suggest it in
this case; at least, I see nothing. Do you?”

“Nothing very positive,” said I; “but there are some facts that seem
to call for consideration. Let us go over what we have seen. In the
first place, there is a distinct discrepancy in the appearance of the
body. The general easy, symmetrical posture, like that of a figure on
a tomb, suggests the effect of a slow, painless poison. But look at
the face. There is nothing reposeful about that. It is very strongly
suggestive of pain or terror or both.”

“Yes,” said Foxton, “that is so. But you can’t draw any satisfactory
conclusions from the facial expression of dead bodies. Why, men who
have been hanged, or even stabbed, often look as peaceful as babes.”

“Still,” I urged, “it is a fact to be noted. Then there is that cut on
the lip. It may have been produced in the way you suggest; but it may
equally well be the result of pressure on the mouth.”

Foxton made no comment on this beyond a slight shrug of the shoulders,
and I continued:

“Then there is the state of the hand. It was closed, but it did not
really grasp the object it contained. You drew the bottle out without
any resistance. It simply lay in the closed hand. But that is not a
normal state of affairs. As you know, when a person dies grasping any
object, either the hand relaxes and lets it drop, or the muscular
action passes into cadaveric spasm and grasps the object firmly. And
lastly, there is this wax match. Where did it come from? The dead
woman apparently lit her candle with a safety match from the box. It
is a small matter, but it wants explaining.”

Foxton raised his eyebrows protestingly. “You’re like all specialists,
Jervis,” said he. “You see your specialty in everything. And while you
are straining these flimsy suggestions to turn a simple suicide into
murder, you ignore the really conclusive fact that the door was bolted
and had to be broken open before any one could get in.”

“You are not forgetting, I suppose,” said I, “that the window was wide
open and that there were house painters about and possibly a ladder
left standing against the house.”

“As to the ladder,” said Foxton, “that is a pure assumption; but we
can easily settle the question by asking that fellow out there if it
was or was not left standing last night.”

Simultaneously we moved towards the window; but half-way we both
stopped short. For the question of the ladder had in a moment become
negligible. Staring up at us from the dull red linoleum which covered
the floor were the impressions of a pair of bare feet, imprinted in
white paint with the distinctness of a woodcut. There was no need to
ask if they had been made by the dead woman: they were unmistakably
the feet of a man, and large feet at that. Nor could there be any
doubt as to whence those feet had come. Beginning with startling
distinctness under the window, the tracks diminished rapidly in
intensity until they reached the carpeted portion of the room, where
they vanished abruptly; and only by the closest scrutiny was it
possible to detect the faint traces of the retiring tracks.

Foxton and I stood for some moments gazing in silence at the sinister
white shapes; then we looked at one another.

“You’ve saved me from a most horrible blunder, Jervis,” said Foxton.
“Ladder or no ladder, that fellow came in at the window; and he came
in last night, for I saw them painting these window-sills yesterday
afternoon. Which side did he come from, I wonder?”

We moved to the window and looked out on the sill. A set of distinct,
though smeared impressions on the new paint gave unneeded confirmation
and showed that the intruder had approached from the left side, close
to which was a cast-iron stack-pipe, now covered with fresh green
paint.

“So,” said Foxton, “the presence or absence of the ladder is of no
significance. The man got into the window somehow, and that’s all that
matters.”

“On the contrary,” said I, “the point may be of considerable
importance in identification. It isn’t every one who could climb up a
stack-pipe, whereas most people could make shift to climb a ladder,
even if it were guarded by a plank. But the fact that the man took off
his boots and socks suggests that he came up by the pipe. If he had
merely aimed at silencing his foot-falls, he would probably have
removed his boots only.”

From the window we turned to examine more closely the footprints on
the floor, and, while I took a series of measurements with my spring
tape, Foxton entered them in my notebook.

“Doesn’t it strike you as rather odd, Jervis,” said he, “that neither
of the little toes has made any mark?”

“It does indeed,” I replied. “The appearances suggest that the little
toes were absent, but I have never met with such a condition. Have
you?”

“Never. Of course one is acquainted with the supernumerary toe
deformity, but I have never heard of congenitally deficient little
toes.”

Once more we scrutinized the footprints, and even examined those on
the window-sill, obscurely marked on the fresh paint; but, exquisitely
distinct as were those on the linoleum, showing every wrinkle and
minute skin-marking, not the faintest hint of a little toe was to be
seen on either foot.

“It’s very extraordinary,” said Foxton. “He has certainly lost his
little toes, if he ever had any. They couldn’t have failed to make
some mark. But it’s a queer affair. Quite a windfall for the police,
by the way; I mean for purposes of identification.”

“Yes,” I agreed, “and having regard to the importance of the
footprints, I think it would be wise to get a photograph of them.”

“Oh, the police will see to that,” said Foxton. “Besides, we haven’t
got a camera, unless you thought of using that little toy snapshotter
of yours.”

As Foxton was no photographer I did not trouble to explain that my
camera, though small, had been specially made for scientific purposes.

“Any photograph is better than none,” I said, and with this I opened
the tripod and set it over one of the most distinct of the footprints,
screwed the camera to the goose-neck, carefully framed the footprint
in the finder and adjusted the focus, finally making the exposure by
means of an Antinous release. This process I repeated four times,
twice on a right footprint and twice on a left.

“Well,” Foxton remarked, “with all those photographs the police ought
to be able to pick up the scent.”

“Yes, they’ve got something to go on; but they’ll have to catch their
hare before they can cook him. He won’t be walking about barefooted,
you know.”

“No. It’s a poor clue in that respect. And now we may as well be off
as we’ve seen all there is to see. I think we won’t have much to say
to Mrs. Beddingfield. This is a police case, and the less I’m mixed up
in it the better it will be for my practice.”

I was faintly amused at Foxton’s caution when considered by the light
of his utterances at the breakfast table. Apparently his appetite for
mystery and romance was easily satisfied. But that was no affair of
mine. I waited on the doorstep while he said a few--probably
evasive--words to the landlady and then, as we started off together in
the direction of the police station, I began to turn over in my mind
the salient features of the case. For some time we walked on in
silence, and must have been pursuing a parallel train of thought for,
when he at length spoke, he almost put my reflections into words.

“You know, Jervis,” said he, “there ought to be a clue in those
footprints. I realize that you can’t tell how many toes a man has by
looking at his booted feet. But those unusual footprints ought to give
an expert a hint as to what sort of man to look for. Don’t they convey
any hint to you?”

I felt that Foxton was right; that if my brilliant colleague,
Thorndyke, had been in my place, he would have extracted from those
footprints some leading fact that would have given the police a start
along some definite line of inquiry; and that belief, coupled with
Foxton’s challenge, put me on my mettle.

“They offer no particular suggestions to me at this moment,” said I,
“but I think that, if we consider them systematically, we may be able
to draw some useful deductions.”

“Very well,” said Foxton, “then let us consider them systematically.
Fire away. I should like to hear how you work these things out.”

Foxton’s frankly spectatorial attitude was a little disconcerting,
especially as it seemed to commit me to a result that I was by no
means confident of attaining. I therefore began a little diffidently.

“We are assuming that both the feet that made those prints were from
some cause devoid of little toes. That assumption--which is almost
certainly correct--we treat as a fact, and, taking it as our starting
point, the first step in the inquiry is to find some explanation of
it. Now there are three possibilities, and only three: deformity,
injury and disease. The toes may have been absent from birth, they may
have been lost as a result of mechanical injury, or they may have been
lost by disease. Let us take those possibilities in order.

“Deformity we exclude since such a malformation is unknown to us.

“Mechanical injury seems to be excluded by the fact that the two
little toes are on opposite sides of the body and could not
conceivably be affected by any violence which left the intervening
feet uninjured. This seems to narrow the possibilities down to
disease; and the question that arises is, What diseases are there
which might result in the loss of both little toes?”

I looked inquiringly at Foxton, but he merely nodded encouragingly.
His rôle was that of listener.

“Well,” I pursued, “the loss of both toes seems to exclude local
disease, just as it excluded local injury; and as to general diseases,
I can think only of three which might produce this
condition--Raynaud’s disease, ergotism, and frost-bite.”

“You don’t call frost-bite a general disease, do you?” objected
Foxton.

“For our present purpose, I do. The effects are local, but the
cause--low external temperature--affects the whole body and is a
general cause. Well, now, taking the diseases in order, I think we can
exclude Raynaud’s disease. It does, it is true, occasionally cause the
fingers or toes to die and drop off, and the little toes would be
especially liable to be affected as being most remote from the heart.
But in such a severe case the other toes would be affected. They would
be shrivelled and tapered, whereas, if you remember, the toes of these
feet were quite plump and full, to judge by the large impressions they
made. So I think we may safely reject Raynaud’s disease. There remain
ergotism and frost-bite; and the choice between them is just a
question of relative frequency. Frost-bite is more common; therefore
frost-bite is more probable.”

“Do they tend equally to affect the little toes?” asked Foxton.

“As a matter of probability, yes. The poison of ergot acting from
within, and intense cold acting from without, contract the small
blood-vessels and arrest the circulation. The feet, being the most
distant parts of the body from the heart, are the first to feel the
effects; and the little toes, which are the most distant parts of the
feet, are the most susceptible of all.”

Foxton reflected awhile, and then remarked:

“This is all very well, Jervis, but I don’t see that you are much
forrarder. This man has lost both his little toes, and on your
showing, the probabilities are that the loss was due either to chronic
ergot poisoning or to frost-bite, with a balance of probability in
favour of frost-bite. That’s all. No proof, no verification. Just the
law of probability applied to a particular case, which is always
unsatisfactory. He may have lost his toes in some totally different
way. But even if the probabilities work out correctly, I don’t see
what use your conclusions would be to the police. They wouldn’t tell
them what sort of man to look for.”

There was a good deal of truth in Foxton’s objection. A man who has
suffered from ergotism or frost-bite is not externally different from
any other man. Still, we had not exhausted the case, as I ventured to
point out.

“Don’t be premature, Foxton,” said I. “Let us pursue our argument a
little farther. We have established a probability that this unknown
man has suffered either from ergotism or frost-bite. That, as you say,
is of no use by itself; but supposing we can show that these
conditions tend to affect a particular class of persons, we shall have
established a fact that will indicate a line of investigation. And I
think we can. Let us take the case of ergotism first.

“Now how is chronic ergot poisoning caused? Not by the medicinal use
of the drug, but by the consumption of the diseased rye in which ergot
occurs. It is therefore peculiar to countries in which rye is used
extensively as food. Those countries, broadly speaking, are the
countries of North Eastern Europe, and especially Russia and Poland.

“Then take the case of frost-bite. Obviously the most likely person to
get frost-bitten is the inhabitant of a country with a cold climate.
The most rigorous climates inhabited by white people are North America
and North Eastern Europe, especially Russia and Poland. So you see,
the areas associated with ergotism and frost-bite overlap to some
extent. In fact they do more than overlap; for a person even slightly
affected by ergot would be specially liable to frost-bite, owing to
the impaired circulation. The conclusion is that, racially, in both
ergotism and frost-bite, the balance of probability is in favour of a
Russian, a Pole, or a Scandinavian.

“Then in the case of frost-bite there is the occupation factor. What
class of men tend most to become frost-bitten? Well, beyond all doubt,
the greatest sufferers from frost-bite are sailors, especially those
on sailing ships, and, naturally, on ships trading to arctic and
sub-arctic countries. But the bulk of such sailing ships are those
engaged in the Baltic and Archangel trade; and the crews of those
ships are almost exclusively Scandinavians, Finns, Russians and Poles.
So that, again, the probabilities point to a native of North Eastern
Europe, and, taken as a whole, by the overlapping of factors, to a
Russian, a Pole, or a Scandinavian.”

Foxton smiled sardonically. “Very ingenious, Jervis,” said he. “Most
ingenious. As an academic statement of probabilities, quite excellent.
But for practical purposes absolutely useless. However, here we are at
the police station. I’ll just run in and give them the facts and then
go on to the coroner’s office.”

“I suppose I’d better not come in with you?” I said.

“Well, no,” he replied. “You see, you have no official connection with
the case, and they mightn’t like it. You’d better go and amuse
yourself while I get the morning’s visits done. We can talk things
over at lunch.”

With this he disappeared into the police station, and I turned away
with a smile of grim amusement. Experience is apt to make us a trifle
uncharitable, and experience had taught me that those who are the most
scornful of academic reasoning are often not above retailing it with
some reticence as to its original authorship. I had a shrewd suspicion
that Foxton was at this very moment disgorging my despised “academic
statement of probabilities” to an admiring police-inspector.

My way towards the sea lay through Ethelred Road, and I had traversed
about half its length and was approaching the house of the tragedy
when I observed Mrs. Beddingfield at the bay window. Evidently she
recognized me, for a few moments later she appeared in outdoor clothes
on the doorstep and advanced to meet me.

“Have you seen the police?” she asked as we met. I replied that Dr.
Foxton was even now at the police station.

“Ah!” she said, “it’s a dreadful affair; most unfortunate, too, just
at the beginning of the season. A scandal is absolute ruin to a
boarding-house. What do you think of the case? Will it be possible to
hush it up? Dr. Foxton said you were a lawyer, I think, Dr. Jervis?”

“Yes, I am a lawyer, but really I know nothing of the circumstances of
this case. Did I understand that there had been something in the
nature of a love affair?”

“Yes--at least--well, perhaps I oughtn’t to have said that. But hadn’t
I better tell you the whole story?--that is, if I am not taking up too
much of your time.”

“I should be interested to hear what led to the disaster,” said I.

“Then,” she said, “I will tell you all about it. Will you come
indoors, or shall I walk a little way with you?”

As I suspected that the police were at that moment on their way to the
house, I chose the latter alternative and led her away seawards at a
pretty brisk pace.

“Was this poor lady a widow?” I asked as we started up the street.

“No, she wasn’t,” replied Mrs. Beddingfield, “and that was the
trouble. Her husband was abroad--at least, he had been, and he was
just coming home. A pretty home-coming it will be for him, poor man.
He is an officer in the civil police at Sierra Leone, but he hasn’t
been there long. He went there for his health.”

“What! To Sierra Leone!” I exclaimed, for the “White Man’s Grave”
seemed a queer health resort.

“Yes. You see, Mr. Toussaint is a French Canadian, and it seems that
he has always been somewhat of a rolling stone. For some time he was
in the Klondike, but he suffered so much from the cold that he had to
come away. It injured his health very severely; I don’t quite know in
what way, but I do know that he was quite a cripple for a time. When
he got better he looked out for a post in a warm climate and
eventually obtained the appointment of Inspector of Civil Police at
Sierra Leone. That was about ten months ago, and when he sailed for
Africa his wife came to stay with me, and has been here ever since.”

“And this love affair that you spoke of?”

“Yes, but I oughtn’t to have called it that. Let me explain what
happened. About three months ago a Swedish gentleman--a Mr.
Bergson--came to stay here, and he seemed to be very much smitten with
Mrs. Toussaint.”

“And she?”

“Oh, she liked him well enough. He is a tall, good-looking man--though
for that matter he is no taller than her husband, nor any better
looking. Both men are over six feet. But there was no harm so far as
she was concerned, excepting that she didn’t see the position quite
soon enough. She wasn’t very discreet, in fact I thought it necessary
to give her a little advice. However, Mr. Bergson left here and went
to live at Ramsgate to superintend the unloading of the ice ships (he
came from Sweden in one), and I thought the trouble was at an end. But
it wasn’t, for he took to coming over to see Mrs. Toussaint, and of
course I couldn’t have that. So at last I had to tell him that he
mustn’t come to the house again. It was very unfortunate, for on that
occasion I think he had been ‘tasting,’ as they say in Scotland. He
wasn’t drunk, but he was excitable and noisy, and when I told him he
mustn’t come again he made such a disturbance that two of the
gentlemen boarders--Mr. Wardale and Mr. Macauley--had to interfere.
And then he was most insulting to them, especially to Mr. Macauley,
who is a coloured gentleman; called him a ‘buck nigger’ and all sorts
of offensive names.”

“And how did the coloured gentleman take it?”

“Not very well, I am sorry to say, considering that he is a
gentleman--a law student with chambers in the Temple. In fact, his
language was so objectionable that Mr. Wardale insisted on my giving
him notice on the spot. But I managed to get him taken in next door
but one; you see, Mr. Wardale had been a Commissioner at Sierra
Leone--it was through him that Mr. Toussaint got his appointment--so I
suppose he was rather on his dignity with coloured people.”

“And was that the last you heard of Mr. Bergson?”

“He never came here again, but he wrote several times to Mrs.
Toussaint, asking her to meet him. At last, only a few days ago, she
wrote to him and told him that the acquaintance must cease.”

“And has it ceased?”

“As far as I know, it has.”

“Then, Mrs. Beddingfield,” said I, “what makes you connect the affair
with--with what has happened?”

“Well, you see,” she explained, “there is the husband. He was coming
home, and is probably in England already.”

“Indeed!” said I.

“Yes,” she continued. “He went up into the bush to arrest some natives
belonging to one of these gangs of murderers--Leopard Societies, I
think they are called--and he got seriously wounded. He wrote to his
wife from hospital, saying that he would be sent home as soon as he
was fit to travel, and about ten days ago she got a letter from him
saying that he was coming by the next ship.

“I noticed that she seemed very nervous and upset when she got the
letters from hospital, and still more so when the last letter came. Of
course, I don’t know what he said to her in those letters. It may be
that he had heard something about Mr. Bergson, and threatened to take
some action. Of course, I can’t say. I only know that she was very
nervous and restless, and when we saw in the paper four days ago that
the ship he would be coming by had arrived in Liverpool, she seemed
dreadfully upset. And she got worse and worse until--well, until last
night.”

“Has anything been heard of the husband since the ship arrived?” I
asked.

“Nothing whatever,” replied Mrs. Beddingfield, with a meaning look at
me which I had no difficulty in interpreting. “No letter, no telegram,
not a word. And you see, if he hadn’t come by that ship he would
almost certainly have sent a letter by her. He must have arrived in
England, but why hasn’t he turned up, or at least sent a wire? What is
he doing? Why is he staying away? Can he have heard something? And
what does he mean to do? That’s what kept the poor thing on wires, and
that, I feel certain, is what drove her to make away with herself.”

It was not my business to contest Mrs. Beddingfield’s erroneous
deductions. I was seeking information--it seemed that I had nearly
exhausted the present source. But one point required amplifying.

“To return to Mr. Bergson, Mrs. Beddingfield,” said I. “Do I
understand that he is a seafaring man?”

“He was,” she replied. “At present he is settled at Ramsgate as
manager of a company in the ice trade, but formerly he was a sailor. I
have heard him say that he was one of the crew of an exploring ship
that went in search of the North Pole and that he was locked up in the
ice for months and months. I should have thought he would have had
enough of ice after that.”

With this view I expressed warm agreement, and having now obtained all
the information that appeared to be available, I proceeded to bring
the interview to an end.

“Well, Mrs. Beddingfield,” I said, “it is a rather mysterious affair.
Perhaps more light may be thrown on it at the inquest. Meanwhile, I
should think that it will be wise of you to keep your own counsel as
far as outsiders are concerned.”

The remainder of the morning I spent pacing the smooth stretch of sand
that lies to the east of the jetty, and reflecting on the evidence
that I had acquired in respect of this singular crime. Evidently there
was no lack of clues in this case. On the contrary, there were two
quite obvious lines of inquiry, for both the Swede and the missing
husband presented the characters of the hypothetical murderer. Both
had been exposed to the conditions which tend to produce frost-bite;
one of them had probably been a consumer of rye meal, and both might
be said to have a motive--though, to be sure, it was a very
insufficient one--for committing the crime. Still, in both cases the
evidence was merely speculative; it suggested a line of investigation,
but it did nothing more.

When I met Foxton at lunch I was sensible of a curious change in his
manner. His previous expansiveness had given place to marked reticence
and a certain official secretiveness.

“I don’t think, you know, Jervis,” he said, when I opened the subject,
“that we had better discuss this affair. You see, I am the principal
witness, and while the case is _sub judice_--well, in fact the police
don’t want the case talked about.”

“But surely I am a witness, too, and an expert witness, moreover----”

“That isn’t the view of the police. They look on you as more or less
of an amateur, and as you have no official connection with the case, I
don’t think they propose to subpœna you. Superintendent Platt, who is
in charge of the case, wasn’t very pleased at my having taken you to
the house. Said it was quite irregular. Oh, and by the way, he says
you must hand over those photographs.”

“But isn’t Platt going to have the footprints photographed on his own
account?” I objected.

“Of course he is. He is going to have a set of proper photographs
taken by an expert photographer;--he was mightily amused when he heard
about your little snapshot affair. Oh, you can trust Platt. He is a
great man. He has had a course of instruction at the Finger Print
Department in London.”

“I don’t see how that is going to help him, as there aren’t any finger
prints in this case.” This was a mere fly-cast on my part, but Foxton
rose at once at the rather clumsy bait.

“Oh, aren’t there?” he exclaimed. “You didn’t happen to spot them, but
they were there. Platt has got the prints of a complete right hand.
This is in strict confidence, you know,” he added, with somewhat
belated caution.

Foxton’s sudden reticence restrained me from uttering the obvious
comment on the superintendent’s achievement. I returned to the subject
of the photographs.

“Supposing I decline to hand over my film?” said I.

“But I hope you won’t--and in fact you mustn’t. I am officially
connected with the case, and I’ve got to live with these people. As
the police-surgeon, I am responsible for the medical evidence, and
Platt expects me to get those photographs from you. Obviously you
can’t keep them. It would be most irregular.”

It was useless to argue. Evidently the police did not want me to be
introduced into the case, and after all, the superintendent was within
his rights, if he chose to regard me as a private individual and to
demand the surrender of the film.

Nevertheless I was loath to give up the photographs, at least, until I
had carefully studied them. The case was within my own specialty of
practice, and was a strange and interesting one. Moreover, it appeared
to be in unskilful hands, judging from the finger-print episode, and
then experience had taught me to treasure up small scraps of chance
evidence, since one never knew when one might be drawn into a case in
a professional capacity. In effect, I decided not to give up the
photographs, though that decision committed me to a ruse that I was
not very willing to adopt. I would rather have acted quite
straightforwardly.

“Well, if you insist, Foxton,” I said, “I will hand over the film or,
if you like, I will destroy it in your presence.”

“I think Platt would rather have the film uninjured,” said Foxton.
“Then he’ll know, you know,” he added, with a sly grin.

In my heart, I thanked Foxton for that grin. It made my own guileful
proceedings so much easier; for a suspicious man invites you to get
the better of him if you can.

After lunch I went up to my room, locked the door and took the little
camera from my pocket. Having fully wound up the film, I extracted it,
wrapped it up carefully and bestowed it in my inside breast-pocket.
Then I inserted a fresh film, and going to the open window, took four
successive snapshots of the sky. This done, I closed the camera,
slipped it into my pocket, and went downstairs. Foxton was in the
hall, brushing his hat, as I descended, and at once renewed his
demand.

“About those photographs, Jervis,” said he, “I shall be looking in at
the police station presently, so if you wouldn’t mind----”

“To be sure,” said I. “I will give you the film now, if you like.”

Taking the camera from my pocket, I solemnly wound up the remainder of
the film, extracted it, stuck down the loose end with ostentatious
care, and handed it to him.

“Better not expose it to the light,” I said, going the whole hog of
deception, “or you may fog the exposures.”

Foxton took the spool from me as if it were hot--he was not a
photographer--and thrust it into his hand-bag. He was still thanking
me quite profusely when the front-door bell rang.

The visitor who stood revealed when Foxton opened the door was a
small, spare gentleman with a complexion of the peculiar brown-papery
quality that suggests long residence in the Tropics. He stepped in
briskly and introduced himself and his business without preamble.

“My name is Wardale--boarder at Beddingfield’s. I’ve called with
reference to the tragic event which----”

Here Foxton interposed in his frostiest official tone. “I am afraid,
Mr. Wardale, I can’t give you any information about the case at
present.”

“I saw you two gentlemen at the house this morning,” Mr. Wardale
continued, but Foxton again cut him short.

“You did. We were there--or at least, I was--as the representative of
the Law, and while the case is _sub judice_----”

“It isn’t yet,” interrupted Wardale.

“Well, I can’t enter into any discussion of it----”

“I am not asking you to,” said Wardale, a little impatiently. “But I
understand that one of you is Dr. Jervis.”

“I am,” said I.

“I must really warn you,” Foxton began again; but Mr. Wardale
interrupted testily:

“My dear sir, I am a lawyer and a magistrate and understand perfectly
well what is and what is not permissible. I have come simply to make a
professional engagement with Dr. Jervis.”

“In what way can I be of service to you?” I asked.

“I will tell you,” said Mr. Wardale. “This poor lady, whose death has
occurred in so mysterious a manner, was the wife of a man who was,
like myself, a servant of the Government of Sierra Leone. I was the
friend of both of them; and in the absence of the husband, I should
like to have the inquiry into the circumstances of this lady’s death
watched by a competent lawyer with the necessary special knowledge of
medical evidence. Will you or your colleague, Dr. Thorndyke, undertake
to watch the case for me?”

Of course I was willing to undertake the case and said so.

“Then,” said Mr. Wardale, “I will instruct my solicitor to write to
you and formally retain you in the case. Here is my card. You will
find my name in the Colonial Office List, and you know my address
here.”

He handed me his card, wished us both good afternoon, and then, with a
stiff little bow, turned and took his departure.

“I think I had better run up to town and confer with Thorndyke,” said
I. “How do the trains run?”

“There is a good train in about three-quarters of an hour,” replied
Foxton.

“Then I will go by it, but I shall come down again to-morrow or the
next day, and probably Thorndyke will come down with me.”

“Very well,” said Foxton. “Bring him in to lunch or dinner, but I
can’t put him up, I am afraid.”

“It would be better not,” said I. “Your friend, Platt, wouldn’t like
it. He won’t want Thorndyke--or me either for that matter. And what
about those photographs? Thorndyke will want them, you know.”

“He can’t have them,” said Foxton doggedly, “unless Platt is willing
to hand them back; which I don’t suppose he will be.”

I had private reasons for thinking otherwise, but I kept them to
myself; and as Foxton went forth on his afternoon round, I returned
upstairs to pack my suit-case and write the telegram to Thorndyke
informing him of my movements.


It was only a quarter past five when I let myself into our chambers in
King’s Bench Walk. To my relief I found my colleague at home and our
laboratory assistant, Polton, in the act of laying tea for two.

“I gather,” said Thorndyke, as we shook hands, “that my learned
brother brings grist to the mill?”

“Yes,” I replied. “Nominally a watching brief, but I think you will
agree with me that it is a case for independent investigation.”

“Will there be anything in my line, sir?” inquired Polton, who was
always agog at the word “investigation.”

“There is a film to be developed. Four exposures of white footprints
on a dark ground.”

“Ah!” said Polton, “you’ll want good strong negatives and they ought
to be enlarged if they are from the little camera. Can you give me the
dimensions?”

I wrote out the measurements from my notebook and handed him the paper
together with the spool of film, with which he retired gleefully to
the laboratory.

“And now, Jervis,” said Thorndyke, “while Polton is operating on the
film and we are discussing our tea, let us have a sketch of the case.”

I gave him more than a sketch, for the events were recent and I had
carefully sorted out the facts during my journey to town, making rough
notes which I now consulted. To my rather lengthy recital he listened
in his usual attentive manner, without any comment, excepting in
regard to my manœuvre to retain possession of the exposed film.

“It’s almost a pity you didn’t refuse,” said he. “They could hardly
have enforced their demand, and my feeling is that it is more
convenient as well as more dignified to avoid direct deception unless
one is driven to it. But perhaps you considered that you were.”

As a matter of fact I had at the time, but I had since come to
Thorndyke’s opinion. My little manœuvre was going to be a source of
inconvenience presently.

“Well,” said Thorndyke, when I had finished my recital, “I think we
may take it that the police theory is, in the main, your own theory
derived from Foxton.”

“I think so, excepting that I learned from Foxton that Superintendent
Platt has obtained the complete finger-prints of a right hand.”

Thorndyke raised his eyebrows. “Finger-prints!” he exclaimed. “Why the
fellow must be a mere simpleton. But there,” he added,
“everybody--police, lawyers, judges, even Galton himself--seems to
lose every vestige of common sense as soon as the subject of
finger-prints is raised. But it would be interesting to know how he
got them and what they are like. We must try to find that out.
However, to return to your case, since your theory and the police
theory are probably the same, we may as well consider the value of
your inferences.

“At present we are dealing with the case in the abstract. Our data are
largely assumptions, and our inferences are largely derived from an
application of the mathematical laws of probability. Thus we assume
that a murder has been committed, whereas it may turn out to have been
suicide. We assume the murder to have been committed by the person who
made the footprints, and we assume that that person has no little
toes, whereas he may have retracted little toes which do not touch the
ground and so leave no impression. Assuming the little toes to be
absent, we account for their absence by considering known causes in
the order of their probability. Excluding--quite properly, I
think--Raynaud’s disease, we arrive at frost-bite and ergotism. But
two persons, both of whom are of a stature corresponding to the size
of the footprints, may have had a motive--though a very inadequate
one--for committing the crime, and both have been exposed to the
conditions which tend to produce frost-bite, while one of them has
probably been exposed to the conditions which tend to produce
ergotism. The laws of probability point to both of these two men; and
the chances in favour of the Swede being the murderer rather than the
Canadian would be represented by the common
factor--frost-bite--multiplied by the additional factor, ergotism. But
this is purely speculative at present. There is no evidence that
either man has ever been frost-bitten or has ever eaten spurred rye.
Nevertheless, it is a perfectly sound method at this stage. It
indicates a line of investigation. If it should transpire that either
man has suffered from frost-bite or ergotism, a definite advance would
have been made. But here is Polton with a couple of finished prints.
How on earth did you manage it in the time, Polton?”

“Why, you see, sir, I just dried the film with spirit,” replied
Polton. “It saves a lot of time. I will let you have a pair of
enlargements in about a quarter of an hour.”

Handing us the two wet prints, each stuck on a glass plate, he retired
to the laboratory, and Thorndyke and I proceeded to scrutinize the
photographs with the aid of our pocket lenses. The promised
enlargements were really hardly necessary excepting for the purpose of
comparative measurements, for the image of the white footprint, fully
two inches long, was so microscopically sharp that, with the
assistance of the lens, the minutest detail could be clearly seen.

“There is certainly not a vestige of little toe,” remarked Thorndyke,
“and the plump appearance of the other toes supports your rejection of
Raynaud’s disease. Does the character of the footprint convey any
other suggestion to you, Jervis?”

“It gives me the impression that the man had been accustomed to go
bare-footed in early life and had only taken to boots comparatively
recently. The position of the great toe suggests this, and the
presence of a number of small scars on the toes and ball of the foot
seems to confirm it. A person walking barefoot would sustain
innumerable small wounds from treading on small, sharp objects.”

Thorndyke looked dissatisfied. “I agree with you,” he said, “as to the
suggestion offered by the undeformed state of the great toes; but
those little pits do not convey to me the impression of scars
produced, as you suggest. Still, you may be right.”

Here our conversation was interrupted by a knock on the outer oak.
Thorndyke stepped out through the lobby and I heard him open the door.
A moment or two later he re-entered, accompanied by a short,
brown-faced gentleman whom I instantly recognized as Mr. Wardale.

“I must have come up by the same train as you,” he remarked, as we
shook hands, “and to a certain extent, I suspect, on the same errand.
I thought I would like to put our arrangement on a business footing,
as I am a stranger to both of you.”

“What do you want us to do?” asked Thorndyke.

“I want you to watch the case, and, if necessary, to look into the
facts independently.”

“Can you give us any information that may help us?”

Mr. Wardale reflected. “I don’t think I can,” he said at length. “I
have no facts that you have not, and any surmises of mine might be
misleading. I had rather you kept an open mind. But perhaps we might
go into the question of costs.”

This, of course, was somewhat difficult, but Thorndyke contrived to
indicate the probable liabilities involved to Mr. Wardale’s
satisfaction.

“There is one other little matter,” said Wardale as he rose to depart.
“I have got a suit-case here which Mrs. Beddingfield lent me to bring
some things up to town. It is one that Mr. Macauley left behind when
he went away from the boarding-house. Mrs. Beddingfield suggested that
I might leave it at his chambers when I had finished with it; but I
don’t know his address, excepting that it is somewhere in the Temple,
and I don’t want to meet the fellow if he should happen to have come
up to town.”

“Is it empty?” asked Thorndyke.

“Excepting for a suit of pyjamas and a pair of shocking old slippers.”
He opened the suit-case as he spoke and exhibited its contents with a
grin.

“Characteristic of a negro, isn’t it? Pink silk pyjamas and slippers
about three sizes too small.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke. “I will get my man to find out the
address and leave it there.”

As Mr. Wardale went out, Polton entered with the enlarged photographs,
which showed the footprints the natural size. Thorndyke handed them to
me, and as I sat down to examine them he followed his assistant to the
laboratory. He returned in a few minutes, and after a brief inspection
of the photographs, remarked:

“They show us nothing more than we have seen, though they may be
useful later. So your stock of facts is all we have to go on at
present. Are you going home to-night?”

“Yes, I shall go back to Margate to-morrow.”

“Then, as I have to call at Scotland Yard, we may as well walk to
Charing Cross together.”

As we walked down the Strand we gossiped on general topics, but before
we separated at Charing Cross, Thorndyke reverted to the case.

“Let me know the date of the inquest,” said he, “and try to find out
what the poison was--if it was really a poison.”

“The liquid that was left in the bottle seemed to be a watery solution
of some kind,” said I, “as I think I mentioned.”

“Yes,” said Thorndyke. “Possibly a watery infusion of strophanthus.”

“Why strophanthus?” I asked.

“Why not?” demanded Thorndyke. And with this and an inscrutable smile,
he turned and walked down Whitehall.


Three days later I found myself at Margate sitting beside Thorndyke in
a room adjoining the Town Hall, in which the inquest on the death of
Mrs. Toussaint was to be held. Already the coroner was in his chair,
the jury were in their seats and the witnesses assembled in a group of
chairs apart. These included Foxton, a stranger who sat by
him--presumably the other medical witness--Mrs. Beddingfield, Mr.
Wardale, the police superintendent and a well-dressed coloured man,
whom I correctly assumed to be Mr. Macauley.

As I sat by my rather sphinx-like colleague my mind recurred for the
hundredth time to his extraordinary powers of mental synthesis. That
parting remark of his as to the possible nature of the poison had
brought home to me in a flash the fact that he already had a definite
theory of this crime, and that his theory was not mine nor that of the
police. True, the poison might not be strophanthus, after all, but
that would not alter the position. He had a theory of the crime, but
yet he was in possession of no facts excepting those with which I had
supplied him. Therefore those facts contained the material for a
theory, whereas I had deduced from them nothing but the bald,
ambiguous mathematical probabilities.

The first witness called was naturally Dr. Foxton, who described the
circumstances already known to me. He further stated that he had been
present at the autopsy, that he had found on the throat and limbs of
the deceased, bruises that suggested a struggle and violent restraint.
The immediate cause of death was heart failure, but whether that
failure was due to shock, terror, or the action of a poison he could
not positively say.

The next witness was a Dr. Prescott, an expert pathologist and
toxicologist. He had made the autopsy and agreed with Dr. Foxton as to
the cause of death. He had examined the liquid contained in the bottle
taken from the hand of the deceased and found it to be a watery
infusion or decoction of strophanthus seeds. He had analyzed the fluid
contained in the stomach and found it to consist largely of the same
infusion.

“Is infusion of strophanthus seeds used in medicine?” the coroner
asked.

“No,” was the reply. “The tincture is the form in which strophanthus
is administered unless it is given in the form of strophanthin.”

“Do you consider that the strophanthus caused, or contributed to
death?”

“It is difficult to say,” replied Dr. Prescott. “Strophanthus is a
heart poison, and there was a very large poisonous dose. But very
little had been absorbed, and the appearances were not inconsistent
with death from shock.”

“Could death have been self-produced by the voluntary taking of the
poison?” asked the coroner.

“I should say, decidedly not. Dr. Foxton’s evidence shows that the
bottle was almost certainly placed in the hands of the deceased after
death, and this is in complete agreement with the enormous dose and
small absorption.”

“Would you say that appearances point to suicidal or homicidal
poisoning?”

“I should say that they point to homicidal poisoning, but that death
was probably due mainly to shock.”

This concluded the expert’s evidence. It was followed by that of Mrs.
Beddingfield, which brought out nothing new to me but the fact that a
trunk had been broken open and a small attaché case belonging to the
deceased abstracted and taken away.

“Do you know what the deceased kept in that case?” the coroner asked.

“I have seen her put her husband’s letters into it. She had quite a
number of them. I don’t know what else she kept in it except, of
course, her cheque book.”

“Had she any considerable balance at the bank?”

“I believe she had. Her husband used to send most of his pay home and
she used to pay it in and leave it with the bank. She might have two
or three hundred pounds to her credit.”

As Mrs. Beddingfield concluded, Mr. Wardale was called, and he was
followed by Mr. Macauley. The evidence of both was quite brief and
concerned entirely with the disturbance made by Bergson, whose absence
from the court I had already noted.

The last witness was the police superintendent, and he, as I had
expected, was decidedly reticent. He did refer to the footprints but,
like Foxton--who presumably had his instructions--he abstained from
describing their peculiarities. Nor did he say anything about
finger-prints. As to the identity of the criminal, that had to be
further inquired into. Suspicion had at first fastened upon Bergson,
but it had since transpired that the Swede sailed from Ramsgate on an
ice-ship two days before the occurrence of the tragedy. Then suspicion
had pointed to the husband, who was known to have landed at Liverpool
four days before the death of his wife and who had mysteriously
disappeared. But he (the superintendent) had only that morning
received a telegram from the Liverpool police informing him that the
body of Toussaint had been found floating in the Mersey, and that it
bore a number of wounds of an apparently homicidal character.
Apparently he had been murdered and his corpse thrown into the river.

“This is very terrible,” said the coroner. “Does this second murder
throw any light on the case which we are investigating?”

“I think it does,” replied the officer, without any great conviction,
however, “but it is not advisable to go into details.”

“Quite so,” agreed the coroner. “Most inexpedient. But are we to
understand that you have a clue to the perpetrator of this
crime--assuming a crime to have been committed?”

“Yes,” replied Platt. “We have several important clues.”

“And do they point to any particular individual?”

The superintendent hesitated. “Well--” he began, with some
embarrassment, but the coroner interrupted him.

“Perhaps the question is indiscreet. We mustn’t hamper the police,
gentlemen, and the point is not really material to our inquiry. You
would rather we waived that question, Superintendent?”

“If you please, sir,” was the emphatic reply.

“Have any cheques from the deceased woman’s cheque-book been presented
at the bank?”

“Not since her death. I inquired at the bank only this morning.”

This concluded the evidence, and after a brief but capable summing-up
by the coroner, the jury returned a verdict of “wilful murder against
some person unknown.”

As the proceedings terminated, Thorndyke rose and turned round, and
then to my surprise I perceived Superintendent Miller, of the Criminal
Investigation Department, who had come in unperceived by me and was
sitting immediately behind us.

“I have followed your instructions, sir,” said he, addressing
Thorndyke, “but before we take any definite action I should like to
have a few words with you.”

He led the way to an adjoining room and, as we entered, we were
followed by Superintendent Platt and Dr. Foxton.

“Now, Doctor,” said Miller, carefully closing the door, “I have
carried out your suggestions. Mr. Macauley is being detained, but
before we commit ourselves to an arrest, we must have something to go
upon. I shall want you to make out a prima facie case.”

“Very well,” said Thorndyke, laying upon the table the small, green
suit-case that was his almost invariable companion.

“I’ve seen that prima facie case before,” Miller remarked with a grin,
as Thorndyke unlocked it and drew out a large envelope. “Now, what
have you got there?”

As Thorndyke extracted from the envelope Polton’s enlargements of my
small photographs, Platt’s eyes appeared to bulge, while Foxton gave
me a quick glance of reproach.

“These,” said Thorndyke, “are the full-sized photographs of the
footprints of the suspected murderer. Superintendent Platt can
probably verify them.”

Rather reluctantly Platt produced from his pocket a pair of
whole-plate photographs, which he laid beside the enlargements.

“Yes,” said Miller, after comparing them, “they are the same
footprints. But you say, Doctor, that they are Macauley’s footprints.
Now, what evidence have you?”

Thorndyke again had recourse to the green case, from which he produced
two copper plates mounted on wood and coated with printing ink.

“I propose,” said he, lifting the plates out of their protecting
frame, “that we take prints of Macauley’s feet and compare them with
the photographs.”

“Yes,” said Platt. “And then there are the finger-prints that we’ve
got. We can test those, too.”

“You don’t want finger-prints if you’ve got a set of toe-prints,”
objected Miller.

“With regard to those finger-prints,” said Thorndyke. “May I ask if
they were obtained from the bottle?”

“They were,” Platt admitted.

“And were there any other finger-prints?”

“No,” replied Platt. “These were the only ones.”

As he spoke he laid on the table a photograph showing the prints of
the thumb and fingers of a right hand.

Thorndyke glanced at the photograph and, turning to Miller, said:

“I suggest that those are Dr. Foxton’s finger-prints.”

“Impossible!” exclaimed Platt, and then suddenly fell silent.

“We can soon see,” said Thorndyke, producing from the case a pad of
white paper. “If Dr. Foxton will lay the finger-tips of his right hand
first on this inked plate and then on the paper, we can compare the
prints with the photograph.”

Foxton placed his fingers on the blackened plate and then pressed them
on the paper pad, leaving on the latter four beautifully clear, black
finger-prints. These Superintendent Platt scrutinized eagerly, and as
his glance travelled from the prints to the photographs, he broke into
a sheepish grin.

“Sold again!” he muttered. “They are the same prints.”

“Well,” said Miller in a tone of disgust, “you must have been a mug
not to have thought of that when you knew that Dr. Foxton had handled
the bottle.”

“The fact, however, is important,” said Thorndyke. “The absence of any
finger-prints but Dr. Foxton’s not only suggests that the murderer
took the precaution to wear gloves, but especially it proves that the
bottle was not handled by the deceased during life. A suicide’s hands
will usually be pretty moist and would leave conspicuous, if not very
clear, impressions.”

“Yes,” agreed Miller, “that is quite true. But with regard to these
footprints. We can’t compel this man to let us examine his feet
without arresting him. Don’t think, Dr. Thorndyke, that I suspect you
of guessing. I’ve known you too long for that. You’ve got your facts
all right, I don’t doubt, but you must let us have enough to justify
our arrest.”

Thorndyke’s answer was to plunge once more into the inexhaustible
green case, from which he now produced two objects wrapped in tissue
paper. The paper being removed, there was revealed what looked like a
model of an excessively shabby pair of brown shoes.

“These,” said Thorndyke, exhibiting the “models” to Superintendent
Miller--who viewed them with an undisguised grin--“are plaster casts
of the interiors of a pair of slippers--very old and much too
tight--belonging to Mr. Macauley. His name was written inside them.
The casts have been waxed and painted with raw umber, which has been
lightly rubbed off, thus accentuating the prominences and depressions.
You will notice that the impressions of the toes on the soles and of
the ‘knuckles’ on the uppers appear as prominences; in fact we have in
these casts a sketchy reproduction of the actual feet.

“Now, first as to dimensions. Dr. Jervis’s measurements of the
footprints give us ten inches and three-quarters as the extreme length
and four inches and five-eighths as the extreme width at the heads of
the metatarsus. On these casts, as you see, the extreme length is ten
inches and five-eighths--the loss of one-eighth being accounted for by
the curve of the sole--and the extreme width is four inches and a
quarter--three-eighths being accounted for by the lateral compression
of a tight slipper. The agreement of the dimensions is remarkable,
considering the unusual size. And now as to the peculiarities of the
feet. You notice that each toe has made a perfectly distinct
impression on the sole, excepting the little toe, of which there is no
trace in either cast. And, turning to the uppers, you notice that the
knuckles of the toes appear quite distinct and prominent--again
excepting the little toes, which have made no impression at all. Thus
it is not a case of retracted little toes, for they would appear as an
extra prominence. Then, looking at the feet as a whole, it is evident
that the little toes are absent; there is a distinct hollow where
there should be a prominence.”

“M’yes,” said Miller dubiously, “it’s all very neat. But isn’t it just
a bit speculative?”

“Oh, come, Miller,” protested Thorndyke; “just consider the facts.
Here is a suspected murderer known to have feet of an unusual size and
presenting a very rare deformity; and here are a pair of feet of that
same unusual size and presenting that same rare deformity; and they
are the feet of a man who had actually lived in the same house as the
murdered woman and who, at the date of the crime, was living only two
doors away. What more would you have?”

“Well, there is the question of motive,” objected Miller.

“That hardly belongs to a prima facie case,” said Thorndyke. “But even
if it did, is there not ample matter for suspicion? Remember who the
murdered woman was, what her husband was, and who this Sierra Leone
gentleman is.”

“Yes, yes; that’s true,” said Miller somewhat hastily, either
perceiving the drift of Thorndyke’s argument (which I did not), or
being unwilling to admit that he was still in the dark. “Yes, we’ll
have the fellow in and get his actual footprints.”

He went to the door and, putting his head out, made some sign, which
was almost immediately followed by a trampling of feet, and Macauley
entered the room, followed by two large plain-clothes policemen. The
negro was evidently alarmed, for he looked about him with the wild
expression of a hunted animal. But his manner was aggressive and
truculent.

“Why am I being interfered with in this impertinent manner?” he
demanded in the deep, buzzing voice characteristic of the male negro.

“We want to have a look at your feet, Mr. Macauley,” said Miller.
“Will you kindly take off your shoes and socks?”

“No,” roared Macauley. “I’ll see you damned first.”

“Then,” said Miller, “I arrest you on a charge of having murdered----”

The rest of the sentence was drowned in a sudden uproar. The tall,
powerful negro, bellowing like an angry bull, had whipped out a large,
strangely shaped knife and charged furiously at the Superintendent.
But the two plain-clothes men had been watching him from behind and
now sprang upon him, each seizing an arm. Two sharp, metallic clicks
in quick succession, a thunderous crash and an ear-splitting yell, and
the formidable barbarian lay prostrate on the floor with one massive
constable sitting astride his chest and the other seated on his knees.

“Now’s your chance, Doctor,” said Miller. “I’ll get his shoes and
socks off.”

As Thorndyke re-inked his plates, Miller and the local superintendent
expertly removed the smart patent shoes and the green silk socks from
the feet of the writhing, bellowing negro. Then Thorndyke rapidly and
skilfully applied the inked plates to the soles of the feet--which I
steadied for the purpose--and followed up with a dexterous pressure of
the paper pad, first to one foot and then--having torn off the printed
sheet--to the other. In spite of the difficulties occasioned by
Macauley’s struggles, each sheet presented a perfectly clear and sharp
print of the sole of the foot, even the ridge-patterns of the toes and
ball of the foot being quite distinct. Thorndyke laid each of the new
prints on the table beside the corresponding large photograph, and
invited the two superintendents to compare them.

“Yes,” said Miller--and Superintendent Platt nodded his
acquiescence--“there can’t be a shadow of a doubt. The ink-prints and
the photographs are identical, to every line and skin-marking. You’ve
made out your case, Doctor, as you always do.”


“So you see,” said Thorndyke, as we smoked our evening pipes on the
old stone pier, “your method was a perfectly sound one, only you
didn’t apply it properly. Like too many mathematicians, you started on
your calculations before you had secured your data. If you had applied
the simple laws of probability to the real data, they would have
pointed straight to Macauley.”

“How do you suppose he lost his little toes?” I asked.

“I don’t suppose at all. Obviously it was a case of double ainhum.”

“Ainhum!” I exclaimed with a sudden flash of recollection.

“Yes; that was what you overlooked. You compared the probabilities of
three diseases either of which only very rarely causes the loss of
even one little toe and infinitely rarely causes the loss of both, and
none of which conditions is confined to any definite class of persons;
and you ignored ainhum, a disease which attacks almost exclusively the
little toe, causing it to drop off, and quite commonly destroys both
little toes--a disease, moreover, which is confined to the
black-skinned races. In European practice ainhum is unknown, but in
Africa, and to a less extent, in India, it is quite common. If you
were to assemble all the men in the world who have lost both little
toes, more than nine-tenths of them would be suffering from ainhum; so
that, by the laws of probability, your footprints were, by nine
chances to one, those of a man who had suffered from ainhum, and
therefore a black-skinned man. But as soon as you had established a
black man as the probable criminal, you opened up a new field of
corroborative evidence. There was a black man on the spot. That man
was a native of Sierra Leone and almost certainly a man of importance
there. But the victim’s husband had deadly enemies in the native
secret societies of Sierra Leone. The letters of the husband to the
wife probably contained matter incriminating certain natives of Sierra
Leone. The evidence became cumulative, you see. Taken as a whole, it
pointed plainly to Macauley, apart from the new fact of the murder of
Toussaint in Liverpool, a city with a considerable floating population
of West Africans.”

“And I gather from your reference to the African poison, strophanthus,
that you fixed on Macauley at once when I gave you my sketch of the
case?”

“Yes; especially when I saw your photographs of the footprints with
the absent little toes and those characteristic chigger-scars on the
toes that remained. But it was sheer luck that enabled me to fit the
key-stone into its place and turn mere probability into virtual
certainty. I could have embraced the magician Wardale when he brought
us the magic slippers. Still, it isn’t an absolute certainty, even
now, though I expect it will be by to-morrow.”

And Thorndyke was right. That very evening the police entered
Macauley’s chambers in Tanfield Court, where they discovered the dead
woman’s attaché case. It still contained Toussaint’s letters to his
wife, and one of those letters mentioned by name, as members of a
dangerous secret society, several prominent Sierra Leone men,
including the accused David Macauley.




 III.
 THE NEW JERSEY SPHINX

“A rather curious neighbourhood this, Jervis,” my friend Thorndyke
remarked as we turned into Upper Bedford Place; “a sort of temporary
aviary for cosmopolitan birds of passage, especially those of the
Oriental variety. The Asiatic and African faces that one sees at the
windows of these Bloomsbury boarding-houses almost suggest an overflow
from the ethnographical galleries of the adjacent British Museum.”

“Yes,” I agreed, “there must be quite a considerable population of
Africans, Japanese and Hindus in Bloomsbury; particularly Hindus.”

As I spoke, and as if in illustration of my statement, a dark-skinned
man rushed out of one of the houses farther down the street and began
to advance towards us in a rapid, bewildered fashion, stopping to look
at each street door as he came to it. His hatless condition--though he
was exceedingly well dressed--and his agitated manner immediately
attracted my attention, and Thorndyke’s too, for the latter remarked,
“Our friend seems to be in trouble. An accident, perhaps, or a case of
sudden illness.”

Here the stranger, observing our approach, ran forward to meet us and
asked in an agitated tone, “Can you tell me, please, where I can find
a doctor?”

“I am a medical man,” replied Thorndyke, “and so is my friend.”

Our acquaintance grasped Thorndyke’s sleeve and exclaimed eagerly:

“Come with me, then, quickly if you please. A most dreadful thing has
happened.”

He hurried us along at something between a trot and a quick walk, and
as we proceeded he continued excitedly, “I am quite confused and
terrified; it is all so strange and sudden and terrible.”

“Try,” said Thorndyke, “to calm yourself a little and tell us what has
happened.”

“I will,” was the agitated reply. “It is my cousin, Dinanath
Byramji--his surname is the same as mine. Just now I went to his room
and was horrified to find him lying on the floor, staring at the
ceiling and blowing--like this,” and he puffed out his cheeks with a
soft blowing noise. “I spoke to him and shook his hand, but he was
like a dead man. This is the house.”

He darted up the steps to an open door at which a rather scared
page-boy was on guard, and running along the hall, rapidly ascended
the stairs. Following him closely, we reached a rather dark
first-floor landing where, at a half-open door, a servant-maid stood
listening with an expression of awe to a rhythmical snoring sound that
issued from the room.

The unconscious man lay as Mr. Byramji had said, staring fixedly at
the ceiling with wide-open, glazy eyes, puffing out his cheeks
slightly at each breath. But the breathing was shallow and slow, and
it grew perceptibly slower, with lengthening pauses. And even as I was
timing it with my watch while Thorndyke examined the pupils with the
aid of a wax match, it stopped. I laid my finger on the wrist and
caught one or two slow, flickering beats. Then the pulse stopped too.

“He is gone,” said I. “He must have burst one of the large arteries.”

“Apparently,” said Thorndyke, “though one would not have expected it
at his age. But wait! What is this?”

He pointed to the right ear, in the hollow of which a few drops of
blood had collected, and as he spoke he drew his hand gently over the
dead man’s head and moved it slightly from side to side.

“There is a fracture of the base of the skull,” said he, “and quite
distinct signs of contusion of the scalp.” He turned to Mr. Byramji,
who stood wringing his hands and gazing incredulously at the dead man,
and asked:

“Can you throw any light on this?”

The Indian looked at him vacantly. The sudden tragedy seemed to have
paralyzed his brain. “I don’t understand,” said he. “What does it
mean?”

“It means,” replied Thorndyke, “that he has received a heavy blow on
the head.”

For a few moments Mr. Byramji continued to stare vacantly at my
colleague. Then he seemed suddenly to realize the import of
Thorndyke’s reply, for he started up excitedly and turned to the door,
outside which the two servants were hovering.

“Where is the person gone who came in with my cousin?” he demanded.

“You saw him go out, Albert,” said the maid. “Tell Mr. Byramji where
he went to.”

The page tiptoed into the room with a fearful eye fixed on the corpse,
and replied falteringly, “I only see the back of him as he went out,
and all I know is that he turned to the left. P’raps he’s gone for a
doctor.”

“Can you give us any description of him?” asked Thorndyke.

“I only see the back of him,” repeated the page. “He was a shortish
gentleman and he had on a dark suit of clothes and a hard felt hat.
That’s all I know.”

“Thank you,” said Thorndyke. “We may want to ask you some more
questions presently,” and having conducted the page to the door, he
shut it and turned to Mr. Byramji.

“Have you any idea who it was that was with your cousin?” he asked.

“None at all,” was the reply. “I was sitting in my room opposite,
writing, when I heard my cousin come up the stairs with another
person, to whom he was talking. I could not hear what he was saying.
They went into his room--this room--and I could occasionally catch the
sound of their voices. In about a quarter of an hour I heard the door
open and shut, and then some one went downstairs, softly and rather
quickly. I finished the letter that I was writing, and when I had
addressed it I came in here to ask my cousin who the visitor was. I
thought it might be some one who had come to negotiate for the ruby.”

“The ruby!” exclaimed Thorndyke. “What ruby do you refer to?”

“The great ruby,” replied Byramji. “But of course you have not----” He
broke off suddenly and stood for a few moments staring at Thorndyke
with parted lips and wide-open eyes; then abruptly he turned, and
kneeling beside the dead man he began, in a curious, caressing,
half-apologetic manner, first to pass his hand gently over the body at
the waist and then to unfasten the clothes. This brought into view a
handsome, soft leather belt, evidently of native workmanship, worn
next to the skin and furnished with three pockets. Mr. Byramji
unbuttoned and explored them in quick succession, and it was evident
that they were all empty.

“It is gone!” he exclaimed in low, intense tones. “Gone! Ah! But how
little would it signify! But thou, dear Dinanath, my brother, my
friend, thou art gone, too!”

He lifted the dead man’s hand and pressed it to his cheek, murmuring
endearments in his own tongue. Presently he laid it down reverently,
and sprang up, and I was startled at the change in his aspect. The
delicate, gentle, refined face had suddenly become the face of a
Fury--fierce, sinister, vindictive.

“This wretch must die!” he exclaimed huskily. “This sordid brute who,
without compunction, has crushed out a precious life as one would
carelessly crush a fly, for the sake of a paltry crystal--he must die,
if I have to follow him and strangle him with my own hands!”

Thorndyke laid his hand on Byramji’s shoulder. “I sympathize with you
most cordially,” said he. “If it is as you think, and appearances
suggest, that your cousin has been murdered as a mere incident of
robbery, the murderer’s life is forfeit, and Justice cries aloud for
retribution. The fact of murder will be determined, for or against, by
a proper inquiry. Meanwhile we have to ascertain who this unknown man
is and what happened while he was with your cousin.”

Byramji made a gesture of despair. “But the man has disappeared, and
nobody has seen him! What can we do?”

“Let us look around us,” replied Thorndyke, “and see if we can judge
what has happened in this room. What, for instance, is this?”

He picked up from a corner near the door a small leather object, which
he handed to Mr. Byramji. The Indian seized it eagerly, exclaiming:

“Ah! It is the little bag in which my cousin used to carry the ruby.
So he had taken it from his belt.”

“It hasn’t been dropped, by any chance?” I suggested.

In an instant Mr. Byramji was down on his knees, peering and groping
about the floor, and Thorndyke and I joined in the search. But, as
might have been expected, there was no sign of the ruby, nor, indeed,
of anything else, excepting a hat which I picked up from under the
table.

“No,” said Mr. Byramji, rising with a dejected air. “It is gone--of
course it is gone, and the murderous villain----”

Here his glance fell on the hat, which I had laid on the table, and he
bent forward to look at it.

“Whose hat is this?” he demanded, glancing at the chair on which
Thorndyke’s hat and mine had been placed.

“Is it not your cousin’s?” asked Thorndyke.

“No, certainly not. His hat was like mine--we bought them both
together. It had a white silk lining with his initials, D.B., in gold.
This has no lining and is a much older hat. It must be the murderer’s
hat.”

“If it is,” said Thorndyke, “that is a most important fact--important
in two respects. Could you let us see your hat?”

“Certainly,” replied Byramji, walking quickly, but with a soft tread,
to the door. As he went out, shutting the door silently behind him,
Thorndyke picked up the derelict hat and swiftly tried it on the head
of the dead man. As far as I could judge, it appeared to fit, and this
Thorndyke confirmed as he replaced it on the table.

“As you see,” said he, “it is at least a practicable fit, which is a
fact of some significance.”

Here Mr. Byramji returned with his own hat, which he placed on the
table by the side of the other, and thus placed, crown uppermost, the
two hats were closely similar. Both were black, hard felts of the
prevalent “bowler” shape, and of good quality, and the difference in
their age and state of preservation was not striking; but when Byramji
turned them over and exhibited their interiors it was seen that
whereas the strange hat was unlined save for the leather headband,
Byramji’s had a white silk lining and bore the owner’s initials in
embossed gilt letters.

“What happened,” said Thorndyke, when he had carefully compared the
two hats, “seems fairly obvious. The two men, on entering, placed
their hats crown upwards on the table. In some way--perhaps during a
struggle--the visitor’s hat was knocked down and rolled under the
table. Then the stranger, on leaving, picked up the only visible
hat--almost identically similar to his own--and put it on.”

“Is it not rather singular,” I asked, “that he should not have noticed
the different feel of a strange hat?”

“I think not,” Thorndyke replied. “If he noticed anything unusual he
would probably assume that he had put it on the wrong way round.
Remember that he would be extremely hurried and agitated. And when
once he had left the house he would not dare to take the risk of
returning, though he would doubtless realize the gravity of the
mistake. And now,” he continued, “would you mind giving us a few
particulars? You have spoken of a great ruby, which your cousin had,
and which seems to be missing.”

“Yes. You shall come to my room and I will tell you about it; but
first let us lay my poor cousin decently on his bed.”

“I think,” said Thorndyke, “the body ought not to be moved until the
police have seen it.”

“Perhaps you are right,” Byramji agreed reluctantly, “though it seems
callous to leave him lying there.” With a sigh he turned to the door,
and Thorndyke followed, carrying the two hats.

“My cousin and I,” said our host, when we were seated in his own large
bed-sitting room, “were both interested in gem-stones. I deal in all
kinds of stones that are found in the East, but Dinanath dealt almost
exclusively in rubies. He was a very fine judge of those beautiful
gems, and he used to make periodical tours in Burma in search of uncut
rubies of unusual size or quality. About four months ago he acquired
at Mogok, in Upper Burma, a magnificent specimen over twenty-eight
carats in weight, perfectly flawless and of the most gorgeous colour.
It had been roughly cut, but my cousin was intending to have it recut
unless he should receive an advantageous offer for it in the
meantime.”

“What would be the value of such a stone?” I asked.

“It is impossible to say. A really fine large ruby of perfect colour
is far, far more valuable than the finest diamond of the same size. It
is the most precious of all gems, with the possible exception of the
emerald. A fine ruby of five carats is worth about three thousand
pounds, but, of course, the value rises out of all proportion with
increasing size. Fifty thousand pounds would be a moderate price for
Dinanath’s ruby.”

During this recital I noticed that Thorndyke, while listening
attentively, was turning the stranger’s hat over in his hands,
narrowly scrutinizing it both inside and outside. As Byramji
concluded, he remarked:

“We shall have to let the police know what has happened, but, as my
friend and I will be called as witnesses, I should like to examine
this hat a little more closely before you hand it over to them. Could
you let me have a small, hard brush? A dry nail-brush would do.”

Our host complied readily--in fact eagerly. Thorndyke’s authoritative,
purposeful manner had clearly impressed him, for he said as he handed
my colleague a new nail-brush: “I thank you for your help and value
it. We must not depend on the police only.”

Accustomed as I was to Thorndyke’s methods, his procedure was not
unexpected, but Mr. Byramji watched him with breathless interest and
no little surprise as, laying a sheet of note-paper on the table, he
brought the hat close to it and brushed firmly but slowly, so that the
dust dislodged should fall on it. As it was not a very well-kept hat,
the yield was considerable, especially when the brush was drawn under
the curl of the brim, and very soon the paper held quite a little
heap. Then Thorndyke folded the paper into a small packet and having
written “outside” on it, put it in his pocket-book.

“Why do you do that?” Mr. Byramji asked. “What will the dust tell
you?”

“Probably nothing,” Thorndyke replied. “But this hat is our only
direct clue to the identity of the man who was with your cousin, and
we must make the most of it. Dust, you know, is only a mass of
fragments detached from surrounding objects. If the objects are
unusual the dust may be quite distinctive. You could easily identify
the hat of a miller or a cement worker.” As he was speaking he
reversed the hat and turned down the leather head-lining, whereupon a
number of strips of folded paper fell down into the crown.

“Ah!” exclaimed Byramji, “perhaps we shall learn something now.”

He picked out the folded slips and began eagerly to open them out, and
we examined them systematically, one by one. But they were singularly
disappointing and uninforming. Mostly they consisted of strips of
newspaper, with one or two circulars, a leaf from a price list of gas
stoves, a portion of a large envelope on which were the remains of an
address which read “--n--don, W.C.,” and a piece of paper, evidently
cut down vertically and bearing the right-hand half of some kind of
list. This read:


 “--el 3 oz. 5 dwts.
 --eep 9½ oz.”


“Can you make anything of this?” I asked, handing the paper to
Thorndyke.

He looked at it reflectively, and answered, as he copied it into his
notebook: “It has, at least, some character. If we consider it with
the other data we should get some sort of hint from it. But these
scraps of paper don’t tell us much. Perhaps their most suggestive
feature is their quantity and the way in which, as you have no doubt
noticed, they were arranged at the sides of the hat. We had better
replace them as we found them for the benefit of the police.”

The nature of the suggestion to which he referred was not very obvious
to me, but the presence of Mr. Byramji rendered discussion
inadvisable; nor was there any opportunity, for we had hardly
reconstituted the hat when we became aware of a number of persons
ascending the stairs, and then we heard the sound of rather peremptory
rapping at the door of the dead man’s room.

Mr. Byramji opened the door and went out on to the landing, where
several persons had collected, including the two servants and a
constable.

“I understand,” said the policeman, “that there is something wrong
here. Is that so?”

“A very terrible thing has happened,” replied Byramji. “But the
doctors can tell you better than I can.” Here he looked appealingly at
Thorndyke, and we both went out and joined him.

“A gentleman--Mr. Dinanath Byramji--has met with his death under
somewhat suspicious circumstances,” said Thorndyke, and, glancing at
the knot of naturally curious persons on the landing, he continued:
“If you will come into the room where the death occurred, I will give
you the facts so far as they are known to us.”

With this he opened the door and entered the room with Mr. Byramji,
the constable, and me. As the door opened, the bystanders craned
forward and a middle-aged woman uttered a cry of horror and followed
us into the room.

“This is dreadful!” she exclaimed, with a shuddering glance at the
corpse. “The servants told me about it when I came in just now and I
sent Albert for the police at once. But what does it mean? You don’t
think poor Mr. Dinanath has been murdered?”

“We had better get the facts, ma’am,” said the constable, drawing out
a large black notebook and laying his helmet on the table. He turned
to Mr. Byramji, who had sunk into a chair and sat, the picture of
grief, gazing at his dead cousin. “Would you kindly tell me what you
know about how it happened?”

Byramji repeated the substance of what he had told us, and when the
constable had taken down his statement, Thorndyke and I gave the few
medical particulars that we could furnish and handed the constable our
cards. Then, having helped to lay the corpse on the bed and cover it
with a sheet, we turned to take our leave.

“You have been very kind,” Mr. Byramji said as he shook our hands
warmly. “I am more than grateful. Perhaps I may be permitted to call
on you and hear if--if you have learned anything fresh,” he concluded
discreetly.

“We shall be pleased to see you,” Thorndyke replied, “and to give you
any help that we can”; and with this we took our departure, watched
inquisitively down the stairs by the boarders and the servants who
still lurked in the vicinity of the chamber of death.

“If the police have no more information than we have,” I remarked as
we walked homeward, “they won’t have much to go on.”

“No,” said Thorndyke. “But you must remember that this crime--as we
are justified in assuming it to be--is not an isolated one. It is the
fourth of practically the same kind within the last six months. I
understand that the police have some kind of information respecting
the presumed criminal, though it can’t be worth much, seeing that no
arrest has been made. But there is some new evidence this time. The
exchange of hats may help the police considerably.”

“In what way? What evidence does it furnish?”

“In the first place it suggests a hurried departure, which seems to
connect the missing man with the crime. Then, he is wearing the dead
man’s hat, and though he is not likely to continue wearing it, it may
be seen and furnish a clue. We know that that hat fits him fairly and
we know its size, so that we know the size of his head. Finally, we
have the man’s own hat.”

“I don’t fancy the police will get much information from that,” said
I.

“Probably not,” he agreed. “Yet it offered one or two interesting
suggestions, as you probably observed.”

“It made no suggestions whatever to me,” said I.

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “I can only recommend you to recall our simple
inspection and consider the significance of what we found.”

This I had to accept as closing the discussion for the time being, and
as I had to make a call at my bookseller’s concerning some reports
that I had left to be bound, I parted from Thorndyke at the corner of
Chichester Rents and left him to pursue his way alone.

My business with the bookseller took me longer than I had expected,
for I had to wait while the lettering on the backs was completed, and
when I arrived at our chambers in King’s Bench Walk, I found Thorndyke
apparently at the final stage of some experiment evidently connected
with our late adventure. The microscope stood on the table with one
slide on the stage and a second one beside it; but Thorndyke had
apparently finished his microscopical researches, for as I entered he
held in his hand a test-tube filled with a smoky-coloured fluid.

“I see that you have been examining the dust from the hat,” said I.
“Does it throw any fresh light on the case?”

“Very little,” he replied. “It is just common dust--assorted fibres
and miscellaneous organic and mineral particles. But there are a
couple of hairs from the inside of the hat--both lightish brown, and
one of the atrophic, note-of-exclamation type that one finds at the
margin of bald patches; and the outside dust shows minute traces of
lead, apparently in the form of oxide. What do you make of that?”

“Perhaps the man is a plumber or a painter,” I suggested.

“Either is possible and worth considering,” he replied; but his tone
made clear to me that this was not his own inference; and a row of
five consecutive Post Office Directories, which I had already noticed
ranged along the end of the table, told me that he had not only formed
a hypothesis on the subject, but had probably either confirmed or
disproved it. For the Post Office Directory was one of Thorndyke’s
favourite books of reference; and the amount of curious and recondite
information that he succeeded in extracting from its matter-of-fact
pages would have surprised no one more than it would the compilers of
the work.

At this moment the sound of footsteps ascending our stairs became
audible. It was late for business callers, but we were not
unaccustomed to late visitors; and a familiar rat-tat of our little
brass knocker seemed to explain the untimely visit.

“That sounds like Superintendent Miller’s knock,” said Thorndyke, as
he strode across the room to open the door. And the Superintendent it
turned out to be. But not alone.

As the door opened, the officer entered with two gentlemen, both
natives of India, and one of whom was our friend Mr. Byramji.

“Perhaps,” said Miller, “I had better look in a little later.”

“Not on my account,” said Byramji. “I have only a few words to say and
there is nothing secret about my business. May I introduce my kinsman,
Mr. Khambata, a student of the Inner Temple?”

Byramji’s companion bowed ceremoniously. “Byramji came to my chambers
just now,” he explained, “to consult me about this dreadful affair,
and he chanced to show me your card. He had not heard of you, but
supposed you to be an ordinary medical practitioner. He did not
realize that he had entertained an angel unawares. But I, who knew of
your great reputation, advised him to put his affairs in your
hands--without prejudice to the official investigations,” Mr. Khambata
added hastily, bowing to the Superintendent.

“And I,” said Mr. Byramji, “instantly decided to act on my kinsman’s
advice. I have come to beg you to leave no stone unturned to secure
the punishment of my cousin’s murderer. Spare no expense. I am a rich
man and my poor cousin’s property will come to me. As to the ruby,
recover it if you can, but it is of no consequence. Vengeance--justice
is what I seek. Deliver this wretch into my hands, or into the hands
of justice, and I give you the ruby or its value, freely--gladly.”

“There is no need,” said Thorndyke, “of such extraordinary inducement.
If you wish me to investigate this case, I will do so and will use
every means at my disposal, without prejudice, as your friend says, to
the proper claims of the officers of the law. But you understand that
I can make no promises. I cannot guarantee success.”

“We understand that,” said Mr. Khambata. “But we know that if you
undertake the case, everything that is possible will be done. And now
we must leave you to your consultation.”

As soon as our clients had gone, Miller rose from his chair with his
hand in his breast pocket. “I dare say, Doctor,” said he, “you can
guess what I have come about. I was sent for to look into this Byramji
case, and I heard from Mr. Byramji that you had been there and that
you had made a minute examination of the missing man’s hat. So have I;
and I don’t mind telling you that I could learn nothing from it.”

“I haven’t learnt much myself,” said Thorndyke.

“But you’ve picked up something,” urged Miller, “if it is only a hint;
and we have just a little clue. There is very small doubt that this is
the same man--‘The New Jersey Sphinx,’ as the papers call him--that
committed those other robberies; and a very difficult type of criminal
he is to get hold of. He is bold, he is wary, he plays a lone hand,
and he sticks at nothing. He has no confederates, and he kills every
time. The American police never got near him but once; and that once
gives us the only clues we have.”

“Finger-prints?” inquired Thorndyke.

“Yes, and very poor ones, too. So rough that you can hardly make out
the pattern. And even those are not absolutely guaranteed to be his;
but in any case, finger-prints are not much use until you’ve got the
man. And there is a photograph of the fellow himself. But it is only a
snapshot, and a poor one at that. All it shows is that he has a mop of
hair and a pointed beard--or at least he had when the photograph was
taken. But for identification purposes it is practically worthless.
Still, there it is; and what I propose is this: we want this man and
so do you; we’ve worked together before and can trust one another. I
am going to lay my cards on the table and ask you to do the same.”

“But, my dear Miller,” said Thorndyke, “I haven’t any cards. I haven’t
a single solid fact.”

The detective was visibly disappointed. Nevertheless, he laid two
photographs on the table and pushed them towards Thorndyke, who
inspected them through his lens and passed them to me.

“The pattern is very indistinct and broken up,” he remarked.

“Yes,” said Miller; “the prints must have been made on a very rough
surface, though you get prints something like those from fitters or
other men who use files and handle rough metal. And now, Doctor, can’t
you give us a lead of any kind?”

Thorndyke reflected a few moments. “I really have not a single real
fact,” said he, “and I am unwilling to make merely speculative
suggestions.”

“Oh, that’s all right,” Miller replied cheerfully. “Give us a start. I
shan’t complain if it comes to nothing.”

“Well,” Thorndyke said reluctantly, “I was thinking of getting a few
particulars as to the various tenants of No. 51, Clifford’s Inn.
Perhaps you could do it more easily and it might be worth your while.”

“Good!” Miller exclaimed gleefully. “He ‘gives to airy nothing a local
habitation and a name.’”

“It is probably the wrong name,” Thorndyke reminded him.

“I don’t care,” said Miller. “But why shouldn’t we go together? It’s
too late to-night, and I can’t manage to-morrow morning. But say
to-morrow afternoon. Two heads are better than one, you know,
especially when the second one is yours. Or perhaps,” he added, with a
glance at me, “three would be better still.”

Thorndyke considered for a moment or two and then looked at me.

“What do you say, Jervis?” he asked.

As my afternoon was unoccupied, I agreed with enthusiasm, being as
curious as the Superintendent to know how Thorndyke had connected this
particular locality with the vanished criminal; and Miller departed in
high spirits with an appointment for the morrow at three o’clock in
the afternoon.

For some time after the Superintendent’s departure I sat wrapped in
profound meditation. In some mysterious way the address, 51,
Clifford’s Inn, had emerged from the formless data yielded by the
derelict hat. But what had been the connection? Apparently the
fragment of the addressed envelope had furnished the clue. But how had
Thorndyke extended “----n” into “51, Clifford’s Inn”? It was to me a
complete mystery.

Meanwhile, Thorndyke had seated himself at the writing table, and I
noticed that of the two letters which he wrote, one was written on our
headed paper and the other on ordinary plain notepaper. I was
speculating on the reason for this when he rose, and as he stuck on
the stamps, said to me, “I am just going out to post these two
letters. Do you care for a short stroll through the leafy shades of
Fleet Street? The evening is still young.”

“The rural solitudes of Fleet Street attract me at all hours,” I
replied, fetching my hat from the adjoining office; and we accordingly
sallied forth together, strolling up King’s Bench Walk and emerging
into Fleet Street by way of Mitre Court. When Thorndyke had dropped
his letters into the post office box he stood awhile gazing up at the
tower of St. Dunstan’s Church.

“Have you ever been in Clifford’s Inn, Jervis?” he inquired.

“Never,” I replied (we passed through it together on an average a
dozen times a week), “but it is not too late for an exploratory
visit.”

We crossed the road, and entering Clifford’s Inn Passage, passed
through the still half-open gate, crossed the outer court and threaded
the tunnel-like entry by the hall to the inner court, near the middle
of which Thorndyke halted, and looking up at one of the ancient
houses, remarked, “No. 51.”

“So that is where our friend hangs out his flag,” said I.

“Oh, come, Jervis,” he protested, “I am surprised at you; you are as
bad as Miller. I have merely suggested a possible connection between
these premises and the hat that was left at Bedford Place. As to the
nature of that connection I have no idea, and there may be no
connection at all. I assure you, Jervis, that I am on the thinnest
possible ice. I am working on a hypothesis which is in the highest
degree speculative, and I should not have given Miller a hint, but
that he was so eager and so willing to help--and also that I wanted
his finger-prints. But we are really only at the beginning, and may
never get any farther.”

I looked up at the old house. It was all in darkness excepting the top
floor, where a couple of lighted windows showed the shadow of a man
moving rapidly about the room. We crossed to the entry and inspected
the names painted on the door-posts. The ground floor was occupied by
a firm of photoengravers, the first floor by a Mr. Carrington, whose
name stood out conspicuously on its oblong of comparatively fresh
white paint, while the tenants of the second floor--old residents, to
judge by the faded and discoloured paint in which their names were
announced--were Messrs. Burt & Highley, metallurgists.

“Burt has departed,” said Thorndyke, as I read out the names; and he
pointed to two red lines of erasure which I had not noticed in the dim
light, “so the active gentleman above is presumably Mr. Highley, and
we may take it that he has residential as well as business premises. I
wonder who and what Mr. Carrington is--but I dare say we shall find
out to-morrow.”

With this he dismissed the professional aspects of Clifford’s Inn, and
changing the subject to its history and associations, chatted in his
inimitable, picturesque manner until our leisurely perambulations
brought us at length to the Inner Temple Gate.

On the following morning we bustled through our work in order to leave
the afternoon free, making several joint visits to solicitors from
whom we were taking instructions. Returning from the last of these--a
City lawyer--Thorndyke turned into St. Helen’s Place and halted at a
doorway bearing the brass plate of a firm of assayists and refiners. I
followed him into the outer office where, on his mentioning his name,
an elderly man came to the counter.

“Mr. Grayson has put out some specimens for you, sir,” said he. “They
are about thirty grains to the ton--you said that the content was of
no importance--and I am to tell you that you need not return them.
They are not worth treating.” He went to a large safe from which he
took a canvas bag, and returning to the counter, turned out on it the
contents of the bag, consisting of about a dozen good-sized lumps of
quartz and a glittering yellow fragment, which Thorndyke picked out
and dropped in his pocket.

“Will that collection do?” our friend inquired.

“It will answer my purpose perfectly,” Thorndyke replied, and when the
specimens had been replaced in the bag, and the latter deposited in
Thorndyke’s handbag, my colleague thanked the assistant and we went on
our way.

“We extend our activities into the domain of mineralogy,” I remarked.

Thorndyke smiled an inscrutable smile. “We also employ the suction
pump as an instrument of research,” he observed. “However, the
strategic uses of chunks of quartz--otherwise than as missiles--will
develop themselves in due course, and the interval may be used for
reflection.”

It was. But my reflections brought no solution. I noticed, however,
that when at three o’clock we set forth in company with the
Superintendent, the bag went with us; and having offered to carry it
and having had my offer accepted with a sly twinkle, its weight
assured me that the quartz was still inside.

“Chambers and Offices to let,” Thorndyke read aloud as we approached
the porter’s lodge. “That lets us in, I think. And the porter knows
Dr. Jervis and me by sight, so he will talk more freely.”

“He doesn’t know me,” said the Superintendent, “but I’ll keep in the
background, all the same.”

A pull at the bell brought out a clerical-looking man in a tall hat
and a frock coat, who regarded Thorndyke and me through his spectacles
with an amiable air of recognition.

“Good afternoon, Mr. Larkin,” said Thorndyke. “I am asked to get
particulars of vacant chambers. What have you got to let?”

Mr. Larkin reflected. “Let me see. There’s a ground floor at No.
5--rather dark--and a small second-pair set at No. 12. And then there
is--oh, yes, there is a good first floor set at No. 51. They wouldn’t
have been vacant until Michaelmas, but Mr. Carrington, the tenant, has
had to go abroad suddenly. I had a letter from him this morning,
enclosing the key. Funny letter, too.” He dived into his pocket, and
hauling out a bundle of letters, selected one and handed it to
Thorndyke with a broad smile.

Thorndyke glanced at the postmark (“London, E.”), and having taken out
the key, extracted the letter, which he opened and held so that Miller
and I could see it. The paper bore the printed heading, “Baltic
Shipping Company, Wapping,” and the further written heading, “S.S.
_Gothenburg_,” and the letter was brief and to the point:


 _Dear Sir,_

 _I am giving up my chambers at No._ 51, _as I have been suddenly
 called abroad. I enclose the key, but am not troubling you with the
 rent. The sale of my costly furniture will more than cover it, and the
 surplus can be expended on painting the garden railings._

                                          _Yours sincerely,
                                          A. Carrington._


Thorndyke smilingly replaced the letter and the key in the envelope
and asked:

“What is the furniture like?”

“You’ll see,” chuckled the porter, “if you care to look at the rooms.
And I think they might suit. They’re a good set.”

“Quiet?”

“Yes, pretty quiet. There’s a metallurgist overhead--Highley--used to
be Burt & Highley, but Burt has gone to the City, and I don’t think
Highley does much business now.”

“Let me see,” said Thorndyke, “I think I used to meet Highley
sometimes--a tall, dark man, isn’t he?”

“No, that would be Burt. Highley is a little, fairish man, rather
bald, with a pretty rich complexion”--here Mr. Larkin tapped his nose
knowingly and raised his little finger--“which may account for the
falling off of business.”

“Hadn’t we better have a look at the rooms?” Miller interrupted a
little impatiently.

“Can we see them, Mr. Larkin?” asked Thorndyke.

“Certainly,” was the reply. “You’ve got the key. Let me have it when
you’ve seen the rooms; and whatever you do,” he added with a broad
grin, “be careful of the furniture.”

“It looks,” the Superintendent remarked as we crossed the inner court,
“as if Mr. Carrington had done a mizzle. That’s hopeful. And I see,”
he continued, glancing at the fresh paint on the door-post as we
passed through the entry, “that he hasn’t been here long. That’s
hopeful, too.”

We ascended to the first floor, and as Thorndyke unlocked and threw
open the door, Miller laughed aloud. The “costly furniture” consisted
of a small kitchen table, a Windsor chair and a dilapidated
deck-chair. The kitchen contained a gas ring, a small saucepan and a
frying-pan, and the bedroom was furnished with a camp-bed devoid of
bed-clothes, a washhand basin on a packing case, and a water can.

“Hallo!” exclaimed the Superintendent. “He’s left a hat behind. Quite
a good hat, too.” He took it down from the peg, glanced at its
exterior and then, turning it over, looked inside. And then his mouth
opened with a jerk.

“Great Solomon Eagle!” he gasped. “Do you see, Doctor? It’s _the_
hat.”

He held it out to us, and sure enough on the white silk lining of the
crown were the embossed, gilt letters, D.B., just as Mr. Byramji had
described them.

“Yes,” Thorndyke agreed, as the Superintendent snatched up a
greengrocer’s paper bag from the kitchen floor and persuaded the hat
into it, “it is undoubtedly the missing link. But what are you going
to do now?”

“Do!” exclaimed Miller. “Why, I am going to collar the man. These
Baltic boats put in at Hull and Newcastle--perhaps he didn’t know
that--and they are pretty slow boats, too. I shall wire to Newcastle
to have the ship detained and take Inspector Badger down to make the
arrest. I’ll leave you to explain to the porter, and I owe you a
thousand thanks for your valuable tip.”

With this he bustled away, clasping the precious hat, and from the
window we saw him hurry across the court and dart out through the
postern into Fetter Lane.

“I think Miller was rather precipitate,” said Thorndyke. “He should
have got a description of the man and some further particulars.”

“Yes,” said I. “Miller had much better have waited until you had
finished with Mr. Larkin. But you can get some more particulars when
we take back the key.”

“We shall get more information from the gentleman who lives on the
floor above, and I think we will go up and interview him now. I wrote
to him last night and made a metallurgical appointment, signing myself
W. Polton. Your name, if he should ask, is Stevenson.”

As we ascended the stairs to the next floor, I meditated on the rather
tortuous proceedings of my usually straightforward colleague. The use
of the lumps of quartz was now obvious; but why these mysterious
tactics? And why, before knocking at the door, did Thorndyke carefully
take the reading of the gas meter on the landing?

The door was opened in response to our knock by a shortish,
alert-looking, clean-shaved man in a white overall, who looked at us
keenly and rather forbiddingly. But Thorndyke was geniality
personified.

“How do you do, Mr. Highley?” said he, holding out his hand, which the
metallurgist shook coolly. “You got my letter, I suppose?”

“Yes. But I am not Mr. Highley. He’s away and I am carrying on. I
think of taking over his business, if there is any to take over. My
name is Sherwood. Have you got the samples?”

Thorndyke produced the canvas bag, which Mr. Sherwood took from him
and emptied out on a bench, picking up the lumps of quartz one by one
and examining them closely. Meanwhile Thorndyke took a rapid survey of
the premises. Against the wall were two cupel furnaces and a third
larger furnace like a small pottery kiln. On a set of narrow shelves
were several rows of bone-ash cupels, looking like little white
flower-pots, and near them was the cupel-press--an appliance into
which powdered bone-ash was fed and compressed by a plunger to form
the cupels--while by the side of the press was a tub of bone-ash--a
good deal coarser, I noticed, than the usual fine powder. This
coarseness was also observed by Thorndyke, who edged up to the tub and
dipped his hand into the ash and then wiped his fingers on his
handkerchief.

“This stuff doesn’t seem to contain much gold,” said Mr. Sherwood.
“But we shall see when we make the assay.”

“What do you think of this?” asked Thorndyke, taking from his pocket
the small lump of glittering, golden-looking mineral that he had
picked out at the assayist’s. Mr. Sherwood took it from him and
examined it closely. “This looks more hopeful,” said he; “rather rich,
in fact.”

Thorndyke received this statement with an unmoved countenance; but as
for me, I stared at Mr. Sherwood in amazement. For this lump of
glittering mineral was simply a fragment of common iron pyrites! It
would not have deceived a schoolboy, much less a metallurgist.

Still holding the specimen, and taking a watchmaker’s lens from a
shelf, Mr. Sherwood moved over to the window. Simultaneously,
Thorndyke stepped softly to the cupel shelves and quickly ran his eye
along the rows of cupels. Presently he paused at one, examined it more
closely, and then, taking it from the shelf, began to pick at it with
his finger-nail.

At this moment Mr. Sherwood turned and observed him; and instantly
there flashed into the metallurgist’s face an expression of mingled
anger and alarm.

“Put that down!” he commanded peremptorily, and then, as Thorndyke
continued to scrape with his finger-nail, he shouted furiously, “Do
you hear? Drop it!”

Thorndyke took him literally at his word and let the cupel fall on the
floor, when it shattered into innumerable fragments, of which one of
the largest separated itself from the rest. Thorndyke pounced upon it
and in an instantaneous glance as he picked it up, I recognized it as
a calcined tooth.

Then followed a few moments of weird, dramatic silence. Thorndyke,
holding the tooth between his finger and thumb, looked steadily into
the eyes of the metallurgist; and the latter, pallid as a corpse,
glared at Thorndyke and furtively unbuttoned his overall.

Suddenly the silence broke into a tumult as bewildering as the crash
of a railway collision. Sherwood’s right hand darted under his
overall. Instantly, Thorndyke snatched up another cupel and hurled it
with such truth of aim that it shattered on the metallurgist’s
forehead. And as he flung the missile, he sprang forward, and
delivered a swift upper-cut. There was a thunderous crash, a cloud of
white dust, and an automatic pistol clattered along the floor.

I snatched up the pistol and rushed to my friend’s assistance. But
there was no need. With his great strength and his uncanny skill--to
say nothing of the effects of the knock-out blow--Thorndyke had the
man pinned down immovably.

“See if you can find some cord, Jervis,” he said in a calm, quiet tone
that seemed almost ridiculously out of character with the
circumstances.

There was no difficulty about this, for several corded boxes stood in
a corner of the laboratory. I cut off two lengths, with one of which I
secured the prostrate man’s arms and with the other fastened his knees
and ankles.

“Now,” said Thorndyke, “if you will take charge of his hands, we will
make a preliminary inspection. Let us first see if he wears a belt.”

Unbuttoning the man’s waistcoat, he drew up the shirt, disclosing a
broad, webbing belt furnished with several leather pockets, the
buttoned flaps of which he felt carefully, regardless of the stream of
threats and imprecations that poured from our victim’s swollen lips.
From the front pockets he proceeded to the back, passing an
exploratory hand under the writhing body.

“Ah!” he exclaimed suddenly, “just turn him over, and look out for his
heels.”

We rolled our captive over, and as Thorndyke “skinned the rabbit,” a
central pocket came into view, into which, when he had unbuttoned it,
he inserted his fingers. “Yes,” he continued, “I think this is what we
are looking for.” He withdrew his fingers, between which he held a
small packet of Japanese paper, and with feverish excitement I watched
him open out layer after layer of the soft wrapping. As he turned back
the last fold a wonderful crimson sparkle told me that the “great
ruby” was found.

“There, Jervis,” said Thorndyke, holding the magnificent gem towards
me in the palm of his hand, “look on this beautiful, sinister thing,
charged with untold potentialities of evil--and thank the gods that it
is not yours.”

He wrapped it up again carefully and, having bestowed it in an inner
pocket, said, “And now give me the pistol and run down to the
telegraph office and see if you can stop Miller. I should like him to
have the credit for this.”

I handed him the pistol and made my way out into Fetter Lane and so
down to Fleet Street, where at the post office my urgent message was
sent off to Scotland Yard immediately. In a few minutes the reply came
that Superintendent Miller had not yet left and that he was starting
immediately for Clifford’s Inn. A quarter of an hour later he drove up
in a hansom to the Fetter Lane gate and I conducted him up to the
second floor, where Thorndyke introduced him to his prisoner and
witnessed the official arrest.


“You don’t see how I arrived at it,” said Thorndyke as we walked
homeward after returning the key. “Well, I am not surprised. The
initial evidence was of the weakest; it acquired significance only by
cumulative effect. Let us reconstruct it as it developed.

“The derelict hat was, of course, the starting point. Now the first
thing one noticed was that it appeared to have had more than one
owner. No man would buy a new hat that fitted so badly as to need all
that packing; and the arrangement of the packing suggested a
long-headed man wearing a hat that had belonged to a man with a short
head. Then there were the suggestions offered by the slips of paper.
The fragmentary address referred to a place the name of which ended in
‘n’ and the remainder was evidently ‘London, W.C.’ Now what West
Central place names end in ‘n’? It was not a street, a square or a
court, and Barbican is not in the W.C. district. It was almost
certainly one of the half-dozen surviving Inns of Court or Chancery.
But, of course, it was not necessarily the address of the owner of the
hat.

“The other slip of paper bore the end of a word ending in ‘el,’ and
another word ending in ‘eep,’ and connected with these were quantities
stated in ounces and pennyweights troy weight. But the only persons
who use troy weight are those who deal in precious metals. I inferred
therefore that the ‘el’ was part of ‘lemel,’ and that the ‘eep’ was
part of ‘floor-sweep,’ an inference that was supported by the
respective quantities, three ounces five pennyweights of lemel and
nine and a half ounces of floor-sweep.”

“What is lemel?” I asked.

“It is the trade name for the gold or silver filings that collect in
the ‘skin’ of a jeweller’s bench. Floor-sweep is, of course, the dust
swept up on the floor of a jeweller’s or goldsmith’s workshop. The
lemel is actual metal, though not of uniform fineness, but the ‘sweep’
is a mixture of dirt and metal. Both are saved and sent to the
refiners to have the gold and silver extracted.

“This paper, then, was connected either with a goldsmith or a gold
refiner--who might call himself an assayist or a metallurgist. The
connection was supported by the leaf of a price list of gas stoves. A
metallurgist would be kept well supplied with lists of gas stoves and
furnaces. The traces of lead in the dust from the hat gave us another
straw blowing in the same direction, for gold assayed by the dry
process is fused in the cupel furnace with lead; and as the lead
oxidizes and the oxide is volatile, traces of lead would tend to
appear in the dust deposited in the laboratory.

“The next thing to do was to consult the directory; and when I did so,
I found that there were no goldsmiths in any of the Inns and only one
assayist--Mr. Highley, of Clifford’s Inn. The probabilities,
therefore, slender as they were, pointed to some connection between
this stray hat and Mr. Highley. And this was positively all the
information that we had when we came out this afternoon.

“As soon as we got to Clifford’s Inn, however, the evidence began to
grow like a rolling snowball. First there was Larkin’s contribution;
and then there was the discovery of the missing hat. Now, as soon as I
saw that hat my suspicions fell upon the man upstairs. I felt a
conviction that the hat had been left there purposely and that the
letter to Larkin was just a red herring to create a false trail.
Nevertheless, the presence of that hat completely confirmed the other
evidence. It showed that the apparent connection was a real
connection.”

“But,” I asked, “what made you suspect the man upstairs?”

“My dear Jervis!” he exclaimed. “Consider the facts. That hat was
enough to hang the man who left it there. Can you imagine this astute,
wary villain making such an idiot’s mistake--going away and leaving
the means of his conviction for any one to find? But you are
forgetting that whereas the missing hat was found on the first floor,
the murderer’s hat was connected with the second floor. The evidence
suggested that it was Highley’s hat. And now, before we go on to the
next stage, let me remind you of those finger-prints. Miller thought
that their rough appearance was due to the surface on which they had
been made. But it was not. They were the prints of a person who was
suffering from ichthyosis, palmar psoriasis or some dry dermatitis.

“There is one other point. The man we were looking for was a murderer.
His life was already forfeit. To such a man another murder more or
less is of no consequence. If this man, having laid the false trail,
had determined to take sanctuary in Highley’s rooms, it was probable
that he had already got rid of Highley. And remember that a
metallurgist has unrivalled means of disposing of a body; for not only
is each of his muffle furnaces a miniature crematorium, but the very
residue of a cremated body--bone-ash--is one of the materials of his
trade.

“When we went upstairs, I first took the reading of the gas meter and
ascertained that a large amount of gas had been used recently. Then,
when we entered I took the opportunity to shake hands with Mr.
Sherwood, and immediately I became aware that he suffered from a
rather extreme form of ichthyosis. That was the first point of
verification. Then we discovered that he actually could not
distinguish between iron pyrites and auriferous quartz. He was not a
metallurgist at all. He was a masquerader. Then the bone-ash in the
tub was mixed with fragments of calcined bone, and the cupels all
showed similar fragments. In one of them I could see part of the crown
of a tooth. That was pure luck. But observe that by that time I had
enough evidence to justify an arrest. The tooth served only to bring
the affair to a crisis; and his response to my unspoken accusation
saved us the trouble of further search for confirmatory evidence.”

“What is not quite clear to me,” said I, “is when and why he made away
with Highley. As the body has been completely reduced to bone-ash,
Highley must have been dead at least some days.”

“Undoubtedly,” Thorndyke agreed. “I take it that the course of events
was somewhat like this: The police have been searching eagerly for
this man, and every new crime must have made his position more
unsafe--for a criminal can never be sure that he has not dropped some
clue. It began to be necessary for him to make some arrangements for
leaving the country and meanwhile to have a retreat in case his
whereabouts should chance to be discovered. Highley’s chambers were
admirable for both purposes. Here was a solitary man who seldom had a
visitor, and who would probably not be missed for some considerable
time; and in those chambers were the means of rapidly and completely
disposing of the body. The mere murder would be a negligible detail to
this ruffian.

“I imagine that Highley was done to death at least a week ago, and
that the murderer did not take up his new tenancy until the body was
reduced to ash. With that large furnace in addition to the small ones,
this would not take long. When the new premises were ready, he could
make a sham disappearance to cover his actual flight later; and you
must see how perfectly misleading that sham disappearance was. If the
police had discovered that hat in the empty room only a week later,
they would have been certain that he had escaped to one of the Baltic
ports; and while they were following his supposed tracks, he could
have gone off comfortably via Folkestone or Southampton.”

“Then you think he had only just moved into Highley’s rooms?”

“I should say he moved in last night. The murder of Byramji was
probably planned on some information that the murderer had picked up,
and as soon as it was accomplished he began forthwith to lay down the
false tracks. When he reached his rooms yesterday afternoon, he must
have written the letter to Larkin and gone off at once to the East End
to post it. Then he probably had his bushy hair cut short and shaved
off his beard and moustache--which would render him quite
unrecognizable by Larkin--and moved into Highley’s chambers, from
which he would have quietly sallied forth in a few days’ time to take
his passage to the Continent. It was quite a good plan and but for the
accident of taking the wrong hat, would almost certainly have
succeeded.”

Once every year, on the second of August, there is delivered with
unfailing regularity at No. 5a, King’s Bench Walk, a large box of
carved sandal-wood filled with the choicest Trichinopoly cheroots and
accompanied by an affectionate letter from our late client, Mr.
Byramji. For the second of August is the anniversary of the death (in
the execution shed at Newgate) of Cornelius Barnett, otherwise known
as the “New Jersey Sphinx.”




 IV.
 THE TOUCHSTONE

It happened not uncommonly that the exigencies of practice committed
my friend Thorndyke to investigations that lay more properly within
the province of the police. For problems that had arisen as secondary
consequences of a criminal act could usually not be solved until the
circumstances of that act were fully elucidated, and, incidentally,
the identity of the actor established. Such a problem was that of the
disappearance of James Harewood’s will, a problem that was propounded
to us by our old friend, Mr. Marchmont, when he called on us, by
appointment, with the client of whom he had spoken in his note.

It was just four o’clock when the solicitor arrived at our chambers,
and as I admitted him he ushered in a gentlemanly-looking man of about
thirty-five, whom he introduced as Mr. William Crowhurst.

“I will just stay,” said he, with an approving glance at the
tea-service on the table, “and have a cup of tea with you, and give
you an outline of the case. Then I must run away and leave Mr.
Crowhurst to fill in the details.”

He seated himself in an easy chair within comfortable reach of the
table, and as Thorndyke poured out the tea, he glanced over a few
notes scribbled on a sheet of paper.

“I may say,” he began, stirring his tea thoughtfully, “that this is a
forlorn hope. I have brought the case to you, but I have not the
slightest expectation that you will be able to help us.”

“A very wholesome frame of mind,” Thorndyke commented with a smile. “I
hope it is that of your client also.”

“It is indeed,” said Mr. Crowhurst; “in fact, it seems to me a waste
of your time to go into the matter. Probably you will think so too,
when you have heard the particulars.”

“Well, let us hear the particulars,” said Thorndyke. “A forlorn hope
has, at least, the stimulating quality of difficulty. Let us have your
outline sketch, Marchmont.”

The solicitor, having emptied his cup and pushed it towards the tray
for replenishment, glanced at his notes and began:

“The simplest way in which to present the problem is to give a brief
recital of the events that have given rise to it, which are these: The
day before yesterday--that is last Monday--at a quarter to two in the
afternoon, Mr. James Harewood executed a will at his house at
Merbridge, which is about two miles from Welsbury. There were present
four persons: two of his servants, who signed as witnesses, and the
two principal beneficiaries--Mr. Arthur Baxfield, a nephew of the
testator, and our friend here, Mr. William Crowhurst. The will was a
holograph written on the two pages of a sheet of letter-paper. When
the witnesses signed, the will was covered by another sheet of paper
so that only the space for the signatures was exposed. Neither of the
witnesses read the will, nor did either of the beneficiaries; and so
far as I am aware, no one but the testator knew what were its actual
provisions, though, after the servants had left the room, Mr. Harewood
explained its general purport to the beneficiaries.”

“And what was its general purport?” Thorndyke asked.

“Broadly speaking,” replied Marchmont, “it divided the estate in two
very unequal portions between Mr. Baxfield and Mr. Crowhurst. There
were certain small legacies of which neither the amounts nor the names
of the legatees are known. Then, to Baxfield was given a thousand
pounds to enable him either to buy a partnership or to start a small
factory--he is a felt hat manufacturer by trade--and the remainder to
Crowhurst, who was made executor and residuary legatee. But, of
course, the residue of the estate is an unknown quantity, since we
don’t know either the number or the amounts of the legacies.

“Shortly after the signing of the will, the parties separated. Mr.
Harewood folded up the will and put it in a leather wallet which he
slipped into his pocket, stating his intention of taking the will
forthwith to deposit with his lawyer at Welsbury. A few minutes after
his guests had departed, he was seen by one of the servants to leave
the house, and afterwards was seen by a neighbour walking along a
footpath which, after passing through a small wood, joins the main
road about a mile and a quarter from Welsbury. From that time, he was
never again seen alive. He never visited the lawyer, nor did any one
see him at or near Welsbury or elsewhere.

“As he did not return home that night, his housekeeper (he was a
widower and childless) became extremely alarmed, and in the morning
she communicated with the police. A search party was organized, and,
following the path on which he was last seen, explored the wood--which
is known locally as Gilbert’s Copse--and here, at the bottom of an old
chalk-pit, they found him lying dead with a fractured skull and a
dislocated neck. How he came by these injuries is not at present
known; but as the body had been robbed of all valuables, including his
watch, purse, diamond ring and the wallet containing the will, there
is naturally a strong suspicion that he had been murdered. That,
however, is not our immediate concern--at least not mine. I am
concerned with the will, which, as you see, has disappeared, and as it
has presumably been carried away by a thief who is under suspicion of
murder, it is not likely to be returned.”

“It is almost certainly destroyed by this time,” said Mr. Crowhurst.

“That certainly seems probable,” Thorndyke agreed. “But what do you
want me to do? You haven’t come for counsel’s opinion?”

“No,” replied Marchmont. “I am pretty clear about the legal position.
I shall claim, as the will has presumably been destroyed, to have the
testator’s wishes carried out in so far as they are known. But I am
doubtful as to the view the Court may take. It may decide that the
testator’s wishes are not known; that the provisions of the will are
too uncertain to admit of administration.”

“And what would be the effect of that decision?” asked Thorndyke.

“In that case,” said Marchmont, “the entire estate would go to
Baxfield as he is the next of kin, and there was no previous will.”

“And what is it that you want me to do?”

Marchmont chuckled deprecatingly. “You have to pay the penalty of
being a prodigy, Thorndyke. We are asking you to do an
impossibility--but we don’t really expect you to bring it off. We ask
you to help us to recover the will.”

“If the will has been completely destroyed, it can’t be recovered,”
said Thorndyke. “But we don’t know that it has been destroyed. The
matter is, at least, worth investigating; and if you wish me to look
into it, I will.”

The solicitor rose with an air of evident relief. “Thank you,
Thorndyke,” said he. “I expect nothing--at least, I tell myself that I
do--but I can now feel that everything that is possible will be done.
And now I must be off. Crowhurst can give you any details that you
want.”

When Marchmont had gone, Thorndyke turned to our client and asked,
“What do you suppose Baxfield will do, if the will is irretrievably
lost? Will he press his claim as next of kin?”

“I should say yes,” replied Crowhurst. “He is a business man and his
natural claims are greater than mine. He is not likely to refuse what
the law assigns to him as his right. As a matter of fact, I think he
felt that his uncle had treated him unfairly in alienating the
property.”

“Was there any reason for this diversion of the estate?”

“Well,” replied Crowhurst, “Harewood and I had been very good friends
and he was under some obligations to me; and then Baxfield had not
made himself very acceptable to his uncle. But the principal factor, I
think, was a strong tendency of Baxfield’s to gamble. He had lost
quite a lot of money by backing horses, and a careful, thrifty man
like James Harewood doesn’t care to leave his savings to a gambler.
The thousand pounds that he did leave to Baxfield was expressly for
the purpose of investment in a business.”

“Is Baxfield in business now?”

“Not on his own account. He is a sort of foreman or shop-manager in a
factory just outside Welsbury, and I believe he is a good worker and
knows his trade thoroughly.”

“And now,” said Thorndyke, “with regard to Mr. Harewood’s death. The
injuries might, apparently, have been either accidental or homicidal.
What are the probabilities of accident--disregarding the robbery?”

“Very considerable, I should say. It is a most dangerous place. The
footpath runs close beside the edge of a disused chalk-pit with
perpendicular or overhanging sides, and the edge is masked by bushes
and brambles. A careless walker might easily fall over--or be pushed
over, for that matter.”

“Do you know when the inquest is to take place?”

“Yes. The day after to-morrow. I had the subpœna this morning for
Friday afternoon at 2.30, at the Welsbury Town Hall.”

At this moment footsteps were heard hurriedly ascending the stairs and
then came a loud and peremptory rat-tat at our door. I sprang across
to see who our visitor was, and as I flung open the door, Mr.
Marchmont rushed in, breathing heavily and flourishing a newspaper.

“Here is a new development,” he exclaimed. “It doesn’t seem to help us
much, but I thought you had better know about it at once.” He sat
down, and putting on his spectacles, read aloud as follows: “A new and
curious light has been thrown on the mystery of the death of Mr. James
Harewood, whose body was found yesterday in a disused chalk-pit near
Merbridge. It appears that on Monday--the day on which Mr. Harewood
almost certainly was killed--a passenger alighting from a train at
Barwood Junction before it had stopped, slipped and fell between the
train and the platform. He was quickly extricated, and as he had
evidently sustained internal injuries, he was taken to the local
hospital, where he was found to be suffering from a fractured pelvis.
He gave his name as Thomas Fletcher, but refused to give any address,
saying that he had no relatives. This morning he died, and on his
clothes being searched for an address, a parcel, formed of two
handkerchiefs tied up with string, was found in his pocket. When it
was opened it was found to contain five watches, three watch-chains, a
tie-pin and a number of bank-notes. Other pockets contained a quantity
of loose money--gold and silver mixed--and a card of the Welsbury
Races, which were held on Monday. Of the five watches, one has been
identified as the one taken from Mr. Harewood; and the bank-notes have
been identified as a batch handed to him by the cashier of his bank at
Welsbury last Thursday and presumably carried in the leather wallet
which was stolen from his pocket. This wallet, by the way, has also
been found. It was picked up--empty--last night on the railway
embankment just outside Welsbury Station. Appearances thus suggest
that the man, Fletcher, when on his way to the races, encountered Mr.
Harewood in the lonely copse, and murdered and robbed him; or perhaps
found him dead in the chalk-pit and robbed the body--a question that
is now never likely to be solved.”

As Marchmont finished reading, he looked up at Thorndyke. “It doesn’t
help us much, does it?” said he. “As the wallet was found empty, it is
pretty certain that the will has been destroyed.”

“Or perhaps merely thrown away,” said Thorndyke. “In which case an
advertisement offering a substantial reward may bring it to light.”

The solicitor shrugged his shoulders sceptically, but agreed to
publish the advertisement. Then, once more he turned to go; and as Mr.
Crowhurst had no further information to give, he departed with his
lawyer.

For some time after they had gone, Thorndyke sat with his brief notes
before him, silent and deeply reflective. I, too, maintained a
discreet silence, for I knew from long experience that the motionless
pose and quiet, impassive face were the outward signs of a mind in
swift and strenuous action. Instinctively, I gathered that this
apparently chaotic case was being quietly sorted out and arranged in a
logical order; that Thorndyke, like a skilful chess-player, was
“trying over the moves” before he should lay his hand upon the pieces.

Presently he looked up. “Well?” he asked. “What do you think, Jervis?
Is it worth while?”

“That,” I replied, “depends on whether the will is or is not in
existence. If it has been destroyed, an investigation would be a waste
of our time and our client’s money.”

“Yes,” he agreed. “But there is quite a good chance that it has not
been destroyed. It was probably dropped loose into the wallet, and
then might have been picked out and thrown away before the wallet was
examined. But we mustn’t concentrate too much on the will. If we take
up the case--which I am inclined to do--we must ascertain the actual
sequence of events. We have one clear day before the inquest. If we
run down to Merbridge to-morrow and go thoroughly over the ground, and
then go on to Barwood and find out all that we can about the man
Fletcher, we may get some new light from the evidence at the inquest.”

I agreed readily to Thorndyke’s proposal, not that I could see any way
into the case, but I felt a conviction that my colleague had isolated
some leading fact and had a definite line of research in his mind. And
this conviction deepened when, later in the evening, he laid his
research case on the table and rearranged its contents with evident
purpose. I watched curiously the apparatus that he was packing in it
and tried--not very successfully--to infer the nature of the proposed
investigation. The box of powdered paraffin wax and the spirit
blowpipe were obvious enough; but the “dust-aspirator”--a sort of
miniature vacuum cleaner--the portable microscope, the coil of Manila
line, with an eye spliced into one end, and especially the abundance
of blank-labelled microscope slides, all of which I saw him pack in
the case with deliberate care, defeated me utterly.


About ten o’clock on the following morning we stepped from the train
in Welsbury Station, and having recovered our bicycles from the
luggage van, wheeled them through the barrier and mounted. During the
train journey we had both studied the one-inch Ordnance map to such
purpose that we were virtually in familiar surroundings and immune
from the necessity of seeking directions from the natives. As we
cleared the town we glanced up the broad by-road to the left which led
to the race-course; then we rode on briskly for a mile, which brought
us to the spot where the footpath to Merbridge joined the road. Here
we dismounted and, lifting our bicycles over the stile, followed the
path towards a small wood which we could see ahead, crowning a low
hill.

“For such a good path,” Thorndyke remarked as we approached the wood,
“it is singularly unfrequented. I haven’t seen a soul since we left
the road.” He glanced at the map as the path entered the wood, and
when we had walked on a couple of hundred yards, he halted and stood
his bicycle against a tree. “The chalk-pit should be about here,” said
he, “though it is impossible to see.” He grasped a stem of one of the
small bushes that crowded on to the path and pulled it aside. Then he
uttered an exclamation.

“Just look at that, Jervis. It is a positive scandal that a public
path should be left in this condition.”

Certainly Mr. Crowhurst had not exaggerated. It was a most dangerous
place. The parted branches revealed a chasm some thirty feet deep, the
brink of which, masked by the bushes, was but a matter of inches from
the edge of the path.

“We had better go back,” said Thorndyke, “and find the entrance to the
pit, which seems to be to the right. The first thing is to ascertain
exactly where Harewood fell. Then we can come back and examine the
place from above.”

We turned back, and presently found a faint track, which we followed
until, descending steeply, it brought us out into the middle of the
pit. It was evidently an ancient pit, for the sides were blackened by
age, and the floor was occupied by a number of trees, some of
considerable size. Against one of these we leaned our bicycles and
then walked slowly round at the foot of the frowning cliff.

“This seems to be below the path,” said Thorndyke, glancing up at the
grey wall which jutted out above in stages like an inverted flight of
steps. “Somewhere hereabouts we should find some traces of the
tragedy.”

Even as he spoke my eye caught a spot of white on a block of chalk,
and on the freshly fractured surface a significant brownish-red stain.
The block lay opposite the mouth of an artificial cave--an old
wagon-shelter, but now empty--and immediately under a markedly
overhanging part of the cliff.

“This is undoubtedly the place where he fell,” said Thorndyke. “You
can see where the stretcher was placed--an old-pattern stretcher with
wheel-runners--and there is a little spot of broken soil at the top
where he came over. Well, apart from the robbery, a clear fall of over
thirty feet is enough to account for a fractured skull. Will you stay
here, Jervis, while I run up and look at the path?”

He went off towards the entrance, and presently I heard him above,
pulling aside the bushes, and after one or two trials, he appeared
directly overhead.

“There are plenty of footprints on the path,” said he, “but nothing
abnormal. No trampling or signs of a struggle. I am going on a little
farther.”

He withdrew behind the bushes, and I proceeded to inspect the interior
of the cave, noting the smoke-blackened roof and the remains of a
recent fire, which, with a number of rabbit bones and a discarded
tea-boiler of the kind used by the professional tramp, seemed not
without a possible bearing on our investigation. I was thus engaged
when I heard Thorndyke hail me from above, and coming out of the cave,
I saw his head thrust between the branches. He seemed to be lying
down, for his face was nearly on a level with the top of the cliff.

“I want to take an impression,” he called out. “Will you bring up the
paraffin and the blower? And you might bring the coil of line, too.”

I hurried away to the place where our bicycles were standing, and
opening the research case, took out the coil of line, the tin of
paraffin wax and the spirit blowpipe, and having ascertained that the
container of the latter was full, I ran up the incline and made my way
along the path. Some distance along, I found my colleague nearly
hidden in the bushes, lying prone, with his head over the edge of the
cliff.

“You see, Jervis,” he said as I crawled alongside and looked over,
“this is a possible way down, and some one has used it quite recently.
He climbed down with his face to the cliff--you can see the clear
impression of the toe of a boot in the loam on that projection, and
you can even make out the shape of an iron toe-tip. Now the problem is
how to get down to take the impression without dislodging the earth
above it. I think I will secure myself with the line.”

“It is hardly worth the risk of a broken neck,” said I. “Probably the
print is that of some schoolboy.”

“It is a man’s foot,” he replied. “Most likely it has no connection
with our case. But it may have, and as a shower of rain would
obliterate it we ought to secure it.” As he spoke, he passed the end
of the cord through the eye and slipped the loop over his shoulders,
drawing it tight under his arms. Then, having made the line fast to
the butt of a small tree, he cautiously lowered himself over the edge
and climbed down to the projection. As soon as he had a secure
footing, I passed the spare cord through the ring on the lid of the
wax tin and lowered it to him, and when he had unfastened it, I drew
up the cord and in the same way let down the blowpipe. Then I watched
his neat, methodical procedure. First he took out a spoonful of the
powdered, or grated, wax and very delicately sprinkled it on the
toe-print until the latter was evenly but very thinly covered. Next he
lit the blow-lamp, and as soon as the blue flame began to roar from
the pipe, he directed it on to the toe-print. Almost instantly the
powder melted, glazing the impression like a coat of varnish. Then the
flame was removed and the film of wax at once solidified and became
dull and opaque. A second, heavier sprinkling with the powder,
followed by another application of the flame, thickened the film of
wax, and this process, repeated four or five times, eventually
produced a solid cake. Then Thorndyke extinguished the blow-lamp, and
securing it and the tin to the cord, directed me to pull them up. “And
you might send me down the field-glasses,” he added. “There is
something farther down that I can’t quite make out.”

I slipped the glasses from my shoulder, and opening the case, tied the
cord to the leather sling and lowered it down the cliff; and then I
watched with some curiosity as Thorndyke stood on his insecure perch
steadily gazing through the glasses (they were Zeiss 8-prismatics) at
a clump of wallflowers that grew from a boss of chalk about half-way
down. Presently he lowered the glasses and, slinging them round his
neck by their lanyard, turned his attention to the cake of wax. It was
by this time quite solid, and when he had tested it, he lifted it
carefully and placed it in the empty binocular case, when I drew it
up.

“I want you, Jervis,” Thorndyke called up, “to steady the line. I am
going down to that wallflower clump.”

It looked extremely unsafe, but I knew it was useless to protest, so I
hitched the line around a massive stump and took a firm grip of the
“fall.”

“Ready,” I sang out; and forthwith Thorndyke began to creep across the
face of the cliff with feet and hands clinging to almost invisible
projections. Fortunately, there was at this part no overhang, and
though my heart was in my mouth as I watched, I saw him cross the
perilous space in safety. Arrived at the clump, he drew an envelope
from his pocket, stooped and picked up some small object, which he
placed in the envelope, returning the latter to his pocket. Then he
gave me another bad five minutes while he recrossed the nearly
vertical surface to his starting-point; but at length this, too, was
safely accomplished, and when he finally climbed up over the edge and
stood beside me on solid earth, I drew a deep breath and turned to
revile him.

“Well,” I demanded sarcastically, “what have you gathered at the risk
of your neck? Is it samphire or edelweiss?”

He drew the envelope from his pocket, and dipping into it, produced a
cigarette-holder--a cheap bone affair, black and clammy with long
service and still holding the butt of a hand-made cigarette--and
handed it to me. I turned it over, smelled it and hastily handed it
back. “For my part,” said I, “I wouldn’t have risked the cervical
vertebrae of a yellow cat for it. What do you expect to learn from
it?”

“Of course, I expect nothing. We are just collecting facts on the
chance that they may turn out to be relevant. Here, for instance, we
find that a man has descended, within a few yards of where Harewood
fell, by this very inconvenient route, instead of going round to the
entrance to the pit. He must have had some reason for adopting this
undesirable mode of descent. Possibly, he was in a hurry, and probably
he belonged to the district, since a stranger would not know of the
existence of this short cut. Then it seems likely that this was his
cigarette tube. If you look over, you will see by those vertical
scrapes on the chalk that he slipped and must have nearly fallen. At
that moment he probably dropped the tube, for you notice that the
wallflower clump is directly under the marks of his toes.”

“Why do you suppose he did not recover the tube?”

“Because the descent slopes away from the position of the clump, and
he had no trusty Jervis with a stout cord to help him to cross the
space. And if he went down this way because he was hurried, he would
not have time to search for the tube. But if the tube was not his,
still it belonged to somebody who has been here recently.”

“Is there anything that leads you to connect this man with the crime?”

“Nothing but time and place,” he replied. “The man has been down into
the pit close to where Harewood was robbed and possibly murdered, and
as the traces are quite recent, he must have been there near about the
time of the robbery. That is all. I am considering the traces of this
man in particular because there are no traces of any other. But we may
as well have a look at the path, which, as you see, yields good
impressions.”

We walked slowly along the path towards Merbridge, keeping at the
edges and scrutinizing the surface closely. In the shady hollows, the
soft loam bore prints of many feet, and among them we could
distinguish one with an iron toe-tip, but it was nearly obliterated by
another studded with hob-nails.

“We shan’t get much information here,” said Thorndyke as he turned
about. “The search party have trodden out the important prints. Let us
see if we can find out where the man with the toe-tips went to.”

We searched the path on the Welsbury side of the chalk-pit, but found
no trace of him. Then we went into the pit, and having located the
place where he descended, sought for some other exit than the track
leading to the path. Presently, half-way up the slope, we found a
second track, bearing away in the direction of Merbridge. Following
this for some distance, we came to a small hollow at the bottom of
which was a muddy space. And here we both halted abruptly, for in the
damp ground were the clear imprints of a pair of boots which we could
see had, in addition to the toe-tips, half-tips to the heels.

“We had better have wax casts of these,” said Thorndyke, “to compare
with the boots of the man Fletcher. I will do them while you go back
for the bicycles.”

By the time that I returned with the machines two of the footprints
were covered with a cake each of wax, and Thorndyke had left the track
and was peering among the bushes. I inquired what he was looking for.

“It is a forlorn hope, as Marchmont would say,” he replied, “but I am
looking to see if the will has been thrown away here. It was quite
probably jettisoned at once, and this is the most probable route for
the robber to have taken, if he knew of it. You see by the map that it
must lead nearly directly to the race-course, and it avoids both the
path and the main road. While the wax is setting we might as well look
round.”

It seemed a hopeless enough proceeding and I agreed to it without
enthusiasm. Leaving the track on the opposite side to that which
Thorndyke was searching, I wandered among the bushes and the little
open spaces, peering about me and reminding myself of that “aged, aged
man” who


 “Sometimes searched the grassy knolls,
 For wheels of hansom cabs.”


I had worked my way nearly back to where I could see Thorndyke, also
returning, when my glance fell on a small, brown object caught among
the branches of a bush. It was a man’s pigskin purse; and as I picked
it out of the bush I saw that it was open and empty.

With my prize in my hand, I hastened to the spot where Thorndyke was
lifting the wax casts. He looked up and asked, “No luck, I suppose?”

I held out the purse, on which he pounced eagerly. “But this is most
important, Jervis,” he exclaimed. “It is almost certainly Harewood’s
purse. You see the initials, ‘J.H.,’ stamped on the flap. Then we were
right as to the direction that the robber took. And it would pay to
search this place exhaustively for the will, though we can’t do that
now, as we have to go on to Barwood. I wrote to say we were coming. We
had better get back to the path now and make for the road. Barwood is
only half an hour’s run.”

We packed the casts in the research case (which was strapped to
Thorndyke’s bicycle), and turning back, made our way to the path. As
it was still deserted, we ventured to mount, and soon reached the
road, along which we started at a good pace towards Barwood.

Half an hour’s ride brought us into the main street of the little
town, and when we dismounted at the police station we found the Chief
Constable himself waiting to receive us, courteously eager to assist
us, but possessed by a devouring curiosity which was somewhat
inconvenient.

“I have done as you asked me in your letter, sir,” he said.
“Fletcher’s body is, of course, in the mortuary, but I have had all
his clothes and effects brought here; and I have had them put in my
private office, so that you can look them over in comfort.”

“It is exceedingly good of you,” said Thorndyke, “and most helpful.”
He unstrapped the research case, and following the officer into his
sanctum, looked round with deep approval. A large table had been
cleared for the examination, and the dead pickpocket’s clothes and
effects neatly arranged at one end.

Thorndyke’s first proceeding was to pick up the dead man’s boots--a
smart but flimsy pair of light brown leather, rather down at heel and
in need of re-soling. Neither toes nor heels bore any tips or even
nails excepting the small fastening brads. Having exhibited them to me
without remark, Thorndyke placed them on a sheet of white paper and
made a careful tracing of the soles, a proceeding that seemed to
surprise the Chief Constable, for he remarked, “I should hardly have
thought that the question of footprints would arise in this case. You
can’t charge a dead man.”

Thorndyke agreed that this seemed to be true; and then he proceeded to
an operation that fairly made the officer’s eyes bulge. Opening the
research case--into which the officer cast an inquisitive glance--he
took out the dust-aspirator, the nozzle of which he inserted into one
after another of the dead thief’s pockets while I worked the pump.
When he had gone through them all, he opened the receiver and
extracted quite a considerable ball of dusty fluff. Placing this on a
glass slide, he tore it in halves with a pair of mounted needles and
passed one half to me, when we both fell to work “teasing” it out into
an open mesh, portions of which we separated and laid--each in a tiny
pool of glycerine--on blank-labelled glass slides, applying to each
slide its cover-glass and writing on the label, “Dust from Fletcher’s
pockets.”

When the series was complete, Thorndyke brought out the microscope,
and fitting on a one-inch objective, quickly examined the slides, one
after another, and then pushed the microscope to me. So far as I could
see, the dust was just ordinary dust--principally made up of broken
cotton fibres with a few fibres of wool, linen, wood, jute, and others
that I could not name and some undistinguishable mineral particles.
But I made no comment, and resigning the microscope to the Chief
Constable--who glared through it, breathing hard, and remarked that
the dust was “rummy-looking stuff”--watched Thorndyke’s further
proceedings. And very odd proceedings they were.

First he laid the five stolen watches in a row, and with a Coddington
lens minutely examined the dial of each. Then he opened the back of
each in turn and copied into his notebook the watch-repairers’
scratched inscriptions. Next he produced from the case a number of
little vulcanite rods, and laying out five labelled slides, dropped a
tiny drop of glycerine on each, covering it at once with a watch-glass
to protect it from falling dust. Then he stuck a little label on each
watch, wrote a number on it and similarly numbered the five slides.
His next proceeding was to take out the glass of watch No. 1 and pick
up one of the vulcanite rods, which he rubbed briskly on a silk
handkerchief and passed slowly across and around the dial of the
watch, after which he held the rod close to the glycerine on slide No.
1 and tapped it sharply with the blade of his pocket-knife. Then he
dropped a cover-glass on to the glycerine and made a rapid inspection
of the specimen through the microscope.

This operation he repeated on the other four watches, using a fresh
rod for each, and when he had finished he turned to the open-mouthed
officer. “I take it,” said he, “that the watch which has the chain
attached to it is Mr. Harewood’s watch?”

“Yes, sir. That helped us to identify it.”

Thorndyke looked at the watch reflectively. Attached to the bow by a
short length of green tape was a small, rather elaborate key. This my
friend picked up, and taking a fresh mounted needle, inserted it into
the barrel of the key, from which he then withdrew it with a tiny ball
of fluff on its point. I hastily prepared a slide and handed it to
him, when, with a pair of dissecting scissors, he cut off a piece of
the fluff and let it fall into the glycerine. He repeated this
manœuvre with two more slides and then labelled the three, “Key,
outside,” “middle” and “inside,” and in that order examined them under
the microscope.

My own examination of the specimens yielded very little. They all
seemed to be common dust, though that from the face of watch No. 3
contained a few broken fragments of what looked like animal
hairs--possibly cat’s--as also did the key-fluff marked “outside.” But
if this had any significance, I could not guess what it was. As to the
Chief Constable, he clearly looked on the whole proceeding as a sort
of legerdemain with no obvious purpose, for he remarked, as we were
packing up to go, “I am glad I’ve seen how you do it, sir. But all the
same, I think you are flogging a dead horse. We know who committed the
crime and we know he’s beyond the reach of the law.”

“Well,” said Thorndyke, “one must earn one’s fee, you know. I shall
put Fletcher’s boots and the five watches in evidence at the inquest
to-morrow, and I will ask you to leave the labels on the watches.”

With renewed thanks and a hearty handshake he bade the courteous
officer adieu, and we rode off to catch the train to London.

That evening, after dinner, we brought out the specimens and went over
them at our leisure; and Thorndyke added a further specimen by drawing
a knotted piece of twine through the cigarette-holder that he had
salved from the chalk-pit, and teasing out the unsavoury, black
substance that came out on the string in glycerine on a slide. When he
had examined it, he passed it to me. The dark, tarry liquid somewhat
obscured the detail, but I could make out fragments of the same animal
hairs that I had noted in the other specimens, only here they were
much more numerous. I mentioned my observation to Thorndyke. “They are
certainly parts of mammalian hairs,” I said, “and they look like the
hairs of a cat. Are they from a cat?”

“Rabbit,” Thorndyke replied curtly; and even then, I am ashamed to
admit, I did not perceive the drift of the investigation.


The room in the Welsbury Town Hall had filled up some minutes before
the time fixed for the opening of the inquest, and in the interval,
when the jury had retired to view the body in the adjacent mortuary, I
looked round the assembly. Mr. Marchmont and Mr. Crowhurst were
present, and a youngish, horsey-looking man in cord breeches and
leggings, whom I correctly guessed to be Arthur Baxfield. Our friend
the Chief Constable of Barwood was also there, and with him Thorndyke
exchanged a few words in a retired corner. The rest of the company
were strangers.

As soon as the coroner and the jury had taken their places the medical
witness was called. The cause of death, he stated, was dislocation of
the neck, accompanied by a depressed fracture of the skull. The
fracture might have been produced by a blow with a heavy, blunt
weapon, or by the deceased falling on his head. The witness adopted
the latter view, as the dislocation showed that deceased had fallen in
that manner.

The next witness was Mr. Crowhurst, who repeated to the Court what he
had told us, and further stated that on leaving deceased’s house he
went straight home, as he had an appointment with a friend. He was
followed by Baxfield, who gave evidence to the same effect, and stated
that on leaving the house of deceased he went to his place of business
at Welsbury. He was about to retire when Thorndyke rose to
cross-examine.

“At what time did you reach your place of business?” he asked.

The witness hesitated for a few moments and then replied, “Half-past
four.”

“And what time did you leave deceased’s house?”

“Two o’clock,” was the reply.

“What is the distance?”

“In a direct line, about two miles. But I didn’t go direct. I took a
round in the country by Lenfield.”

“That would take you near the race-course on the way back. Did you go
to the races?”

“No. The races were just over when I returned.”

There was a slight pause and then Thorndyke asked, “Do you smoke much,
Mr. Baxfield?”

The witness looked surprised, and so did the jury, but the former
replied, “A fair amount. About fifteen cigarettes a day.”

“What brand of cigarettes do you smoke, and what kind of tobacco is
it?”

“I make my own cigarettes. I make them of shag.”

Here protesting murmurs arose from the jury, and the coroner remarked
stiffly, “These questions do not appear to have much connection with
the subject of this inquiry.”

“You may take it, sir,” replied Thorndyke, “that they have a very
direct bearing on it.” Then, turning to the witness he asked, “Do you
use a cigarette-tube?”

“Sometimes I do,” was the reply.

“Have you lost a cigarette-tube lately?”

The witness directed a startled glance at Thorndyke and replied after
some hesitation, “I believe I mislaid one a little time ago.”

“When and where did you lose that tube?” Thorndyke asked.

“I--I really couldn’t say,” replied Baxfield, turning perceptibly
pale.

Thorndyke opened his dispatch box, and taking out the tube that he had
salved at so much risk, handed it to the witness. “Is that the tube
that you lost?” he asked.

At this question Baxfield turned pale as death, and the hand in which
he received the tube shook as if with a palsy. “It may be,” he
faltered. “I wouldn’t swear to it. It is like the one I lost.”

Thorndyke took it from him and passed it to the coroner. “I am putting
this tube in evidence, sir,” said he. Then, addressing the witness, he
said, “You stated that you did not go to the races. Did you go on the
course or inside the grounds at all?”

Baxfield moistened his lips and replied, “I just went in for a minute
or two, but I didn’t stay. The races were over, and there was a very
rough crowd.”

“While you were in that crowd, Mr. Baxfield, did you have your pocket
picked?”

There was an expectant silence in the Court as Baxfield replied in a
low voice:

“Yes. I lost my watch.”

Again Thorndyke opened the dispatch box, and taking out a watch (it
was the one that had been labelled 3), handed it to the witness. “Is
that the watch that you lost?” he asked.

Baxfield held the watch in his trembling hand and replied
hesitatingly, “I believe it is, but I won’t swear to it.”

There was a pause. Then, in grave, impressive tones, Thorndyke said,
“Now, Mr. Baxfield, I am going to ask you a question which you need
not answer if you consider that by doing so you would prejudice your
position in any way. That question is, When your pocket was picked,
were any articles besides this watch taken from your person? Don’t
hurry. Consider your answer carefully.”

For some moments Baxfield remained silent, regarding Thorndyke with a
wild, affrighted stare. At length he began falteringly, “I don’t
remember missing anything----” and then stopped.

“Could the witness be allowed to sit down, sir?” Thorndyke asked. And
when the permission had been given and a chair placed, Baxfield sat
down heavily and cast a bewildered glance round the Court. “I think,”
he said, addressing Thorndyke, “I had better tell you exactly what
happened and take my chance of the consequences. When I left my
uncle’s house on Monday, I took a circuit through the fields and then
entered Gilbert’s Copse to wait for my uncle and tell him what I
thought of his conduct in leaving the bulk of his property to a
stranger. I struck the path that I knew my uncle would take and walked
along it slowly to meet him. I did meet him--on the path, just above
where he was found--and I began to say what was in my mind. But he
wouldn’t listen. He flew into a rage, and as I was standing in the
middle of the path, he tried to push past me. In doing so he caught
his foot in a bramble and staggered back, then he disappeared through
the bushes and a few seconds after I heard a thud down below. I pulled
the bushes aside and looked down into the chalk-pit, and there I saw
him lying with his head all on one side. Now, I happened to know of a
short cut down into the pit. It was rather a dangerous climb, but I
took it to get down as quickly as possible. It was there that I
dropped the cigarette-tube. When I got to my uncle I could see that he
was dead. His skull was battered and his neck was broken. Then the
devil put into my head the idea of making away with the will. But I
knew that if I took the will only, suspicion would fall on me. So I
took most of his valuables--the wallet, his watch and chain, his purse
and his ring. The purse I emptied and threw away, and flung the ring
after it. I took the will out of the wallet--it had just been dropped
in loose--and put it in an inner pocket. Then I dropped the wallet and
the watch and chain into my outside coat pocket.

“I struck across country, intending to make for the race-course and
drop the things among the crowd, so that they might be picked up and
safely carried away. But when I got there a gang of pickpockets saved
me the trouble; they mobbed and hustled me and cleared my pockets of
everything but my keys and the will.”

“And what has become of the will?” asked Thorndyke.

“I have it here.” He dipped into his breast pocket and produced a
folded paper, which he handed to Thorndyke, who opened it, and having
glanced at it, passed it to the coroner.

That was practically the end of the inquest. The jury decided to
accept Baxfield’s statement and recorded a verdict of “Death by
Misadventure,” leaving Baxfield to be dealt with by the proper
authorities.


“An interesting and eminently satisfactory case,” remarked Thorndyke,
as we sat over a rather late dinner. “Essentially simple, too. The
elucidation turned, as you probably noticed, on a single illuminating
fact.”

“I judged that it was so,” said I, “though the illumination of that
fact has not yet reached me.”

“Well,” said Thorndyke, “let us first take the general aspect of the
case as it was presented by Marchmont. The first thing, of course,
that struck one was that the loss of the will might easily have
converted Baxfield from a minor beneficiary to the sole heir. But even
if the Court agreed to recognize the will, it would have to be guided
by the statements of the only two men to whom its provisions were even
approximately known, and Baxfield could have made any statement he
pleased. It was impossible to ignore the fact that the loss of the
will was very greatly to Baxfield’s advantage.

“When the stolen property was discovered in Fletcher’s possession it
looked, at the first glance, as if the mystery of the crime was
solved. But there were several serious inconsistencies. First, how
came Fletcher to be in this solitary wood, remote from any railway or
even road? He appeared to be a London pickpocket. When he was killed
he was travelling to London by train. It seemed probable that he had
come from London by train to ply his trade at the races. Then, as you
know, criminological experience shows that the habitual criminal is a
rigid specialist. The burglar, the coiner, the pickpocket, each keeps
strictly to his own special line. Now, Fletcher was a pickpocket, and
had evidently been picking pockets on the race-course. The
probabilities were against his being the original robber and in favour
of his having picked the pocket of the person who robbed Harewood. But
if this were so, who was that person? Once more the probabilities
suggested Baxfield. There was the motive, as I have said, and further,
the pocket-picking had apparently taken place on the race-course, and
Baxfield was known to be a frequenter of race-courses. But again, if
Baxfield were the person robbed by Fletcher, then one of the five
watches was probably Baxfield’s watch. Whether it was so or not might
have been very difficult to prove, but here came in the single
illuminating fact that I have spoken of.

“You remember that when Marchmont opened the case he mentioned that
Baxfield was a manufacturer of felt hats, and Crowhurst told us that
he was a sort of foreman or manager of the factory.”

“Yes, I remember, now you speak of it. But what is the bearing of the
fact?”

“My dear Jervis!” exclaimed Thorndyke. “Don’t you see that it gave us
a touchstone? Consider, now. What is a felt hat? It is just a mass of
agglutinated rabbits’ hair. The process of manufacture consists in
blowing a jet of the more or less disintegrated hair on to a revolving
steel cone which is moistened by a spray of an alcoholic solution of
shellac. But, of course, a quantity of the finer and more minute
particles of the broken hairs miss the cone and float about in the
air. The air of the factory is thus charged with the dust of broken
rabbit hairs; and this dust settles on and penetrates the clothing of
the workers. But when clothing becomes charged with dust, that dust
tends to accumulate in the pockets and find its way into the hollows
and interstices of any objects carried in those pockets. Thus, if one
of the five watches was Baxfield’s it would almost certainly show
traces where this characteristic dust had crept under the bezel and
settled on the dial. And so it turned out to be. When I inspected
those five watches through the Coddington lens, on the dial of No. 3
I saw a quantity of dust of this character. The electrified vulcanite
rod picked it all up neatly and transferred it to the slide, and under
the microscope its nature was obvious. The owner of this watch was
therefore, almost certainly, employed in a felt hat factory. But, of
course, it was necessary to show not only the presence of rabbit hair
in this watch, but its absence in the others and in Fletcher’s
pockets, which I did.

“Then with regard to Harewood’s watch. There was no rabbit hair on the
dial, but there was a small quantity on the fluff from the key barrel.
Now, if that rabbit-hair had come from Harewood’s pocket it would have
been uniformly distributed through the fluff. But it was not. It was
confined exclusively to the part of the fluff that was exposed. Thus
it had come from some pocket other than Harewood’s, and the owner of
that pocket was almost certainly employed in a felt hat factory, and
was most probably the owner of watch No. 3.

“Then there was the cigarette-tube. Its bore was loaded with rabbit
hair. But its owner had unquestionably been at the scene of the crime.
There was a clear suggestion that his was the pocket in which the
stolen watch had been carried and that he was the owner of watch No.
3. The problem was to piece this evidence together and prove
definitely who this person was. And that I was able to do by means of
a fresh item of evidence, which I acquired when I saw Baxfield at the
inquest. I suppose you noticed his boots?”

“I am afraid I didn’t,” I had to admit.

“Well, I did. I watched his feet constantly, and when he crossed his
legs I could see that he had iron toe-tips on his boots. That was what
gave me confidence to push the cross-examination.”

“It was certainly a rather daring cross-examination--and rather
irregular, too,” said I.

“It was extremely irregular,” Thorndyke agreed. “The coroner ought not
to have permitted it. But it was all for the best. If the coroner had
disallowed my questions we should have had to take criminal
proceedings against Baxfield, whereas now that we have recovered the
will, it is possible that no one will trouble to prosecute him.”

Which, I subsequently ascertained, is what actually happened.




 V.
 A FISHER OF MEN

“The man,” observed Thorndyke, “who would successfully practice the
scientific detection of crime must take all knowledge for his
province. There is no single fact which may not, in particular
circumstances, acquire a high degree of evidential value; and in such
circumstances, success or failure is determined by the possession or
non-possession of the knowledge wherewith to interpret the
significance of that fact.”

This _obiter dictum_ was thrown off apropos of our investigation of
the case rather magniloquently referred to in the press as “The Blue
Diamond Mystery”; and more particularly of an incident which occurred
in the office of our old friend, Superintendent Miller, at Scotland
Yard. Thorndyke had called to verify the few facts which had been
communicated to him, and having put away his notebook and picked up
his green canvas-covered research case, had risen to take his leave,
when his glance fell on a couple of objects on a side-table--a leather
handbag and a walking-stick, lashed together with string, to which was
attached a descriptive label.

He regarded them for a few moments reflectively and then glanced at
the Superintendent.

“Derelicts?” he inquired, “or jetsam?”

“Jetsam,” the Superintendent replied, “literally jetsam--thrown
overboard to lighten the ship.”

Here Inspector Badger, who had been a party to the conference, looked
up eagerly.

“Yes,” he broke in. “Perhaps the doctor wouldn’t mind having a look at
them. It’s quite a nice little problem, Doctor, and entirely in your
line.”

“What is the problem?” asked Thorndyke.

“It’s just this,” said Badger. “Here is a bag. Now the question is,
Whose bag is it? What sort of person is the owner? Where did he come
from and where has he gone to?”

Thorndyke chuckled. “That seems quite simple,” said he. “A cursory
inspection ought to dispose of trivial details like those. But how did
you come by the bag?”

“The history of the derelicts,” said Miller, “is this: About four
o’clock this morning, a constable on duty in King’s Road, Chelsea, saw
a man walking on the opposite side of the road, carrying a hand-bag.
There was nothing particularly suspicious in this, but still the
constable thought he would cross and have a closer look at him. As he
did so the man quickened his pace and, of course, the constable
quickened his. Then the man broke into a run, and so did the
constable, and a fine, stern chase started. Suddenly the man shot down
a by-street, and as the constable turned the corner he saw his quarry
turn into a sort of alley. Following him into this, and gaining on him
perceptibly, he saw that the alley ended in a rather high wall. When
the fugitive reached the wall he dropped his bag and stick and went
over like a harlequin. The constable went over after him, but not like
a harlequin--he wasn’t dressed for the part. By the time he got over,
into a large garden with a lot of fruit trees in it, my nabs had
disappeared. He traced him by his footprints across the garden to
another wall, and when he climbed over that he found himself in
another by-street. But there was no sign of our agile friend. The
constable ran up and down the street to the next crossings, blowing
his whistle, but of course it was no go. So he went back across the
garden and secured the bag and stick, which were at once sent here for
examination.”

“And no arrest has been made?”

“Well,” replied Miller with a faint grin, “a constable in Oakley
Street who had heard the whistle arrested a man who was carrying a
suspicious-looking object. But he turned out to be a cornet player
coming home from the theatre.”

“Good,” said Thorndyke. “And now let us have a look at the bag, which
I take it has already been examined?”

“Yes, we’ve been through it,” replied Miller, “but everything has been
put back as we found it.”

Thorndyke picked up the bag and proceeded to make a systematic
inspection of its exterior.

“A good bag,” he commented; “quite an expensive one originally, though
it has seen a good deal of service. You noticed the muddy marks on the
bottom?”

“Yes,” said Miller. “Those were probably made when he dropped the bag
to jump over the wall.”

“Possibly,” said Thorndyke, “though they don’t look like street mud.
But we shall probably get more information from the contents.” He
opened the bag, and after a glance at its interior, spread out on the
table a couple of sheets of foolscap from the stationery rack, on
which he began methodically to deposit the contents of the bag,
accompanying the process with a sort of running commentary on their
obvious characteristics.

“Item one: a small leather dressing wallet. Rather shabby, but
originally of excellent quality. It contains two Swedish razors, a
little Washita hone, a diminutive strop, a folding shaving-brush,
which is slightly damp to the fingers and has a scent similar to that
of the stick of shaving soap. You notice that the hone is distinctly
concave in the middle and that the inscription on the razors,
‘Arensburg, Eskilstuna, Sweden,’ is partly ground away. Then there is
a box containing a very dry cake of soap, a little manicure set, a
well-worn toothbrush, a nailbrush, dental-brush, button-hook,
corn-razor, a small clothes-brush and a pair of small hairbrushes. It
seems to me, Badger, that this wallet suggests--mind, I only say
‘suggests’--a pretty complete answer to one of your questions.”

“I don’t see how,” said the Inspector. “Tell us what it suggests to
you.”

“It suggests to me,” replied Thorndyke, laying down the lens through
which he had been inspecting the hairbrushes, “a middle-aged or
elderly man with a shaven upper lip and a beard; a well-preserved,
healthy man, neat, orderly, provident and careful as to his
appearance; a man long habituated to travelling, and--though I don’t
insist on this, but the appearances suggest that he had been living
for some time in a particular household, and that at the time when he
lost the bag, he was changing his residence.”

“He was that,” cackled the Inspector, “if the constable’s account of
the way he went over that wall is to be trusted. But still, I don’t
see how you have arrived at all those facts.”

“Not facts, Badger,” Thorndyke corrected. “I said suggestions. And
those suggestions may be quite misleading. There may be some factor,
such as change of ownership of the wallet, which we have not allowed
for. But, taking the appearances at their face value, that is what
they suggest. There is the wallet itself, for instance--strong,
durable, but shabby with years of wear. And observe that it is a
travelling wallet and would be subjected to wear only during travel.
Then further, as to the time factor, there are the hone and the
razors. It takes a good many years to wear a Washita hone hollow or to
wear away the blade of a Swedish razor until the maker’s mark is
encroached on. The state of health, and to some extent the age, are
suggested by the toothbrush and the dental-brush. He has lost some
teeth, since he wears a plate, but not many; and he is free from
pyorrhea and alveolar absorption. You don’t wear a toothbrush down
like this on half a dozen rickety survivors. But a man whose teeth
will bear hard brushing is probably well-preserved and healthy.”

“You say that he shaves his upper lip but wears a beard,” said the
Inspector. “How do you arrive at that?”

“It is fairly obvious,” replied Thorndyke. “We see that he has razors
and uses them, and we also see that he has a beard.”

“Do we?” exclaimed Badger. “How do we?”

Thorndyke delicately picked a hair from one of the hairbrushes and
held it up. “That is not a scalp hair,” said he. “I should say that it
came from the side of the chin.”

Badger regarded the hair with evident disfavour. “Looks to me,” he
remarked, “as if a small-tooth comb might have been useful.”

“It does,” Thorndyke agreed, “but the appearance is deceptive. This is
what is called a moniliform hair--like a string of beads. But the
bead-like swellings are really parts of the hair. It is a diseased, or
perhaps we should say an abnormal, condition.” He handed me the hair
together with his lens, through which I examined it and easily
recognized the characteristic swellings.

“Yes,” said I, “it is an early case of _trichorrexis nodosa_.”

“Good Lord!” murmured the Inspector. “Sounds like a Russian nobleman.
Is it a common complaint?”

“It is not a rare disease--if you can call it a disease,” I replied,
“but it is a rare condition, taking the population as a whole.”

“It is rather a remarkable coincidence that it should happen to occur
in this particular case,” the Superintendent observed.

“My dear Miller,” exclaimed Thorndyke, “surely your experience must
have impressed on you the astonishing frequency of the unusual and the
utter failure of the mathematical laws of probability in practice.
Believe me, Miller, the Bread-and-butterfly was right. It is the
exceptional that always happens.”

Having discharged this paradox, he once more dived into the bag, and
this time handed out a singular and rather unsavoury-looking parcel,
the outer investment of which was formed by what looked like an
excessively dirty towel, but which, as Thorndyke delicately unrolled
it, was seen to be only half a towel which was supplemented by a still
dirtier and excessively ragged coloured handkerchief. This, too, being
opened out, disclosed an extremely soiled and frayed collar (which,
like the other articles, bore no name or mark), and a mass of grass,
evidently used as packing material.

The Inspector picked up the collar and quoted reflectively, “He is a
man, neat, orderly and careful as to his appearance,” after which he
dropped the collar and ostentatiously wiped his fingers.

Thorndyke smiled grimly but refrained from repartee as he carefully
separated the grass from the contained objects, which turned out to be
a small telescopic jemmy, a jointed auger, a screwdriver and a bunch
of skeleton keys.

“One understands his unwillingness to encounter the constable with
these rather significant objects in his possession,” Thorndyke
remarked. “They would have been difficult to explain away.” He took up
the heap of grass between his hands and gently compressed it to test
its freshness. As he did so a tiny, cigar-shaped object dropped on the
paper.

“What is that?” asked the Superintendent. “It looks like a chrysalis.”

“It isn’t,” said Thorndyke. “It is a shell, a species of Clausilia, I
think.” He picked up the little shell and closely examined its mouth
through his lens. “Yes,” he continued, “it is a Clausilia. Do you
study our British mollusca, Badger?”

“No, I don’t,” the Inspector replied with emphasis.

“Pity,” murmured Thorndyke. “If you did, you would be interested to
learn that the name of this little shell is _Clausilia biplicata_.”

“I don’t care what its beastly name is,” said Badger. “I want to know
whose bag this is; what the owner is like; and where he came from and
where he has gone to. Can you tell us that?”

Thorndyke regarded the Inspector with wooden gravity. “It is all very
obvious,” said he, “very obvious. But still, I think I should like to
fill in a few details before making a definite statement. Yes, I think
I will reserve my judgment until I have considered the matter a little
further.”

The Inspector received this statement with a dubious grin. He was in
somewhat of a dilemma. My colleague was addicted to a certain dry
facetiousness, and was probably “pulling” the Inspector’s “leg.” But,
on the other hand, I knew, and so did both the detectives, that it was
perfectly conceivable that he had actually solved Badger’s problem,
impossible as it seemed, and was holding back his knowledge until he
had seen whither it led.

“Shall we take a glance at the stick?” said he, picking it up as he
spoke and running his eye over its not very distinctive features. It
was a common ash stick, with a crooked handle polished and darkened by
prolonged contact with an apparently ungloved hand, and it was smeared
for about three inches from the tip with a yellowish mud. The iron
shoe of the ferrule was completely worn away and the deficiency had
been made good by driving a steel boot-stud into the exposed end.

“A thrifty gentleman, this,” Thorndyke remarked, pointing to the stud
as he measured the diameter of the ferrule with his pocket
calliper-gauge. “Twenty-three thirty-seconds is the diameter,” he
added, looking gravely at the Inspector. “You had better make a note
of that, Badger.”

The Inspector smiled sourly as Thorndyke laid down the stick, and once
more picking up the little green canvas case that contained his
research outfit, prepared to depart.

“You will hear from us, Miller,” he said, “if we pick up anything that
will be useful to you. And now, Jervis, we must really take ourselves
off.”

As the tinkling hansom bore us down Whitehall towards Waterloo, I
remarked, “Badger half suspects you of having withheld from him some
valuable information in respect of that bag.”

“He does,” Thorndyke agreed with a mischievous smile; “and he doesn’t
in the least suspect me of having given him a most illuminating hint.”

“But did you?” I asked, rapidly reviewing the conversation and
deciding that the facts elicited from the dressing wallet could hardly
be described as hints.

“My learned friend,” he replied, “is pleased to counterfeit
obtuseness. It won’t do, Jervis. I’ve known you too long.”

I grinned with vexation. Evidently I had missed the point of a subtle
demonstration, and I knew that it was useless to ask further
questions; and for the remainder of our journey in the cab I struggled
vainly to recover the “illuminating hint” that the detectives--and
I--had failed to note. Indeed, so preoccupied was I with this problem
that I rather overlooked the fact that the jettisoned bag was really
no concern of ours, and that we were actually engaged in the
investigation of a crime of which, at present, I knew practically
nothing. It was not until we had secured an empty compartment and the
train had begun to move that this suddenly dawned on me; whereupon I
dismissed the bag problem and applied to Thorndyke for details of the
“Brentford Train Mystery.”

“To call it a mystery,” said he, “is a misuse of words. It appears to
be a simple train robbery. The identity of the robber is unknown, but
there is nothing very mysterious in that; and the crime otherwise is
quite commonplace. The circumstances are these: Some time ago, Mr.
Lionel Montague, of the firm, Lyons, Montague & Salaman, art dealers,
bought from a Russian nobleman a very valuable diamond necklace and
pendant. The peculiarity of this necklace was that the stones were all
of a pale blue colour and pretty accurately matched, so that in
addition to the aggregate value of the stones--which were all of large
size and some very large--there was the value of the piece as a whole
due to this uniformity of colour. Mr. Montague gave £70,000 for it,
and considered that he had made an excellent bargain. I should mention
that Montague was the chief buyer for the firm, and that he spent most
of his time travelling about the Continent in search of works of art
and other objects suitable for the purposes of his firm, and that,
naturally, he was an excellent judge of such things. Now, it seems
that he was not satisfied with the settings of this necklace, and as
soon as he had purchased it he handed it over to Messrs. Binks, of Old
Bond Street, to have the settings replaced by others of better design.
Yesterday morning he was notified by Binks that the resetting was
completed, and in the afternoon he called to inspect the work and take
the necklace away if it was satisfactory. The interview between Binks
and Montague took place in a room behind the shop, but it appears that
Montague came out into the shop to get a better light for his
inspection; and Mr. Binks states that as his customer stood facing the
door, examining the new settings, he, Binks, noticed a man standing by
the doorway furtively watching Mr. Montague.”

“There is nothing very remarkable in that,” said I. “If a man stands
at a shop door with a necklace of blue diamonds in his hand, he is
rather likely to attract attention.”

“Yes,” Thorndyke agreed. “But the significance of an antecedent is apt
to be more appreciated after the consequences have developed. Binks is
now very emphatic about the furtive watcher. However, to continue: Mr.
Montague, being satisfied with the new settings, replaced the necklace
in its case, put the latter into his bag--which he had brought with
him from the inner room--and a minute or so later left the shop. That
was about 5 p.m.; and he seems to have gone direct to the flat of his
partner, Mr. Salaman, with whom he had been staying for a fortnight,
at Queen’s Gate. There he remained until about half-past eight, when
he came out accompanied by Mr. Salaman. The latter carried a small
suit-case, while Montague carried a handbag in which was the necklace.
It is not known whether it contained anything else.

“From Queen’s Gate the two men proceeded to Waterloo, walking part of
the way and covering the remainder by omnibus.”

“By omnibus!” I exclaimed, “with seventy thousand pounds worth of
diamonds about them!”

“Yes, it sounds odd. But people who habitually handle portable
property of great value seem to resemble those who habitually handle
explosives. They gradually become unconscious of the risks. At any
rate, that is how they went, and they arrived safely at Waterloo in
time to catch the 9.15 train for Isleworth. Mr. Salaman saw his
partner established in an empty first-class compartment and stayed
with him, chatting, until the train started.

“Mr. Montague’s destination was Isleworth, in which rather unlikely
neighbourhood Mr. Jacob Lowenstein, late of Chicago, and now Berkeley
Square, has a sort of river-side villa with a motor boat-house
attached. Lowenstein had secured the option of purchasing the blue
diamond necklace, and Montague was taking it down to exhibit it and
carry out the deal. He was proposing to stay a few days with
Lowenstein, and then he was proceeding to Brussels on one of his
periodic tours. But he never reached Isleworth. When the train stopped
at Brentford, a porter noticed a suit-case on the luggage-rack of an
apparently empty first-class compartment. He immediately entered to
take possession of it, and was in the act of reaching up to the rack
when his foot came in contact with something soft under the seat.
Considerably startled, he stooped and peered under, when, to his
horror, he perceived the body of a man, quite motionless and
apparently dead. Instantly he darted out and rushed up the platform in
a state of wild panic until he, fortunately, ran against the station
master, with whom and another porter he returned to the compartment.
When they drew the body out from under the seat it was found to be
still breathing, and they proceeded at once to apply such restoratives
as cold water and fresh air, pending the arrival of the police and the
doctor, who had been sent for.

“In a few minutes the police arrived accompanied by the police
surgeon, and the latter, after a brief examination, decided that the
unconscious man was suffering from the effects of a large dose of
chloroform, violently and unskilfully administered, and ordered him to
be carefully removed to a local nursing home. Meanwhile, the police
had been able, by inspecting the contents of his pockets, to identify
him as Mr. Lionel Montague.”

“The diamonds had vanished, of course?” said I.

“Yes. The handbag was not in the compartment, and later an empty
handbag was picked up on the permanent way between Barnes and
Chiswick, which seems to indicate the locality where the robbery took
place.”

“And what is our present objective?”

“We are going, on instructions from Mr. Salaman, to the nursing home
to see what information we can pick up. If Montague has recovered
sufficiently to give an account of the robbery, the police will have
a description of the robber, and there may not be much for us to do.
But you will have noticed that they do not seem to have any
information at Scotland Yard at present, beyond what I have given you.
So there is a chance yet that we may earn our fees.”

Thorndyke’s narrative of this somewhat commonplace crime, with the
discussion which followed it, occupied us until the train stopped at
Brentford Station. A few minutes later we halted in one of the quiet
by-streets of this old-world town, at a soberly painted door on which
was a brass plate inscribed “St. Agnes Nursing Home.” Our arrival had
apparently been observed, for the door was opened by a middle-aged
lady in a nurse’s uniform.

“Dr. Thorndyke?” she inquired; and as my colleague bowed assent she
continued: “Mr. Salaman told me you would probably call. I am afraid I
haven’t very good news for you. The patient is still quite
unconscious.”

“That is rather remarkable,” said Thorndyke.

“It is. Dr. Kingston, who is in charge of the case, is somewhat
puzzled by this prolonged stupor. He is inclined to suspect a
narcotic--possibly a large dose of morphine--in addition to the
effects of the chloroform and the shock.”

“He is probably right,” said I; “and the marvel is that the man is
alive at all after such outrageous treatment.”

“Yes,” Thorndyke agreed. “He must be pretty tough. Shall we be able to
see him?”

“Oh, yes,” the matron replied. “I am instructed to give you every
assistance. Dr. Kingston would like to have your opinion on the case.”

With this she conducted us to a pleasant room on the first floor
where, in a bed placed opposite a large window--purposely left
uncurtained--with the strong light falling full on his face, a man lay
with closed eyes, breathing quietly and showing no sign of
consciousness when we somewhat noisily entered the room. For some time
Thorndyke stood by the bedside, looking down at the unconscious man,
listening to the breathing and noting its frequency by his watch. Then
he felt the pulse, and raising both eyelids, compared the two pupils.

“His condition doesn’t appear alarming,” was his conclusion. “The
breathing is rather shallow, but it is quite regular, and the pulse is
not bad though slow. The contracted pupils strongly suggest opium, or
more probably morphine. But that could easily be settled by a chemical
test. Do you notice the state of the face, Jervis?”

“You mean the chloroform burns? Yes, the handkerchief or pad must have
been saturated. But I was also noticing that he corresponds quite
remarkably with the description you were giving Badger of the owner of
the dressing wallet. He is about the age you mentioned--roughly about
fifty--and he has the same old-fashioned treatment of the beard, the
shaven upper lip and the monkey-fringe under the chin. It is rather an
odd coincidence.”

Thorndyke looked at me keenly. “The coincidence is closer than that,
Jervis. Look at the beard itself.”

He handed me his lens, and, stooping down, I brought it to bear on the
patient’s beard. And then I started back in astonishment; for by the
bright light I could see plainly that a considerable proportion of the
hairs were distinctly moniliform. This man’s beard, too, was affected
by an early stage of _trichorrexis nodosa!_

“Well!” I exclaimed, “this is really an amazing coincidence. I wonder
if it is anything more.”

“I wonder,” said Thorndyke. “Are those Mr. Montague’s things, Matron?”

“Yes,” she replied, turning to the side table on which the patient’s
effects were neatly arranged. “Those are his clothes and the things
which were taken from his pockets, and that is his bag. It was found
on the line and sent on here a couple of hours ago. There is nothing
in it.”

Thorndyke looked over the various objects--keys, card-case,
pocket-book, etc.--that had been turned out of the patient’s pockets,
and then picked up the bag, which he turned over curiously and then
opened to inspect the interior. There was nothing distinctive about
it. It was just a plain, imitation leather bag, fairly new, though
rather the worse for its late vicissitudes, lined with coarse linen to
which two large, wash-leather pockets had been roughly stitched. As he
laid the bag down and picked up his own canvas case, he asked: “What
time did Mr. Salaman come to see the patient?”

“He came here about ten o’clock this morning, and he was not able to
stay more than half an hour as he had an appointment. But he said he
would look in again this evening. You can’t stay to see him, I
suppose?”

“I’m afraid not,” Thorndyke replied; “in fact, we must be off now for
both Dr. Jervis and I have some other matters to attend to.”

“Are you going straight back to the chambers, Jervis?” Thorndyke
asked, as we walked down the main street towards the station.

“Yes,” I replied in some surprise. “Aren’t you?”

“No. I have a little expedition in view.”

“Oh, have you?” I exclaimed, and as I spoke it began to dawn on me
that I had overestimated the importance of my other business.

“Yes,” said Thorndyke; “the fact is that--ha! excuse me one moment,
Jervis.” He had halted abruptly outside a fishing tackle shop and now,
after a brief glance in through the window, entered with an air of
business. I immediately bolted in after him, and was just in time to
hear him demand a fishing rod of a light and inexpensive character.
When this had been supplied he asked for a line and one or two hooks;
and I was a little surprised--and the vendor was positively
scandalized--at his indifference to the quality or character of these
appliances. I believe he would have accepted cod-line and a shark-hook
if they had been offered.

“And now I want a float,” said he.

The shopkeeper produced a tray containing a varied assortment of
floats over which Thorndyke ran a critical eye, and finally reduced
the shopman to stupefaction by selecting a gigantic, pot-bellied,
scarlet-and-green atrocity that looked like a juvenile telegraph buoy.

I could not let this outrage pass without comment. “You must excuse
me, Thorndyke,” I said, “if I venture to point out that the Greenland
whale no longer frequents the upper reaches of the Thames.”

“You mind your own business,” he retorted, stolidly pocketing the
telegraph buoy when he had paid for his purchases. “I like a float
that you can see.”

Here the shopman, recovering somewhat from the shock of surprise,
remarked deferentially that it was a long time since a really large
pike had been caught in the neighbourhood; whereupon Thorndyke
finished him off by replying: “Yes, I’ve no doubt. They don’t use the
right sort of floats, you know. Now, when the pike see my float, they
will just come tumbling over one another to get on the hook.” With
this he tucked the rod under his arm and strolled out, leaving the
shopman breathing hard and staring harder.

“But what on earth,” I asked, as we walked down the street (watched by
the shopman, who had come out on the pavement to see the last of us),
“do you want with such an enormous float? Why, it will be visible a
quarter of a mile away.”

“Exactly,” said Thorndyke. “And what more could a fisher of men
require?”

This rejoinder gave me pause. Evidently Thorndyke had something in
hand of more than common interest; and again it occurred to me that my
own business engagements were of no special urgency. I was about to
mention this fact when Thorndyke again halted--at an oilshop this
time.

“I think I will step in here and get a little burnt umber,” said he.

I followed him into the shop, and while the powder-colour was being
weighed and made up into a little packet I reflected profoundly.
Fishing tackle and burnt umber had no obvious associations. I began to
be mystified and correspondingly inquisitive.

“What do you want the burnt umber for?” I asked as soon as we were
outside.

“To mix with plaster,” he replied readily.

“But why do you want to colour the plaster? And what are you going to
do with it?”

“Now, Jervis,” he admonished with mock severity, “you are not doing
yourself justice. An investigator of your experience shouldn’t ask for
explanations of the obvious.”

“And why,” I continued, “did you want to know if I was going straight
back to the chambers?”

“Because I may want some assistance later. Probably Polton will be
able to do all that I want, but I wished to know that you would both
be within reach of a telegram.”

“But,” I exclaimed, “what nonsense it is to talk of sending a telegram
to me when I’m here!”

“But I may not want any assistance, after all.”

“Well,” I said doggedly, “you are going to have it whether you want it
or not. You’ve got something on and I’m going to be in it.”

“I like your enthusiasm, Jervis,” he chuckled; “but it is quite
possible that I shall merely find a mare’s nest.”

“Very well,” said I. “Then I’ll help you to find it. I’ve had plenty
of experience in that line, to say nothing of my natural gifts. So
lead on.”

He led on, with a resigned smile, to the station, where we were
fortunate enough to find a train just ready to start. But our journey
was not a long one, for at Chiswick Thorndyke got out of the train,
and on leaving the station struck out eastward with a very evident air
of business. As we entered the outskirts of Hammersmith he turned into
a by-street which presently brought us out into Bridge Road. Here he
turned sharply to the right and, at the same brisk pace, crossed
Hammersmith Bridge and made his way to the towing path. As he now
slowed down perceptibly, I ventured to inquire whether this was the
spot on which he proposed to exhibit his super-float.

“This, I think, will be our fishing-ground,” he replied; “but we will
look over it carefully and select a suitable pitch.”

He continued to advance at an easy pace, and I noticed that, according
to his constant habit, he was studying the peculiarities of the
various feet that had trodden the path within the last day or two,
keeping, for this purpose, on the right-hand side, where the shade of
a few pollard willows overhanging an indistinct dry ditch had kept the
ground soft. We had walked on for nearly half a mile when he halted
and looked round.

“I think we had better turn back a little way,” said he. “We seem to
have overshot our mark.”

I made no comment on this rather mysterious observation, and we
retraced our steps for a couple of hundred yards, Thorndyke still
walking on the side farthest from the river and still keeping his eyes
fixed on the ground. Presently he again halted, and looking up and
down the path, of which we were at the moment the only occupants,
placed the canvas case on the ground and unfastened its clasps.

“This, I think, will be our pitch,” said he.

“What are you going to do?” I asked.

“I am going to make one or two casts. And meanwhile you had better get
the fishing rod fixed together so as to divert the attention of any
passers by.”

I proceeded to make ready the fishing tackle, but at the same time
kept a close watch on my colleague’s proceedings. And very curious
proceedings they were. First he dipped up a little water from the
river in the rubber mixing bowl with which he mixed a bowlful of
plaster, and into this he stirred a few pinches of burnt umber,
whereby its dazzling white was changed to a muddy buff. Then, having
looked up and down the path, he stooped and carefully poured the
plaster into a couple of impressions of a walking-stick that were
visible at the edge of the path and finished up by filling a deep
impression of the same stick, at the margin of the ditch, where it had
apparently been stuck in the soft, clayey ground.

As I watched this operation, a sudden suspicion flashed into my mind.
Dropping the fishing rod, I walked quickly along the path until I was
able to pick up another impression of the stick. A very brief
examination of it confirmed my suspicion. At the centre of the little
shallow pit was a semicircular impression--clearly that of a half-worn
boot-stud.

“Why!” I exclaimed, “this is the stick that we saw at Scotland Yard!”

“I should expect it to be and I believe it is,” said Thorndyke. “But
we shall be better able to judge from the casts. Pick up your rod.
There are two men coming down the path.”

He closed his “research case” and drawing the fishing-line from his
pocket, began meditatively to unwind it.

“I could wish,” said I, “that our appearance was more in character
with the part of the rustic angler; and for the Lord’s sake keep that
float out of sight, or we shall collect a crowd.”

Thorndyke laughed softly. “The float,” said he, “was intended for
Polton. He would have loved it. And the crowd would have been rather
an advantage--as you will appreciate when you come to use it.”

The two men--builder’s labourers, apparently--now passed us with a
glance of faint interest at the fishing-tackle; and as they strolled
by, I appreciated the value of the burnt umber. If the casts had been
made of the snow-white plaster they would have stared conspicuously
from the ground and these men would almost certainly have stopped to
examine them and see what we were doing. But the tinted plaster was
practically invisible.

“You are a wonderful man, Thorndyke,” I said, as I announced my
discovery. “You foresee everything.”

He bowed his acknowledgments, and having tenderly felt one of the
casts and ascertained that the plaster had set hard, he lifted it with
infinite care, exhibiting a perfect facsimile of the end of the stick,
on which the worn boot-stud was plainly visible, even to the remains
of the pattern. Any doubt that might have remained as to the identity
of the stick was removed when Thorndyke produced his calliper-gauge.

“Twenty-three thirty-seconds was the diameter, I think,” said he as he
opened the jaws of the gauge and consulted his notes. He placed the
cast between the jaws, and as they were gently slid into contact, the
index marked twenty-three thirty-seconds.

“Good,” said Thorndyke, picking up the other two casts and
establishing their identity with the one which we had examined. “This
completes the first act.” Dropping one cast into his case and throwing
the other two into the river, he continued: “Now we proceed to the
next and hope for a like success. You notice that he stuck his stick
into the ground. Why do you suppose he did that?”

“Presumably to leave his hands free.”

“Yes. And now let us sit down here and consider why he wanted his
hands free. Just look around and tell me what you see.”

I gazed rather hopelessly at the very undistinctive surroundings and
began a bald catalogue. “I see a shabby-looking pollard willow, an
assortment of suburban vegetation, an obsolete tin
saucepan--unserviceable--and a bald spot where somebody seems to have
pulled up a small patch of turf.”

“Yes,” said Thorndyke. “You will also notice a certain amount of dry,
powdered earth distributed rather evenly over the bottom of the ditch.
And your patch of turf was cut round with a large knife before it was
pulled up. Why do you suppose it was pulled up?”

I shook my head. “It’s of no use making mere guesses.”

“Perhaps not,” said he, “though the suggestion is fairly obvious when
considered with the other appearances. Between the roots of the willow
you notice a patch of grass that looks denser than one would expect
from its position. I wonder----”

As he spoke, he reached forward with his stick and prized vigorously
at the edge of the patch, with the result that the clump of grass
lifted bodily; and when I picked it up and tried it on the bald spot,
the nicety with which it fitted left no doubt as to its origin.

“Ha!” I exclaimed, looking at the obviously disturbed earth between
the roots of the willow, which the little patch of turf had covered;
“the plot thickens. Something seems to have been either buried or dug
up there; more probably buried.”

“I hope and believe that my learned friend is correct,” said
Thorndyke, opening his case to abstract a large, powerful spatula.

“What do you expect to find there?” I asked.

“I have a faint hope of finding something wrapped in the half of a
very dirty towel,” was the reply.

“Then you had better find it quickly,” said I, “for there is a man
coming along the path from the Putney direction.”

He looked round at the still distant figure, and driving the spatula
into the loose earth stirred it up vigorously.

“I can feel something,” he said, digging away with powerful thrusts
and scooping the earth out with his hands. Once more he looked round
at the approaching stranger--who seemed now to have quickened his pace
but was still four or five hundred yards distant. Then, thrusting his
hands into the hole, he gave a smart pull. Slowly there came forth a
package, about ten inches by six, enveloped in a portion of a
peculiarly filthy towel and loosely secured with string. Thorndyke
rapidly cast off the string and opened out the towel, disclosing a
handsome morocco case with an engraved gold plate.

I pounced on the case and, pressing the catch, raised the lid; and
though I had expected no less, it was with something like a shock of
surprise that I looked on the glittering row and the dazzling cluster
of steely-blue diamonds.

As I closed the casket and deposited it in the green canvas case,
Thorndyke, after a single glance at the treasure and another along the
path, crammed the towel into the hole and began to sweep the loose
earth in on top of it. The approaching stranger was for the moment
hidden from us by a bend of the path and a near clump of bushes, and
Thorndyke was evidently working to hide all traces before he should
appear. Having filled the hole, he carefully replaced the sod of turf
and then, moving over to the little bare patch from whence the turf
had been removed, he began swiftly to dig it up.

“There,” said he, flinging on the path a worm which he had just
disinterred, “that will explain our activities. You had better
continue the excavation with your pocket-knife, and then proceed to
the capture of the leviathans. I must run up to the police station and
you must keep possession of this pitch. Don’t move away from here on
any account until I come back or send somebody to relieve you. I will
hand you over the float; you’ll want that.” With a malicious smile he
dropped the gaudy monstrosity on the path and having wiped the spatula
and replaced it in the case, picked up the latter and moved away
towards Putney.

At this moment the stranger reappeared, walking as if for a wager, and
I began to peck up the earth with my pocket-knife.

As the man approached he slowed down by degrees until he came up at
something like a saunter. He was followed at a little distance by
Thorndyke, who had turned as if he had changed his mind, and now
passed me with the remark that “Perhaps Hammersmith would be better.”
The stranger cast a suspicious glance at him and then turned his
attention to me.

“Lookin’ for worms?” he inquired, halting and surveying me
inquisitively.

I replied by picking one up (with secret distaste) and holding it
aloft, and he continued, looking wistfully at Thorndyke’s retreating
figure:

“Your pal seems to have had enough.”

“He hadn’t got a rod,” said I; “but he’ll be back presently.”

“Ah!” said he, looking steadily over my shoulder in the direction of
the willow. “Well, you won’t do any good here. The place where they
rises is a quarter of a mile farther down--just round the bend there.
That’s a prime pitch. You just come along with me and I’ll show you.”

“I must stay here until my friend comes back,” said I. “But I’ll tell
him what you say.”

With this I seated myself stolidly on the bank and, having flung the
baited hook into the stream, sat and glared fixedly at the
preposterous float. My acquaintance fidgeted about me uneasily,
endeavouring from time to time to lure me away to the “prime pitch”
round the bend. And so the time dragged on until three-quarters of an
hour had passed.

Suddenly I observed two taxicabs crossing the bridge, followed by
three cyclists. A minute or two later Thorndyke reappeared,
accompanied by two other men, and then the cyclists came into view,
approaching at a rapid pace.

“Seems to be a regular procession,” my friend remarked, viewing the
new arrivals with evident uneasiness. As he spoke, one of the cyclists
halted and dismounted to examine his tyre, while the other two
approached and shot past us. Then they, too, halted and dismounted,
and having deposited their machines in the ditch, came back towards
us. By this time I was able--with a good deal of surprise--to identify
Thorndyke’s two companions as Inspector Badger and Superintendent
Miller. Perhaps my acquaintance also recognized them, or possibly the
proceedings of the third cyclist--who had also laid down his machine
and was approaching on foot--disturbed him. At any rate he glanced
quickly from the one group to the other, and, selecting the smaller
one, sprang suddenly between the two cyclists and sped away along the
path like a hare.

In a moment there was a wild stampede. The three cyclists, remounting
their machines, pedalled furiously after the fugitive, followed by
Badger and Miller on foot. Then the fugitive, the cyclists, and
finally the two officers disappeared round the bend of the path.

“How did you know that he was the man?” I asked, when my colleague and
I were left alone.

“I didn’t, though I had pretty strong grounds for suspicion. But I
merely brought the police to set a watch on the place and arrange an
ambush. Their encircling movement was just an experimental bluff; they
might have been chary of arresting the fellow if he hadn’t taken
fright and bolted. We have been fortunate all round, for, by a lucky
chance, Badger and Miller were at Chiswick making enquiries and I was
able to telephone to them to meet me at the bridge.”

At this moment the procession reappeared, advancing briskly; and my
late adviser marched at the centre securely handcuffed. As he was
conducted past me he glared savagely and made some impolite references
to a “blooming nark.”

“You can take him in one of the taxis,” said Miller, “and put your
bicycles on top.” Then, as the procession moved on towards the bridge
he turned to Thorndyke. “I suppose he’s the right man, Doctor, but he
hasn’t got any of the stuff on him.”

“Of course he hasn’t,” said Thorndyke.

“Well, do you know where it is?”

Thorndyke opened his case and taking out the casket, handed it to the
Superintendent. “I shall want a receipt for it,” said he.

Miller opened the casket, and at the sight of the glittering jewels
both the detectives uttered an exclamation of amazement, and the
Superintendent demanded: “Where did you get this, sir?”

“I dug it up at the foot of that willow.”

“But how did you know it was there?”

“I didn’t,” replied Thorndyke; “but I thought I might as well look,
you know,” and he bestowed a smile of exasperating blandness on the
astonished officer.

The two detectives gazed at Thorndyke, then they looked at one another
and then they looked at me; and Badger observed, with profound
conviction, that it was a “knock-out.” “I believe the doctor keeps a
tame clairvoyant,” he added.

“And may I take it, sir,” said Miller, “that you can establish a
_prima facie_ case against this man, so that we can get a remand until
Mr. Montague is well enough to identify him?”

“You may,” Thorndyke replied. “Let me know when and where he is to be
charged and I will attend and give evidence.”

On this Miller wrote out a receipt for the jewels and the two officers
hurried off to their taxicab, leaving us, as Badger put it, “to our
fishing.”

As soon as they were out of sight, Thorndyke opened his case and mixed
another bowlful of plaster. “We want two more casts,” said he; “one of
the right foot of the man who buried the jewels and one of the right
foot of the prisoner. They are obviously identical, as you can see by
the arrangement of the nails and the shape of the new patch on the
sole. I shall put the casts in evidence and compare them with the
prisoner’s right boot.”

I understood now why Thorndyke had walked away towards Putney and then
returned in rear of the stranger. He had suspected the man and had
wanted to get a look at his footprints. But there was a good deal in
this case that I did not understand at all.


“There,” said Thorndyke, as he deposited the casts, each with its
pencilled identification, in his canvas case, “that is the end of the
Blue Diamond Mystery.”

“I beg your pardon,” said I, “but it isn’t. I want a full explanation.
It is evident that from the house at Brentford you made a bee line to
that willow. You knew then pretty exactly where the necklace was
hidden. For all I know, you may have had that knowledge when we left
Scotland Yard.”

“As a matter of fact, I had,” he replied. “I went to Brentford
principally to verify the ownership of the wallet and the bag.”

“But what was it that directed you with such certainty to the
Hammersmith towing-path?”

It was then that he made the observation that I have quoted at the
beginning of this narrative.

“In this case,” he continued, “a curious fact, well known to
naturalists, acquired vital evidential importance. It associated a
bag, found in one locality, with another apparently unrelated
locality. It was the link that joined up the two ends of a broken
chain. I offered that fact to Inspector Badger, who, lacking the
knowledge wherewith to interpret it, rejected it with scorn.”

“I remember that you gave him the name of that little shell that
dropped out of the handful of grass.”

“Exactly,” said Thorndyke. “That was the crucial fact. It told us
where the handful of grass had been gathered.”

“I can’t imagine how,” said I. “Surely you find shells all over the
country?”

“That is, in general, quite true,” he replied, “but _Clausilia
biplicata_ is one of the rare exceptions. There are four British
species of these queer little univalves (which are so named from the
little spring door with which the entrance of the shell is furnished);
_Clausilia laminata_, _Rolphii_, _rugosa_ and _biplicata_. The first
three species have what we may call a normal distribution, whereas the
distribution of _biplicata_ is abnormal. This seems to be a dying
species. It is in process of becoming extinct in this island. But when
a species of animal or plant becomes extinct, it does not fade away
evenly over the whole of its _habitat_, but it disappears in patches,
which gradually extend, leaving, as it were, islands of survival. This
is what has happened to _Clausilia biplicata_. It has disappeared from
this country with the exception of two localities; one of these is in
Wiltshire, and the other is the right bank of the Thames at
Hammersmith. And this latter locality is extraordinarily restricted.
Walk down a few hundred yards towards Putney, and you have walked out
of its domain; walk up a few hundred yards towards the bridge, and
again you have walked out of its territory. Yet within that little
area it is fairly plentiful. If you know where to look--it lives on
the bark or at the roots of willow trees--you can usually find one or
two specimens. Thus, you see, the presence of that shell associated
the handful of grass with a certain willow tree, and that willow was
either in Wiltshire or by the Hammersmith towing-path. But there was
nothing otherwise to connect it with Wiltshire, whereas there was
something to connect it with Hammersmith. Let us for a moment dismiss
the shell and consider the other suggestions offered by the bag and
stick.

“The bag, as you saw, contained traces of two very different persons.
One was apparently a middle-class man, probably middle-aged or
elderly, cleanly, careful as to his appearance and of orderly habits;
the other, uncleanly, slovenly and apparently a professional criminal.
The bag itself seemed to appertain to the former person. It was an
expensive bag and showed signs of years of careful use. This, and the
circumstances in which it was found, led us to suspect that it was a
stolen bag. Now, we knew that the contents of a bag had been stolen.
We knew that an empty bag had been picked up on the line between
Barnes and Chiswick, and it was probable that the thief had left the
train at the latter station. The empty bag had been assumed to be Mr.
Montague’s, whereas the probabilities--as, for instance, the fact of
its having been thrown out on the line--suggested that it was the
thief’s bag, and that Mr. Montague’s had been taken away with its
contents.

“The point, then, that we had to settle when we left Scotland Yard,
was whether this apparently stolen bag had any connection with the
train robbery. But as soon as we saw Mr. Montague it was evident that
he corresponded exactly with the owner of the dressing-wallet; and
when we saw the bag that had been found on the line--a shoddy,
imitation leather bag--it was practically certain that it was not his,
while the roughly-stitched leather pockets exactly suited to the
dimensions of house-breaking tools, strongly suggested that it was a
burglar’s bag. But if this were so, then Mr. Montague’s bag had been
stolen, and the robber’s effects stuffed into it.

“With this working hypothesis we were now able to take up the case
from the other end. The Scotland Yard bag was Montague’s bag. It had
been taken from Chiswick to the Hammersmith towpath, where--judging
from the clay smears on the bottom--it had been laid on the ground,
presumably close to a willow tree. The use of the grass as packing
suggested that something had been removed from the bag at this
place--something that had wedged the tools together and prevented them
from rattling; and there appeared to be half a towel missing. Clearly,
the towpath was our next field of exploration.

“But, small as this area was geographically, it would have taken a
long time to examine in detail. Here, however, the stick gave us
invaluable aid. It had a perfectly distinctive tip, and it showed
traces of having been stuck about three inches into earth similar to
that on the bag. What we had thus to look for was a hole in the ground
about three inches deep, and having at the bottom the impression of a
half-worn boot-stud. This hole would probably be close to a willow.

“The search turned out even easier than I had hoped. Directly we
reached the towpath I picked up the track of the stick, and not one
track only, but a double track, showing that our friend had returned
to the bridge. All that remained was to follow the track until it came
to an end and there we were pretty certain to find the hole in the
ground, as, in fact, we did.”

“And why,” I asked, “do you suppose he buried the stuff?”

“Probably as a precaution, in case he had been seen and described.
This morning’s papers will have told him that he had not been.
Probably, also, he wanted to make arrangements with a fence and didn’t
want to have the booty about him.”


There is little more to tell. When the case was heard on the following
morning, Thorndyke’s uncannily precise and detailed description of the
course of events, coupled with the production of the stolen property,
so unnerved the prisoner that he pleaded guilty forthwith.

As to Mr. Montague, he recovered completely in a few days, and a
handsome pair of Georgian silver candlesticks may even to this day be
seen on our mantel-piece testifying to his gratitude and appreciation
of Thorndyke’s brilliant conduct of the case.




 VI.
 THE STOLEN INGOTS

“In medico-legal practice,” Thorndyke remarked, “one must be
constantly on one’s guard against the effects of suggestion, whether
intentional or unconscious. When the facts of a case are set forth by
an informant, they are nearly always presented, consciously or
unconsciously, in terms of inference. Certain facts, which appear to
the narrator to be the leading facts, are given with emphasis and in
detail, while other facts, which appear to be subordinate or trivial,
are partially suppressed. But this assessment of evidential value must
never be accepted. The whole case must be considered and each fact
weighed separately, and then it will commonly happen that the leading
fact turns out to be the one that had been passed over as negligible.”

The remark was made apropos of a case, the facts of which had just
been stated to us by Mr. Halethorpe, of the Sphinx Assurance Company.
I did not quite perceive its bearing at the time, but looking back
when the case was concluded, I realized that I had fallen into the
very error against which Thorndyke’s warning should have guarded me.

“I trust,” said Mr. Halethorpe, “that I have not come at an
inconvenient time. You are so tolerant of unusual hours----”

“My practice,” interrupted Thorndyke, “is my recreation, and I welcome
you as one who comes to furnish entertainment. Draw your chair up to
the fire, light a cigar and tell us your story.”

Mr. Halethorpe laughed, but adopted the procedure suggested, and
having settled his toes upon the kerb and selected a cigar from the
box, he opened the subject of his call.

“I don’t quite know what you can do for us,” he began, “as it is
hardly your business to trace lost property, but I thought I would
come and let you know about our difficulty. The fact is that our
company looks like dropping some four thousand pounds, which the
directors won’t like. What has happened is this:

“About two months ago the London House of the Akropong Gold Fields
Company applied to us to insure a parcel of gold bars that were to be
consigned to Minton and Borwell, the big manufacturing jewellers. The
bars were to be shipped at Accra and landed at Bellhaven, which is the
nearest port to Minton and Borwell’s works. Well, we agreed to
underwrite the risk--we have done business with the Akropong people
before--and the matter was settled. The bars were put on board the
_Labadi_ at Accra, and in due course were landed at Bellhaven, where
they were delivered to Minton’s agents. So far, so good. Then came the
catastrophe. The case of bars was put on the train at Bellhaven,
consigned to Anchester, where Mintons have their factory. But the line
doesn’t go to Anchester direct. The junction is at Garbridge, a small
country station close to the river Crouch, and here the case was put
out and locked up in the station-master’s office to wait for the
Anchester train. It seems that the station-master was called away and
detained longer than he had expected, and when the train was signalled
he hurried back in a mighty twitter. However, the case was there all
right, and he personally superintended its removal to the guard’s van
and put it in the guard’s charge. All went well for the rest of the
journey. A member of the firm was waiting at Anchester station with a
closed van. The case was put into it and taken direct to the factory,
where it was opened in the private office--and found to be full of
lead pipe.”

“I presume,” said Thorndyke, “that it was not the original case.”

“No,” replied Halethorpe, “but it was a very fair imitation. The label
and the marks were correct, but the seals were just plain wax.
Evidently the exchange had been made in the station-master’s office,
and it transpires that although the door was securely locked, there
was an unfastened window which opened on to the garden, and there were
plain marks of feet on the flower-bed outside.”

“What time did this happen?” asked Thorndyke.

“The Anchester train came in at a quarter past seven, by which time,
of course, it was quite dark.”

“And when did it happen?”

“The day before yesterday. We heard of it yesterday morning.”

“Are you contesting the claim?”

“We don’t want to. Of course, we could plead negligence, but in that
case I think we should make a claim on the railway company. But,
naturally, we should much rather recover the property. After all, it
can’t be so very far away.”

“I wouldn’t say that,” said Thorndyke. “This was no impromptu theft.
The dummy case was prepared in advance, and evidently by somebody who
knew what the real case was like, and how and when it was to be
despatched from Bellhaven. We must assume that the disposal of the
stolen case has been provided for with similar completeness. How far
is Garbridge from the river?”

“Less than half a mile across the marshes. The
detective-inspector--Badger, I think you know him--asked the same
question.”

“Naturally,” said Thorndyke. “A heavy object like this case is much
more easily and inconspicuously conveyed by water than on land. And
then, see what facilities for concealment a navigable river offers.
The case could be easily stowed away on a small craft, or even in a
boat; or the bars could be taken out and stowed amongst the ballast,
or even, at a pinch, dropped overboard at a marked spot and left until
the hue and cry was over.”

“You are not very encouraging,” Halethorpe remarked gloomily. “I take
it that you don’t much expect that we shall recover those bars.”

“We needn’t despair,” was the reply, “but I want you to understand the
difficulties. The thieves have got away with the booty, and that booty
is an imperishable material which retains its value even if broken up
into unrecognizable fragments. Melted down into small ingots, it would
be impossible to identify.”

“Well,” said Halethorpe, “the police have the matter in
hand--Inspector Badger, of the C.I.D., is in charge of the case--but
our directors would be more satisfied if you would look into it. Of
course we would give you any help we could. What do you say?”

“I am willing to look into the case,” said Thorndyke, “though I don’t
hold out much hope. Could you give me a note to the shipping company
and another to the consignees, Minton and Borwell?”

“Of course I will. I’ll write them now. I have some of our stationery
in my attaché case. But, if you will pardon my saying so, you seem to
be starting your inquiry just where there is nothing to be learned.
The case was stolen after it left the ship and before it reached the
consignees--although their agent had received it from the ship.”

“The point is,” said Thorndyke, “that this was a preconcerted robbery,
and that the thieves possessed special information. That information
must have come either from the ship or from the factory. So, while we
must try to pick up the track of the case itself, we must seek the
beginning of the clue at the two ends--the ship and the factory--from
one of which it must have started.”

“Yes, that’s true,” said Halethorpe. “Well, I’ll write those two notes
and then I must run away; and we’ll hope for the best.”

He wrote the two letters, asking for facilities from the respective
parties, and then took his departure in a somewhat chastened frame of
mind.

“Quite an interesting little problem,” Thorndyke remarked, as
Halethorpe’s footsteps died away on the stairs, “but not much in our
line. It is really a police case--a case for patient and intelligent
inquiry. And that is what we shall have to do--make some careful
inquiries on the spot.”

“Where do you propose to begin?” I asked.

“At the beginning,” he replied. “Bellhaven. I propose that we go down
there to-morrow morning and pick up the thread at that end.”

“What thread?” I demanded. “We know that the package started from
there. What else do you expect to learn?”

“There are several curious possibilities in this case, as you must
have noticed,” he replied. “The question is, whether any of them are
probabilities. That is what I want to settle before we begin a
detailed investigation.”

“For my part,” said I, “I should have supposed that the investigation
would start from the scene of the robbery. But I presume that you have
seen some possibilities that I have overlooked.”

Which eventually turned out to be the case.


“I think,” said Thorndyke as we alighted at Bellhaven on the following
morning, “we had better go first to the Customs and make quite
certain, if we can, that the bars were really in the case when it was
delivered to the consignees’ agents. It won’t do to take it for
granted that the substitution took place at Garbridge, although that
is by far the most probable theory.” Accordingly we made our way to
the harbour, where an obliging mariner directed us to our destination.

At the Custom House we were received by a genial officer, who, when
Thorndyke had explained his connection with the robbery, entered into
the matter with complete sympathy and a quick grasp of the situation.

“I see,” said he. “You want clear evidence that the bars were in the
case when it left here. Well, I think we can satisfy you on that
point. Bullion is not a customable commodity, but it has to be
examined and reported. If it is consigned to the Bank of England or
the Mint, the case is passed through with the seals unbroken, but as
this was a private consignment, the seals will have been broken and
the contents of the case examined. Jeffson, show these gentlemen the
report on the case of gold bars from the _Labadi_.”

“Would it be possible,” Thorndyke asked, “for us to have a few words
with the officer who opened the case? You know the legal partiality
for personal testimony.”

“Of course it would. Jeffson, when these gentlemen have seen the
report, find the officer who signed it and let them have a talk with
him.”

We followed Mr. Jeffson into an adjoining office where he produced the
report and handed it to Thorndyke. The particulars that it gave were
in effect those that would be furnished by the ship’s manifest and the
bill of lading. The case was thirteen inches long by twelve wide and
nine inches deep, outside measurement; and its gross weight was one
hundred and seventeen pounds three ounces, and it contained four bars
of the aggregate weight of one hundred and thirteen pounds two ounces.

“Thank you,” said Thorndyke, handing back the report. “And now can we
see the officer--Mr. Byrne, I think--just to fill in the details?”

“If you will come with me,” replied Mr. Jeffson, “I’ll find him for
you. I expect he is on the wharf.”

We followed our conductor out on to the quay among a litter of cases,
crates and barrels, and eventually, amidst a battalion of Madeira wine
casks, found the officer deep in problems of “content and ullage,” and
other customs mysteries. As Jeffson introduced us, and then discreetly
retired, Mr. Byrne confronted us with a mahogany face and a truculent
blue eye.

“With reference to this bullion,” said Thorndyke, “I understand that
you weighed the bars separately from the case?”

“Oi did,” replied Mr. Byrne.

“Did you weigh each bar separately?”

“Oi did not,” was the concise reply.

“What was the appearance of the bars--I mean as to shape and size?
Were they of the usual type?”

“Oi’ve not had a great deal to do with bullion,” said Mr. Byrne, “but
Oi should say that they were just ordinary gold bars, about nine
inches long by four wide and about two inches deep.”

“Was there much packing material in the case?”

“Very little. The bars were wrapped in thick canvas and jammed into
the case. There wouldn’t be more than about half an inch clearance all
round to allow for the canvas. The case was inch and a half stuff
strengthened with iron bands.”

“Did you seal the case after you had closed it up?”

“Oi did. ’Twas all shipshape when it was passed back to the mate. And
Oi saw him hand it over to the consignees’ agents; so ’twas all in
order when it left the wharf.”

“That was what I wanted to make sure of,” said Thorndyke; and, having
pocketed his notebook and thanked the officer, he turned away among
the wilderness of merchandise.

“So much for the Customs,” said he. “I am glad we went there first. As
you have no doubt observed, we have picked up some useful
information.”

“We have ascertained,” I replied, “that the case was intact when it
was handed over to the consignees’ agents, so that our investigations
at Garbridge will start from a solid basis. And that, I take it, is
all you wanted to know.”

“Not quite all,” he rejoined. “There are one or two little details
that I should like to fill in. I think we will look in on the shipping
agents and present Halethorpe’s note. We may as well learn all we can
before we make our start from the scene of the robbery.”

“Well,” I said. “I don’t see what more there is to learn here. But
apparently you do. That seems to be the office, past those sheds.”

The manager of the shipping agent’s office looked us up and down as he
sat at his littered desk with Halethorpe’s letter in his hand.

“You’ve come about that bullion that was stolen,” he said brusquely.
“Well, it wasn’t stolen here. Hadn’t you better inquire at Garbridge,
where it was?”

“Undoubtedly,” replied Thorndyke. “But I am making certain preliminary
inquiries. Now, first, as to the bill of lading. Who has that--the
original, I mean?”

“The captain has it at present, but I have a copy.”

“Could I see it?” Thorndyke asked.

The manager raised his eyebrows protestingly, but produced the
document from a file and handed it to Thorndyke, watching him
inquisitively as he copied the particulars of the package into his
notebook.

“I suppose,” said Thorndyke as he returned the document, “you have a
copy of the ship’s manifest?”

“Yes,” replied the manager, “but the entry in the manifest is merely a
copy of the particulars given in the bill of lading.”

“I should like to see the manifest, if it is not troubling you too
much.”

“But,” the other protested impatiently, “the manifest contains no
information respecting this parcel of bullion excepting the one entry,
which, as I have told you, has been copied from the bill of lading.”

“I realize that,” said Thorndyke; “but I should like to look over it,
all the same.”

Our friend bounced into an inner office and presently returned with a
voluminous document, which he slapped down on a side-table.

“There, sir,” he said. “That is the manifest. This is the entry
relating to the bullion that you are enquiring about. The rest of the
document is concerned with the cargo, in which I presume you are not
interested.”

In this, however, he was mistaken; for Thorndyke, having verified the
bullion entry, turned the leaves over and began systematically, though
rapidly, to run his eye over the long list from the beginning, a
proceeding that the manager viewed with frenzied impatience.

“If you are going to read it right through, sir,” the latter observed,
“I shall ask you to excuse me. Art is long but life is short,” he
added with a sour smile.

Nevertheless he hovered about uneasily, and when Thorndyke proceeded
to copy some of the entries into his notebook, he craned over and read
them without the least disguise, though not without comment.

“Good God, sir!” he exclaimed. “What possible bearing on this robbery
can that parcel of scrivelloes have? And do you realize that they are
still in the ship’s hold?”

“I inferred that they were, as they are consigned to London,”
Thorndyke replied, drawing his finger down the “description” column
and rapidly scanning the entries in it. The manager watched that
finger, and as it stopped successively at a bag of gum copal, a case
of quartz specimens, a case of six-inch brass screw-bolts, a bag of
beni-seed and a package of kola nuts, he breathed hard and muttered
like an angry parrot. But Thorndyke was quite unmoved. With calm
deliberation he copied out each entry, conscientiously noting the
marks, descriptions of packages and contents, gross and net weight,
dimensions, names of consignors and consignees, ports of shipment and
discharge, and, in fact, the entire particulars. It was certainly an
amazing proceeding, and I could make no more of it than could our
impatient friend.

At last Thorndyke closed and pocketed his note-book, and the manager
heaved a slightly obtrusive sigh. “Is there nothing more, sir?” he
asked. “You don’t want to examine the ship, for instance?” The next
moment, I think, he regretted his sarcasm, for Thorndyke inquired with
evident interest: “Is the ship still here?”

“Yes,” was the unwilling admission. “She finishes unloading here at
midday to-day and will probably haul into the London Docks to-morrow
morning.”

“I don’t think I need go on board,” said Thorndyke, “but you might
give me a card in case I find that I want to.”

The card was somewhat grudgingly produced, and when Thorndyke had
thanked our entertainer for his help, we took our leave and made our
way towards the station.

“Well,” I said, “you have collected a vast amount of curious
information, but I am hanged if I can see that any of it has the
slightest bearing on our inquiry.”

Thorndyke cast on me a look of deep reproach. “Jervis!” he exclaimed,
“you astonish me; you do, indeed. Why, my dear fellow, it stares you
in the face!”

“When you say ‘it,’” I said a little irritably, “you mean----?”

“I mean the leading fact from which we may deduce the _modus operandi_
of this robbery. You shall look over my notes in the train and sort
out the data that we have collected. I think you will find them
extremely illuminating.”

“I doubt it,” said I. “But, meanwhile, aren’t we wasting a good deal
of time? Halethorpe wants to get the gold back; he doesn’t want to
know how the thieves contrived to steal it.”

“That is a very just remark,” answered Thorndyke. “My learned friend
displays his customary robust common sense. Nevertheless, I think that
a clear understanding of the mechanism of this robbery will prove very
helpful to us, though I agree with you that we have spent enough time
on securing our preliminary data. The important thing now is to pick
up a trail from Garbridge. But I see our train is signalled. We had
better hurry.”

As the train rumbled into the station, we looked out for an empty
smoking compartment, and having been fortunate enough to secure one,
we settled ourselves in opposite corners and lighted our pipes. Then
Thorndyke handed me his notebook and as I studied, with wrinkled
brows, the apparently disconnected entries, he sat and observed me
thoughtfully and with the faintest suspicion of a smile. Again and
again I read through those notes with ever-dwindling hopes of
extracting the meaning that “stared me in the face.” Vainly did I
endeavour to connect gum copal, scrivelloes or beni-seed with the
methods of the unknown robbers. The entries in the notebook persisted
obstinately in remaining totally disconnected and hopelessly
irrelevant. At last I shut the book with a savage snap and handed it
back to its owner.

“It’s no use, Thorndyke,” I said. “I can’t see the faintest glimmer of
light.”

“Well,” said he, “it isn’t of much consequence. The practical part of
our task is before us, and it may turn out a pretty difficult part.
But we have got to recover those bars if it is humanly possible. And
here we are at our jumping-off place. This is Garbridge Station--and
I see an old acquaintance of ours on the platform.”

I looked out, as the train slowed down, and there, sure enough, was no
less a person than Inspector Badger of the Criminal Investigation
Department.

“We could have done very well without Badger,” I remarked.

“Yes,” Thorndyke agreed, “but we shall have to take him into
partnership, I expect. After all, we are on his territory and on the
same errand. How do you do, Inspector?” he continued, as the officer,
having observed our descent from the carriage, hurried forward with
unwonted cordiality.

“I rather expected to see you here, sir,” said he. “We heard that Mr.
Halethorpe had consulted you. But this isn’t the London train.”

“No,” said Thorndyke. “We’ve been to Bellhaven, just to make sure that
the bullion was in the case when it started.”

“I could have told you that two days ago,” said Badger. “We got on to
the Customs people at once. That was all plain sailing; but the rest
of it isn’t.”

“No clue as to how the case was taken away?”

“Oh, yes; that is pretty clear. It was hoisted out, and the dummy
hoisted in, through the window of the station-master’s office. And the
same night, two men were seen carrying a heavy package, about the size
of the bullion-case, towards the marshes. But there the clue ends. The
stuff seems to have vanished into thin air. Of course our people are
on the look-out for it in various likely directions, but I am staying
here with a couple of plain-clothes men. I’ve a conviction that it is
still somewhere in this neighbourhood, and I mean to stick here in the
hope that I may spot somebody trying to move it.”

As the inspector was speaking we had been walking slowly from the
station towards the village, which was on the opposite side of the
river. On the bridge Thorndyke halted and looked down the river and
over the wide expanse of marshy country.

“This is an ideal place for a bullion robbery,” he remarked. “A tidal
river near to the sea and a network of creeks, in any one of which one
could hide a boat or sink the booty below tide-marks. Have you heard
of any strange craft having put in here?”

“Yes. There’s a little ramshackle bawley from Leigh--but her crew of
two ragamuffins are not Leigh men. And they’ve made a mess of their
visit--got their craft on the mud on the top of the spring tide. There
she is, on that spit; and there she’ll be till next spring tide. But
I’ve been over her carefully and I’ll swear the stuff isn’t aboard
her. I had all the ballast out and emptied the lazarette and the chain
locker.”

“And what about the barge?”

“She’s a regular trader here. Her crew--the skipper and his son--are
quite respectable men and they belong here. There they go in that
boat; I expect they are off on this tide. But they seem to be making
for the bawley.”

As he spoke the inspector produced a pair of glasses, through which he
watched the movements of the barge’s jolly-boat, and a couple of
elderly fishermen, who were crossing the bridge, halted to look on.
The barge’s boat ran alongside the stranded bawley, and one of the
rowers hailed; whereupon two men tumbled up from the cabin and dropped
into the boat, which immediately pushed off and headed for the barge.

“Them bawley blokes seems to be taking a passage along of old Bill
Somers,” one of the fishermen remarked, levelling a small telescope at
the barge as the boat drew alongside and the four men climbed on
board. “Going to work their passage, too,” he added as the two
passengers proceeded immediately to man the windlass while the crew
let go the brails and hooked the main-sheet block to the traveller.

“Rum go,” commented Badger, glaring at the barge through his glasses;
“but they haven’t taken anything aboard with them. I could see that.”

“You have overhauled the barge, I suppose?” said Thorndyke.

“Yes. Went right through her. Nothing there. She’s light. There was no
place aboard her where you could hide a split-pea.”

“Did you get her anchor up?”

“No,” replied Badger. “I didn’t. I suppose I ought to have done so.
However, they’re getting it up themselves now.” As he spoke, the rapid
clink of a windlass-pawl was borne across the water, and through my
prismatic glasses I could see the two passengers working for all they
were worth at the cranks. Presently the clink of the pawl began to
slow down somewhat and the two bargemen, having got the sails set,
joined the toilers at the windlass, but even then there was no great
increase of speed.

“Anchor seems to come up uncommon heavy,” one of the fishermen
remarked.

“Aye,” the other agreed. “Got foul of an old mooring maybe.”

“Look out for the anchor, Badger,” Thorndyke said in a low voice,
gazing steadily through his binocular. “It is out of the ground. The
cable is up and down and the barge is drifting off on the tide.”

Even as he spoke the ring and stock of the anchor rose slowly out of
the water, and now I could see that a second chain was shackled
loosely to the cable, down which it had slid until it was stopped by
the ring of the anchor. Badger had evidently seen it too, for he
ejaculated, “Hallo!” and added a few verbal flourishes which I need
not repeat. A few more turns of the windlass brought the flukes of the
anchor clear of the water, and dangling against them was an undeniable
wooden case, securely slung with lashings of stout chain. Badger
cursed volubly, and, turning to the fishermen, exclaimed in a rather
offensively peremptory tone:

“I want a boat. Now. This instant.”

The elder piscator regarded him doggedly and replied: “All right. I
ain’t got no objection.”

“Where can I get a boat?” the inspector demanded, nearly purple with
excitement and anxiety.

“Where do you think?” the mariner responded, evidently nettled by the
inspector’s masterful tone. “Pastrycook’s? Or livery stables?”

“Look here,” said Badger. “I’m a police officer and I want to board
that barge, and I am prepared to pay handsomely. Now where can I get a
boat?”

“We’ll put you aboard of her,” replied the fisherman, “that is, if we
can catch her. But I doubt it. She’s off, that’s what she is. And
there’s something queer a-going on aboard of her,” he added in a
somewhat different tone.

There was. I had been observing it. The case had been, with some
difficulty, hoisted on board, and then suddenly there had broken out
an altercation between the two bargees and their passengers, and this
had now developed into what looked like a free fight. It was difficult
to see exactly what was happening, for the barge was drifting rapidly
down the river, and her sails, blowing out first on one side and then
on the other, rather obscured the view. Presently, however, the sails
filled and a man appeared at the wheel; then the barge jibed round,
and with a strong ebb tide and a fresh breeze, very soon began to grow
small in the distance.

Meanwhile the fishermen had bustled off in search of a boat, and the
inspector had raced to the bridgehead, where he stood gesticulating
frantically and blowing his whistle, while Thorndyke continued
placidly to watch the receding barge through his binocular.

“What are we going to do?” I asked, a little surprised at my
colleague’s inaction.

“What can we do?” he asked in reply. “Badger will follow the barge. He
probably won’t overtake her, but he will prevent her from making a
landing until they get out into the estuary, and then he may possibly
get assistance. The chase is in his hands.”

“Are we going with him?”

“I am not. This looks like being an all-night expedition, and I must
be at our chambers to-morrow morning. Besides, the chase is not our
affair. But if you would like to join Badger there is no reason why
you shouldn’t. I can look after the practice.”

“Well,” I said, “I think I should rather like to be in at the death,
if it won’t inconvenience you. But it is possible that they may get
away with the booty.”

“Quite,” he agreed; “and then it would be useful to know exactly how
and where it disappears. Yes, go with them, by all means, and keep a
sharp look-out.”

At this moment Badger returned with the two plain-clothes men whom his
whistle had called from their posts, and simultaneously a boat was
seen approaching the steps by the bridge, rowed by the two fishermen.
The inspector looked at us inquiringly. “Are you coming to see the
sport?” he asked.

“Doctor Jervis would like to come with you,” Thorndyke replied. “I
have to get back to London. But you will be a fair boat-load without
me.”

This appeared to be also the view of the two fishermen, as they
brought up at the steps and observed the four passengers; but they
made no demur beyond inquiring if there were not any more; and when we
had taken our places in the stern sheets, they pushed off and pulled
through the bridge and away down stream. Gradually, the village
receded and the houses and the bridge grew small and more distant,
though they remained visible for a long time over the marshy levels;
and still, as I looked back through my glasses, I could see Thorndyke
on the bridge, watching the pursuit with his binocular to his eyes.

Meanwhile the fugitive barge, having got some two miles start, seemed
to be drawing ahead. But it was only at intervals that we could see
her, for the tide was falling fast and we were mostly hemmed in by the
high, muddy banks. Only when we entered a straight reach of the river
could we see her sails over the land; and every time that she came
into view, she appeared perceptibly smaller.

When the river grew wider, the mast was stepped and a good-sized
lug-sail hoisted, though one of the fishermen continued to ply his oar
on the weather side, while the other took the tiller. This improved
our pace appreciably; but still, whenever we caught a glimpse of the
barge, it was evident that she was still gaining.

On one of these occasions the man at the tiller, standing up to get a
better view, surveyed our quarry intently for nearly a minute and then
addressed the inspector.

“She’s a-going to give us the go-by, mister,” he observed with
conviction.

“Still gaining?” asked Badger.

“Aye. She’s a-going to slip across the tail of Foulness Sand into the
deep channel. And that’s the last we shall see of her.”

“But can’t we get into the channel the same way?” demanded Badger.

“Well, d’ye see,” replied the fisherman, “’tis like this. Tide’s
a-running out, but there’ll be enough for her. It’ll just carry her
out through the Whitaker Channel and across the spit. Then it’ll turn,
and up she’ll go, London way, on the flood. But we shall catch the
flood-tide in the Whitaker Channel, and a rare old job we’ll have to
get out; and when we do get out, that barge’ll be miles away.”

The inspector swore long and earnestly. He even alluded to himself as
a “blithering idiot.” But that helped matters not at all. The
fisherman’s dismal prophecy was fulfilled in every horrid detail. When
we were approaching the Whitaker Channel the barge was just crossing
the spit, and the last of the ebb-tide was trickling out. By the time
we were fairly in the Channel the tide had turned and was already
flowing in with a speed that increased every minute; while over the
sand we could see the barge, already out in the open estuary, heading
to the west on the flood-tide at a good six knots.

Poor Badger was frantic. With yearning eyes fixed on the dwindling
barge, he cursed, entreated, encouraged and made extravagant offers.
He even took an oar and pulled with such desperate energy that he
caught a crab and turned a neat back somersault into the fisherman’s
lap. The two mariners pulled until their oars bent like canes; but
still the sandy banks crept by, inch by inch, and ever the turbid
water seemed to pour up the channel more and yet more swiftly. It was
a fearful struggle and seemed to last for hours; and when, at last,
the boat crawled out across the spit and the exhausted rowers rested
on their oars, the sun was just setting and the barge had disappeared
into the west.

I was really sorry for Badger. His oversight in respect of the anchor
was a very natural one for a landsman, and he had evidently taken
infinite pains over the case and shown excellent judgment in keeping
a close watch on the neighbourhood of Garbridge; and now, after all
his care, it looked as if both the robbers and their booty had slipped
through his fingers. It was desperately bad luck.

“Well,” said the elder fisherman, “they’ve give us a run for our
money; but they’ve got clear away. What’s to be done now, mister?”

Badger had nothing to suggest excepting that we should pull or sail up
the river in the hope of getting some assistance on the way. He was in
the lowest depths of despair and dejection. But now, when Fortune
seemed to have deserted us utterly, and failure appeared to be an
accomplished fact, Providence intervened.

A small steam vessel that had been approaching from the direction of
the East Swin suddenly altered her course and bore down as if to speak
us. The fisherman who had last spoken looked at her attentively for a
few moments and then slapped his thigh. “Saved, by gum!” he exclaimed.
“This’ll do your trick, mister. Here comes a Customs cruiser.”

Instantly the two fishermen bent to their oars to meet the oncoming
craft, and in a few minutes we were alongside, Badger hailing like a
bull of Bashan. A brief explanation to the officer in charge secured a
highly sympathetic promise of help. We all scrambled up on deck; the
boat was dropped astern at the scope of her painter; the engine-room
bell jangled merrily, and the smart, yacht-like vessel began to forge
ahead.

“Now then,” said the officer, as his craft gathered way, “give us a
description of this barge. What is she like?”

“She’s a small stumpy,” the senior fisherman explained, “flying light;
wants paint badly; steers with a wheel; green transom with _Bluebell,
Maldon_, cut in and gilded. Seemed to be keeping along the north
shore.”

With these particulars in his mind, the officer explored the western
horizon with a pair of night-glasses, although it was still broad
daylight. Presently he reported: “There’s a stumpy in a line with the
Blacktail Spit buoy. Just take a look at her.” He handed his glasses
to the fisherman, who, after a careful inspection of the stranger,
gave it as his opinion that she was our quarry. “Probably makin’ for
Southend or Leigh,” said he, and added: “I’ll bet she’s bound for
Benfleet Creek. Nice quiet place, that, to land the stuff.”

Our recent painful experience was now reversed, for as our swift
little vessel devoured the miles of water, the barge, which we were
all watching eagerly, loomed up larger every minute. By the time we
were abreast of the Mouse Lightship, she was but a few hundred yards
ahead, and even through my glasses, the name _Bluebell_ was clearly
legible. Badger nearly wept with delight; the officer in charge smiled
an anticipatory smile; the deck-hands girded up their loins for the
coming capture and the plain-clothes men each furtively polished a
pair of handcuffs.

At length the little cruiser came fairly abreast of the barge--not
unobserved by the two men on her deck. Then she sheered in suddenly
and swept alongside. One hand neatly hooked a shroud with a grappling
iron and made fast while a couple of preventive officers, the
plain-clothes men and the inspector jumped down simultaneously on to
the barge’s deck. For a moment, the two bawley men were inclined to
show fight; but the odds were too great. After a perfunctory scuffle
they both submitted to be handcuffed and were at once hauled up on
board the cruiser and lodged in the fore-peak under guard. Then the
chief officer, the two fishermen and I jumped on board the barge and
followed Badger down the companion hatch to the cabin.

It was a curious scene that was revealed in that little cupboard-like
apartment by the light of Badger’s electric torch. On each of the two
lockers was stretched a man, securely lashed with lead-line and having
drawn over his face a knitted stocking cap, while on the little
triangular fixed table rested an iron-bound box which I instantly
identified by my recollection of the description of the bullion case
in the ship’s manifest. It was but the work of a minute to liberate
the skipper and his son and send them up, wrathful but substantially
uninjured, to refresh on the cruiser; and then the ponderous
treasure-chest was borne in triumph by two muscular deck-hands, up the
narrow steps, to be hoisted to the Government vessel.

“Well, well,” said the inspector, mopping his face with his
handkerchief, “all’s well that ends well; but I thought I had lost the
men and the stuff that time. What are you going to do? I shall stay on
board as this boat is going right up to the Custom House in London;
but if you want to get home sooner, I dare say the chief officer will
put you ashore at Southend.”

I decided to adopt this course, and I was accordingly landed at
Southend Pier with a telegram from Badger to his head-quarters; and at
Southend I was fortunate enough to catch an express train which
brought me to Fenchurch Street while the night was still young.

When I reached our chambers, I found Thorndyke seated by the fire,
serenely studying a brief. He stood up as I entered and, laying aside
the brief, remarked:

“You are back sooner than I expected. How sped the chase? Did you
catch the barge?”

“Yes. We’ve got the men and we’ve got the bullion. But we very nearly
lost both;” and here I gave him an account of the pursuit and the
capture, to which he listened with the liveliest interest. “That
Customs cruiser was a piece of sheer luck,” said he, when I had
concluded. “I am delighted. This capture simplifies the case for us
enormously.”

“It seems to me to dispose of the case altogether,” said I. “The
property is recovered and the thieves are in custody. But I think most
of the credit belongs to Badger.”

Thorndyke smiled enigmatically. “I should let him have it all,
Jervis,” he said; and then, after a reflective pause, he continued:
“We will go round to Scotland Yard in the morning to verify the
capture. If the package agrees with the description in the bill of
lading, the case, as you say, is disposed of.”

“It is hardly necessary,” said I. “The marks were all correct and the
Customs seals were unbroken--but still, I know you won’t be satisfied
until you have verified everything for yourself. And I suppose you are
right.”


It was past eleven in the following forenoon when we invaded
Superintendent Miller’s office at Scotland Yard. That genial officer
looked up from his desk as we entered and laughed joyously. “I told
you so, Badger,” he chuckled, turning to the inspector, who had also
looked up and was regarding us with a foxy smile. “I knew the doctor
wouldn’t be satisfied until he had seen it with his own eyes. I
suppose that is what you have come for, sir?”

“Yes,” was the reply. “It is a mere formality, of course, but, if you
don’t mind----”

“Not in the least,” replied Miller. “Come along, Badger, and show the
doctor your prize.”

The two officers conducted us to a room, which the superintendent
unlocked, and which contained a small table, a measuring standard, a
weighing machine, a set of Snellen’s test-types, and the now historic
case of bullion. The latter Thorndyke inspected closely, checking the
marks and dimensions by his notes.

“I see you haven’t opened it,” he remarked.

“No,” replied Miller. “Why should we? The Customs seals are intact.”

“I thought you might like to know what was inside,” Thorndyke
explained.

The two officers looked at him quickly and the inspector exclaimed:
“But we do know. It was opened and checked at the Customs.”

“What do you suppose is inside?” Thorndyke asked.

“I don’t suppose,” Badger replied testily. “I know. There are four
bars of gold inside.”

“Well,” said Thorndyke, “as the representative of the Assurance
Company, I should like to see the contents of that case.”

The two officers stared at him in amazement, as also, I must admit,
did I. The implied doubt seemed utterly contrary to reason.

“This is scepticism with a vengeance!” said Miller. “How on earth is
it possible--but there, I suppose if you are not satisfied, we should
be justified----”

He glanced at his subordinate, who snorted impatiently: “Oh, open it
and let him see the bars. And then, I suppose, he will want us to make
an assay of the metal.”

The superintendent retired with wrinkled brows and presently returned
with a screwdriver, a hammer and a case-opener. Very deftly he broke
the seals, extracted the screws and prized up the lid of the case,
inside which were one or two folds of thick canvas. Lifting these with
something of a flourish, he displayed the upper pair of dull, yellow
bars.

“Are you satisfied now, sir?” demanded Badger. “Or do you want to see
the other two?”

Thorndyke looked reflectively at the two bars, and the two officers
looked inquiringly at him (but one might as profitably have watched
the expression on the face of a ship’s figurehead). Then he took from
his pocket a folding foot-rule and quickly measured the three
dimensions of one of the bars.

“Is that weighing machine reliable?” he asked.

“It is correct to an ounce,” the superintendent replied, gazing at my
colleague with a slightly uneasy expression. “Why?”

By way of reply Thorndyke lifted out the bar that he had measured and
carrying it across to the machine, laid it on the platform and
carefully adjusted the weights.

“Well?” the superintendent queried anxiously, as Thorndyke took the
reading from the scale.

“Twenty-nine pounds, three ounces,” replied Thorndyke.

“Well?” repeated the superintendent. “What about it?”

Thorndyke looked at him impassively for a moment, and then, in the
same quiet tone, answered: “Lead.”

“What!” the two officers shrieked in unison, darting across to the
scale and glaring at the bar of metal. Then Badger recovered himself
and expostulated, not without temper, “Nonsense, sir. Look at it.
Can’t you see that it is gold?”

“I can see that it is gilded,” replied Thorndyke.

“But,” protested Miller, “the thing is impossible! What makes you
think it is lead?”

“It is just a question of specific gravity,” was the reply. “This bar
contains seventy-two cubic inches of metal and it weighs twenty-nine
pounds three ounces. Therefore it is a bar of lead. But if you are
still doubtful, it is quite easy to settle the matter. May I cut a
small piece off the bar?”

The superintendent gasped and looked at his subordinate. “I suppose,”
said he, “under the circumstances--eh, Badger? Yes. Very well,
Doctor.”

Thorndyke produced a strong pocket-knife, and, having lifted the bar
to the table, applied the knife to one corner and tapped it smartly
with the hammer. The blade passed easily through the soft metal, and
as the detached piece fell to the floor, the two officers and I craned
forward eagerly. And then all possible doubts were set at rest. There
was no mistaking the white, silvery lustre of the freshly-cut surface.

“Snakes!” exclaimed the superintendent. “This is a fair knock-out!
Why, the blighters have got away with the stuff, after all! Unless,”
he added, with a quizzical look at Thorndyke, “you know where it is,
Doctor. I expect you do.”

“I believe I do,” said Thorndyke, “and if you care to come down with
me to the London Docks, I think I can hand it over to you.”

The superintendent’s face brightened appreciably. Not so Badger’s.
That afflicted officer flung down the chip of metal that he had been
examining, and, turning to Thorndyke, demanded sourly: “Why didn’t you
tell us this before, sir? You let me go off chivvying that damn barge,
and you knew all the time that the stuff wasn’t on board.”

“My dear Badger,” Thorndyke expostulated, “don’t you see that these
lead bars are essential to our case? They prove that the gold bars
were never landed and that they are consequently still on the ship.
Which empowers us to detain any gold that we may find on her.”

“There, now, Badger,” said the superintendent, “it’s no use for you to
argue with the doctor. He’s like a giraffe. He can see all round him
at once. Let us get on to the Docks.”

Having locked the room, we all sallied forth, and, taking a train at
Charing Cross Station, made our way by Mark Lane and Fenchurch Street
to Wapping, where, following Thorndyke, we entered the Docks and
proceeded straight to a wharf near the Wapping entrance. Here
Thorndyke exchanged a few words with a Customs official, who hurried
away and presently returned accompanied by an officer of higher rank.
The latter, having saluted Thorndyke and cast a slightly amused glance
at our little party, said: “They’ve landed that package that you spoke
about. I’ve had it put in my office for the present. Will you come and
have a look at it?”

We followed him to his office behind a long row of sheds, where, on a
table, was a strong wooden case, somewhat larger than the “bullion”
case, while, on the desk a large, many-leaved document lay open.

“This is your case, I think,” said the official; “but you had better
check it by the manifest. Here is the entry: ‘One case containing
seventeen and three-quarter dozen brass six-inch by three-eighths
screw-bolts with nuts. Dimensions, sixteen inches by thirteen by nine.
Gross weight a hundred and nineteen pounds; net weight a hundred and
thirteen pounds.’ Consigned to ‘Jackson and Walker, 593, Great Alie
Street, London, E.’ Is that the one?”

“That is the one,” Thorndyke replied.

“Then,” said our friend, “we’ll get it open and have a look at those
brass screw-bolts.”

With a dexterity surprising in an official of such high degree, he had
the screws out in a twinkling, and prizing up the lid, displayed a
fold of coarse canvas. As he lifted this the two police officers
peered eagerly into the case; and suddenly the eager expression on
Badger’s face changed to one of bitter disappointment.

“You’ve missed fire this time, sir,” he snapped. “This is just a case
of brass bolts.”

“Gold bolts, Inspector,” Thorndyke corrected, placidly. He picked out
one and handed it to the astonished detective. “Did you ever feel a
brass bolt of that weight?” he asked.

“Well, it certainly is devilish heavy,” the inspector admitted,
weighing it in his hand and passing it on to Miller.

“Its weight, as stated on the manifest,” said Thorndyke, “works out at
well over eight and a half ounces, but we may as well check it.” He
produced from his pocket a little spring balance, to which he slung
the bolt. “You see,” he said, “it weighs eight ounces and two-thirds.
But a brass bolt of the same size would weigh only three ounces and
four-fifths. There is not the least doubt that these bolts are gold;
and as you see that their aggregate weight is a hundred and thirteen
while the weight of the four missing bars is a hundred and thirteen
pounds, two ounces, it is a reasonable inference that these bolts
represent those bars; and an uncommonly good job they made of the
melting to lose only two ounces. Has the consignee’s agent turned up
yet?”

“He is waiting outside,” replied the officer, with a pleased smile,
“hopping about like a pea in a frying-pan. I’ll call him in.”

He did so, and a small, seedy man of strongly Semitic aspect
approached the door with nervous caution and a rather pale face. But
when his beady eye fell on the open case and the portentous assembly
in the office, he turned about and fled along the wharf as if the
hosts of the Philistines were at his heels.

“Of course it is all perfectly simple, as you say,” I replied to
Thorndyke as we strolled back up Nightingale Lane, “but I don’t see
where you got your start. What made you think that the stolen case was
a dummy?”

“At first,” Thorndyke replied, “it was just a matter of alternative
hypotheses. It was purely speculative. The robbery described by
Halethorpe was a very crude affair. It was planned in quite the wrong
way. Noting this, I naturally asked myself: What is the right way to
steal a case of gold ingots? Now, the outstanding difficulty in such a
robbery arises from the ponderous nature of the thing stolen, and the
way to overcome that difficulty is to get away with the booty at
leisure before the robbery is discovered--the longer the better. It is
also obvious that if you can delude some one into stealing your dummy
you will have covered up your tracks most completely; for if that some
one is caught, the issues are extremely confused, and if he is not
caught, all the tracks lead away from you. Of course, he will discover
the fraud when he tries to dispose of the swag, but his lips are
sealed by the fact that he has, himself, committed a felony. So that
is the proper strategical plan; and, though it was wildly improbable,
and there was nothing whatever to suggest it, still the possibility
that this crude robbery might cover a more subtle one, had to be borne
in mind. It was necessary to make absolutely certain that the gold
bars were really in the case when it left Bellhaven. I had practically
no doubt that they were. Our visit to the Custom House was little more
than a formality, just to give us an undeniable datum from which to
make our start. We had to find somebody who had actually seen the case
open and verified the contents; and when we found that man--Mr.
Byrne--it instantly became obvious that the wildly improbable thing
had really happened. The gold bars had already disappeared. I had
calculated the approximate size of the real bars. They would contain
forty-two cubic inches, and would be about seven inches by three by
two. The dimensions given by Byrne--evidently correct, as shown by
those of the case, which the bars fitted pretty closely--were
impossible. If those bars had been gold, they would have weighed two
hundred pounds, instead of the hundred and thirteen pounds shown on
his report. The astonishing thing is that Byrne did not observe the
discrepancy. There are not many Customs officers who would have let it
pass.”

“Isn’t it rather odd,” I asked, “that the thieves should have gambled
on such a remote chance?”

“It is pretty certain,” he replied, “that they were unaware of the
risk they were taking. Probably they assumed--as most persons would
have done--that a case of bullion would be merely inspected and
passed. Few persons realize the rigorous methods of the Customs
officers. But to resume: It was obvious that the ‘gold’ bars that
Byrne had examined were dummies. The next question was, where were the
real bars? Had they been made away with, or were they still on the
ship? To settle this question I decided to go through the manifest and
especially through the column of net weights. And there, presently, I
came upon a package the net weight of which was within two ounces of
the weight of the stolen bars. And that package was a parcel of brass
screw-bolts--on a homeward-bound ship! But who on earth sends brass
bolts from Africa to London? The anomaly was so striking that I
examined the entry more closely, and then I found--by dividing the net
weight by the number of bolts--that each of these little bolts weighed
over half a pound. But, if this were so, those bolts could be of no
other metal than gold or platinum, and were almost certainly gold.
Also, their aggregate weight was exactly that of the stolen bars, less
two ounces, which probably represented loss in melting.”

“And the scrivelloes,” said I, “and the gum copal and the kola nuts;
what was their bearing on the inquiry? I can’t, even now, trace any
connection.”

Thorndyke cast an astonished glance at me, and then replied with a
quiet chuckle: “There wasn’t any. Those notes were for the benefit of
the shipping gentleman. As he would look over my shoulder, I had to
give him something to read and think about. If I had noted only the
brass bolts, I should have virtually informed him of the nature of my
suspicions.”

“Then, really, you had the case complete when we left Bellhaven?”

“Theoretically, yes. But we had to recover the stolen case, for,
without those lead ingots we could not prove that the gold bolts were
stolen property, any more than one could prove a murder without
evidence of the death of the victim.”

“And how do you suppose the robbery was carried out? How was the gold
got out of the ship’s strong-room?”

“I should say it was never there. The robbers, I suspect, are the
ship’s mate, the chief engineer and possibly the purser. The mate
controls the stowage of cargo, and the chief engineer controls the
repair shop and has the necessary skill and knowledge to deal with the
metal. On receiving the advice of the bullion consignment, I imagine
they prepared the dummy case in agreement with the description. When
the bullion arrived, the dummy case would be concealed on deck and the
exchange made as soon as the bullion was put on board. The dummy would
be sent to the strong-room and the real case carried to a prepared
hiding-place. Then the engineer would cut up the bars, melt them
piecemeal and cast them into bolts in an ordinary casting-flask, using
an iron bolt as a model, and touching up the screw-threads with a die.
The mate could enter the case on the manifest when he pleased, and
send the bill of lading by post to the nominal consignee. That is what
I imagine to have been the procedure.”

Thorndyke’s solution turned out to be literally correct. The
consignee, pursued by Inspector Badger along the quay, was arrested at
the dock gates and immediately volunteered King’s evidence. Thereupon
the mate, the chief engineer and the purser of the steamship _Labadi_
were arrested and brought to trial; when they severally entered a plea
of guilty and described the method of the robbery almost in
Thorndyke’s words.




 VII.
 THE FUNERAL PYRE

Thorndyke did not often indulge in an evening paper, and was even
disposed to view that modern institution with some disfavour; whence
it happened that when I entered our chambers shortly before dinner
time with a copy of the _Evening Gazette_ in my hand, he fixed upon
the folded news-sheet an inquiring and slightly disapproving eye.

“’Orrible discovery near Dartford,” I announced, quoting the juvenile
vendor.

The disapproval faded from his face, but the inquiring expression
remained.

“What is it?” he asked.

“I don’t know,” I replied; “but it seems to be something in our line.”

“My learned friend does us an injustice,” he rejoined, with his eye
riveted on the paper. “Still, if you are going to make my flesh creep,
I will try to endure it.”

Thus invited, I opened the paper and read out as follows:

“A shocking tragedy has come to light in a meadow about a mile from
Dartford. About two o’clock this morning, a rural constable observed a
rick on fire out on the marshes near the creek. By the time he reached
it the upper half of the rick was burning fiercely in the strong wind
and, as he could do nothing alone, he went to the adjacent farm-house
and gave the alarm. The farmer and two of his sons accompanied the
constable to the scene of the conflagration, but the rick was now a
blazing mass, roaring in the wind and giving out an intense heat. As
it was obviously impossible to save any part of it, and as there were
no other ricks near, the farmer decided to abandon it to its fate and
went home.

“At eight o’clock he returned to the spot and found the rick still
burning, though reduced to a heap of glowing cinders and ashes, and
approaching it, he was horrified to perceive a human skull grinning
out from the cindery mass. Closer examination showed other bones--all
calcined white and chalky--and close to the skull a stumpy clay pipe.
The explanation of this dreadful occurrence seems quite simple. The
rick was not quite finished, and when the farm hands knocked off work
they left the ladder in position. It is assumed that some tramp, in
search of a night’s lodging, observed the ladder, and climbing up it,
made himself comfortable in the loose hay at the top of the rick,
where he fell asleep with his lighted pipe in his mouth. This ignited
the hay and the man must have been suffocated by the fumes without
awakening from his sleep.”

“A reasonable explanation,” was Thorndyke’s comment, “and quite
probable; but of course it is pure hypothesis. As a matter of fact,
any one of the three conceivable causes of violent death is possible
in this case--accident, suicide or homicide.”

“I should have supposed,” said I, “that we could almost exclude
suicide. It is difficult to imagine a man electing to roast himself to
death.”

“I cannot agree with my learned friend,” Thorndyke rejoined. “I can
imagine a case--and one of great medico-legal interest--that would
exactly fit the present circumstances. Let us suppose a man,
hopelessly insolvent, desperate and disgusted with life, who decides
to provide for his family by investing the few pounds that he has left
in insuring his life heavily and then making away with himself. How
would he proceed? If he should commit suicide by any of the orthodox
methods he would simply invalidate his policy. But now, suppose he
knows of a likely rick; that he provides himself with some
rapidly-acting poison, such as potassium cyanide--he could even use
prussic acid if he carried it in a rubber or celluloid bottle, which
would be consumed in the fire; that he climbs on to the rick; sets
fire to it, and as soon as it is fairly alight, takes his dose of
poison and falls back dead among the hay. Who is to contest his
family’s claim? The fire will have destroyed all traces of the poison,
even if they should be sought for. But it is practically certain that
the question would never be raised. The claim would be paid without
demur.”

I could not help smiling at this calm exposition of a practicable
crime. “It is a mercy, Thorndyke,” I remarked, “that you are an honest
man. If you were not----”

“I think,” he retorted, “that I should find some better means of
livelihood than suicide. But with regard to this case: it will be
worth watching. The tramp hypothesis is certainly the most probable;
but its very probability makes an alternative hypothesis at least
possible. No one is likely to suspect fraudulent suicide; but that
immunity from suspicion is a factor that increases the probability of
fraudulent suicide. And so, to a less extent, with homicide. We must
watch the case and see if there are any further developments.”

Further developments were not very long in appearing. The report in
the morning paper disposed effectually of the tramp theory without
offering any other. “The tragedy of the burning rick,” it said, “is
taking a somewhat mysterious turn. It is now clear that the unknown
man, who was assumed to have been a tramp, must have been a person of
some social position, for careful examination of the ashes by the
police have brought to light various articles which would have been
carried only by a man of fair means. The clay pipe was evidently one
of a pair--of which the second one has been recovered--probably silver
mounted and carried in a case, the steel frame of which has been
found. Both pipes are of the ‘Burns Cutty’ pattern and have neatly
scratched on the bowls the initials ‘R.R.’ The following articles have
also been found:--Remains of a watch, probably gold, and a rather
singular watch-chain, having alternate links of platinum and gold. The
gold links have partly disappeared, but numerous beads of gold have
been found, derived apparently from the watch and chain. The platinum
links are intact and are fashioned of twisted square wire. A bunch of
keys, partly fused; a rock crystal seal, apparently from a ring; a
little porcelain mascot figure, with a hole for suspension--possibly
from the watch-chain--and a number of artificial teeth. In connection
with the latter, a puzzling and slightly sinister aspect has been
given to the case by the finding of an upper dental plate by a ditch
some two hundred yards from the rick. The plate has two gaps and, on
comparison with the skull of the unknown man, these have been found by
the police surgeon to correspond with two groups of remaining teeth.
Moreover, the artificial teeth found in the ashes all seem to belong
to a lower plate. The presence of this plate, so far from the scene of
the man’s death, is extremely difficult to account for.”

As Thorndyke finished reading the extract he looked at me as if
inviting some comment.

“It is a most remarkable and mysterious affair,” said I, “and
naturally recalls to my mind the hypothetical case that you suggested
yesterday. If that case was possible then, it is actually probable
now. It fits these new facts perfectly, not only in respect of the
abundant means of identification, but even to this dental plate--if we
assume that he took the poison as he was approaching the rick, and
that the poison was of an acrid or irritating character which caused
him to cough or retch. And I can think of no other plausible
explanation.”

“There _are_ other possibilities,” said Thorndyke, “but fraudulent
suicide is certainly the most probable theory on the known facts. But
we shall see. As you say, the body can hardly fail to be identified at
a pretty early date.”

As a matter of fact it was identified in the course of that same day.
Both Thorndyke and I were busily engaged until evening in the courts
and elsewhere and had not had time to give this curious case any
consideration. But as we walked home together, we encountered Mr.
Stalker of the Griffin Life Assurance Company pacing up and down
King’s Bench Walk near the entry of our chambers.

“Ha!” he exclaimed, striding forward to meet us near the Mitre Court
gateway, “you are just the very men I wanted to see. There is a little
matter that I want to consult you about. I shan’t detain you long.”

“It won’t matter much if you do,” said Thorndyke. “We have finished
our routine work for the day and our time is now our own.” He led the
way up to our chambers, where, having given the fire a stir, he drew
up three arm-chairs.

“Now, Stalker,” said he. “Warm your toes and tell us your troubles.”

Mr. Stalker spread out his hands to the blaze and began reflectively:
“It will be enough, I think, if I give you the facts--and most of them
you probably know already. You have heard about this man whose remains
were found in the ashes of a burnt rick? Well, it turns out that he
was a certain Mr. Reginald Reed, an outside broker, as I understand;
but what is of more interest to us is that he was a client of ours. We
have issued a policy on his life for three thousand pounds. I thought
I remembered the name when I saw it in the paper this afternoon, so I
looked up our books, and there it was, sure enough.”

“When was the policy issued?” Thorndyke asked.

“Ah!” exclaimed Stalker. “That’s the exasperating feature of the case.
The policy was issued less than a year ago. He has only paid a single
premium. So we stand to drop practically the whole three thousand. Of
course, we have to take the fat with the lean, but we don’t like to
take it in such precious large lumps.”

“Of course you don’t,” agreed Thorndyke. “But now: you have come to
consult me--about what?”

“Well,” replied Stalker, “I put it to you: isn’t there something
obviously fishy about the case? Are the circumstances normal? For
instance, how the devil came a respectable city gentleman to be
smoking his pipe in a haystack out in a lonely meadow at two o’clock
in the morning, or thereabouts?”

“I agree,” said Thorndyke, “that the circumstances are highly
abnormal. But there is no doubt that the man is dead. Extremely dead,
if I may use the expression. What is the point that you wish to
raise?”

“I am not raising any point,” replied Stalker. “We should like you to
attend the inquest and watch the case for us. Of course, in our
policies, as you know, suicide is expressly ruled out; and if this
should turn out to have been a case of suicide----”

“What is there to suggest that it was?” asked Thorndyke.

“What is there to suggest that it wasn’t?” retorted Stalker.

“Nothing,” rejoined Thorndyke. “But a negative plea is of no use to
you. You will have to furnish positive proof of suicide, or else pay
the claim.”

“Yes, I realize that,” said Stalker, “and I am not suggesting--but
there, it is of no use discussing the matter while we know so little.
I leave the case in your hands. Can you attend the inquest?”

“I shall make it my business to do so,” replied Thorndyke.

“Very well,” said Stalker, rising and putting on his gloves, “then we
will leave it at that; and we couldn’t leave it in better case.”

When our visitor had gone I remarked to Thorndyke: “Stalker seems to
have conceived the same idea as my learned senior--fraudulent
suicide.”

“It is not surprising,” he replied. “Stalker is a shrewd man and he
perceives that when an abnormal thing has happened we may look for an
abnormal explanation. Fraudulent suicide was a speculative possibility
yesterday: to-day, in the light of these new facts, it is the most
probable theory. But mere probabilities won’t help Stalker. If there
is no direct evidence of suicide--and there is not likely to be
any--the verdict will be Death by Misadventure, and the Griffin
Company will have to pay.”

“I suppose you won’t do anything until you have heard what transpires
at the inquest?”

“Yes,” he replied. “I think we should do well to go down and just go
over the ground. At present we have the facts at third hand, and we
don’t know what may have been overlooked. As to-morrow is fairly free
I propose that we make an early start and see the place ourselves.”

“Is there any particular point that you want to clear up?”

“No; I have nothing definite in view. The circumstances are compatible
with either accident, suicide or homicide, with an undoubted leaning
towards suicide. But, at present, I have a completely open mind. I am,
in fact, going down to Dartford in the hope of getting a lead in some
definite direction.”


When we alighted at Dartford Station on the following morning,
Thorndyke looked enquiringly up and down the platform until he espied
an inspector, when he approached the official and asked for a
direction to the site of the burnt rick.

The official glanced at Thorndyke’s canvas-covered research-case and
at my binocular and camera as he replied with a smile: “You are not
the first, by a long way, that has asked that question. There has been
a regular procession of Press gentlemen that way this morning. The
place is about a mile from here. You take the foot-path to Joyce Green
and turn off towards the creek opposite Temple Farm. This is about
where the rick stood,” he added, as Thorndyke produced his one-inch
ordnance map and a pencil, “a few yards from that dyke.”

With this direction and the open map we set forth from the station,
and taking our way along the unfrequented path soon left the town
behind. As we crossed the second stile, where the path rejoined the
road, Thorndyke paused to survey the prospect. “Stalker’s question,”
he remarked, “was not unreasonable. This road leads nowhere but to the
river, and one does rather wonder what a city man can have been doing
out on these marshes in the small hours of the morning. I think that
will be our objective, where you see those men at work by the
shepherd’s hut, or whatever it is.”

We struck off across the level meadows, out of which arose the red
sails of a couple of barges, creeping down the invisible creek; and as
we approached our objective the shepherd’s hut resolved itself into a
contractor’s office van, and the men were seen to be working with
shovels and sieves on the ashes of the rick. A police inspector was
superintending the operations, and when we drew near he accosted us
with a civil inquiry as to our business.

Thorndyke presented his card and explained that he was watching the
case in the interests of the Griffin Assurance Company. “I suppose,”
he added, “I shall be given the necessary facilities?”

“Certainly,” replied the officer, glancing at my colleague with an odd
mixture of respect and suspicion; “and if you can spot anything that
we’ve overlooked, you are very welcome. It’s all for the public good.
Is there anything in particular that you want to see?”

“I should like to see everything that has been recovered so far. The
remains of the body have been removed, I suppose?”

“Yes, sir. To the mortuary. But I have got all the effects here.”

He led the way to the office--a wooden hut on low wheels--and
unlocking the door, invited us to enter. “Here are the things that we
have salved,” he said, indicating a table covered with white paper on
which the various articles were neatly set out, “and I think it’s
about the lot. We haven’t come on anything fresh for the last hour or
so.”

Thorndyke looked over the collection thoughtfully; picked up and
examined successively the two clay pipes--each with the initials
“R.R.” neatly incised on the bowl--the absurd little mascot figure, so
incongruous with its grim surroundings and the tragic circumstances,
the distorted keys, the platinum chain-links to several of which
shapeless blobs of gold adhered, and the crystal seal; and then,
collecting the artificial teeth, arranged them in what appeared to be
their correct order, and compared them with the dental plate.

“I think,” said he, holding the latter in his fingers, “that as the
body is not here, I should like to secure the means of comparison of
these teeth with the skull. There will be no objection to that, I
presume?”

“What did you wish to do?” the inspector asked.

“I should like to take a cast of the plate and a wax impression of the
loose teeth. No damage will be done to the originals, of course.”

The inspector hesitated, his natural, official tendency to refuse
permission apparently contending with a desire to see with his own
eyes how the famous expert carried out his mysterious methods of
research. In the end the latter prevailed and the official sanction
was given, subject to a proviso. “You won’t mind my looking on while
you do it?”

“Of course not,” replied Thorndyke. “Why should I?”

“I thought that perhaps your methods were a sort of trade secret.”

Thorndyke laughed softly as he opened the research-case. “My dear
Inspector,” said he, “the people who have trade secrets are those who
make a profound mystery of simple processes that any schoolboy could
carry out with once showing. That is the necessity for the secrecy.”

As he was speaking he half-filled a tiny aluminium saucepan with
water, and having dropped into it a couple of cakes of dentist’s
moulding composition, put it to heat over a spirit-lamp. While it was
heating he greased the dental plate and the loose teeth, and prepared
the little rubber basin and the other appliances for mixing the
plaster.

The inspector was deeply interested. With almost ravenous attention he
followed these proceedings, and eagerly watched Thorndyke roll the
softened composition into the semblance of a small sausage and press
it firmly on the teeth of the plate; peered into the plaster tin, and
when the liquid plaster was mixed and applied, first to the top and
then to the lower surface of the plate, not only observed the process
closely but put a number of very pertinent questions.

While the plaster and composition were setting Thorndyke renewed his
inspection of the salvage from the rick, picking out a number of iron
boot protectors which he placed apart in a little heap.

Then he proceeded to roll out two flat strips of softened composition,
into one of which he pressed the loose teeth in what appeared to be
their proper order, and into the other the boot protectors--eight in
number--after first dusting the surface with powdered French chalk. By
this time the plaster had set hard enough to allow of the mould being
opened and the dental plate taken out. Then Thorndyke, having painted
the surfaces of the plaster pieces with knotting, put the mould
together again and tied it firmly with string, mixed a fresh bowl of
plaster and poured it into the mould.

While this was setting Thorndyke made a careful inventory, with my
assistance, of the articles found in the ashes and put a few discreet
questions to the inspector. But the latter knew very little about the
case. His duty was merely to examine and report on the rick for the
information of the coroner. The investigation of the case was
evidently being conducted from head-quarters. There being no
information to be gleaned from the officer we went out and inspected
the site of the rick. But here, also, there was nothing to be learned;
the surface of the ground was now laid bare and the men who were
working with the sieves reported no further discoveries. We
accordingly returned to the hut, and as the plaster had now set hard
Thorndyke proceeded with infinite care to open the mould. The
operation was a complete success, and as my colleague extracted the
cast--a perfect replica, in plaster, of the dental plate--the
inspector’s admiration was unbounded. “Why,” he exclaimed, “excepting
for the colour you couldn’t tell one from the other; but all the same,
I don’t quite see what you want it for.”

“I want it to compare with the skull,” replied Thorndyke, “if I have
time to call at the mortuary. As I can’t take the original plate with
me, I shall need this copy to make the comparison. Obviously, it is
most important to make sure that this is Reed’s plate and not that of
some other person. By the way, can you show us the spot where the
plate was picked up?”

“Yes,” replied the inspector. “You can see the place from here. It was
just by that gate at the crossing of the ditch.”

“Thank you, Inspector,” said Thorndyke. “I think we will walk down and
have a look at the place.” He wrapped the new cast in a soft cloth,
and having repacked his research case, shook hands with the officer
and prepared to depart.

“You will notice, Jervis,” he remarked as we walked towards the gate,
“that this denture was picked up at a spot beyond the rick--farther
from the town, I mean. Consequently, if the plate is Reed’s, he must
have dropped it while he was approaching the rick from the direction
of the river. It will be worth while to see if we can find out whence
he came.”

“Yes,” I agreed. “But the dropping of the plate is a rather mysterious
affair. It must have happened when he took the poison--assuming that
he really did poison himself; but one would have expected that he
would wait until he got to the rick to take his dose.”

“We had better not make too many assumptions while we have so few
facts,” said Thorndyke. He put down his case beside the gate, which
guarded a bridge across a broad ditch, or drainage dyke, and opened
his map.

“The question is,” said he, “did he come through this gate or was he
only passing it. This dyke, you see, opens into the creek about
three-quarters of a mile farther down. The probability is, therefore,
that if he came up from the river across the marshes he would be on
this side of the ditch and would pass the gate. But we had better try
both sides. Let us leave our things by the gate and explore the ground
for a few hundred yards, one on either side of the ditch. Which side
will you take?”

I elected to take the side nearer the creek and, having put my camera
down by the research case, climbed over the padlocked gate and began
to walk slowly along by the side of the ditch, scanning the ground for
footprints showing the impression of boot-protectors. At first the
surface was far from favourable for imprints of any kind, being, like
that immediately around the gate, covered with thick turf. About a
hundred and fifty yards down, however, I came upon a heap of
worm-casts on which was plainly visible the print of a heel with a
clear impression of a kidney-shaped protector such as I had seen in
the hut. Thereupon I hailed Thorndyke and, having stuck my stick in
the ground beside the heel-print, went back to meet him at the gate.

“This is rather interesting, Jervis,” he remarked, when I had
described my find. “The inference seems to be that he came from the
creek--unless there is another gate farther down. We had better have
our compo impressions handy for comparison.” He opened his case and
taking from it the strip of composition--now as hard as bone--on which
were the impressions of the boot-protectors, slipped it into his outer
pocket. We then took up the case and the camera and proceeded to the
spot marked by my stick.

“Well,” said Thorndyke, “it is not very conclusive, seeing that so
many people use boot-protectors, but it is probably Reed’s footprint.
Let us hope that we shall find something more distinctive farther on.”

We resumed our march, keeping a few yards apart and examining the
ground closely as we went. For a full quarter of a mile we went on
without detecting any trace of a footprint on the thick turf. Suddenly
we perceived ahead of us a stretch of yellow mud occupying a slight
hollow, across which the creek had apparently overflowed at the last
spring tide. When we reached it we found that the mud was nearly dry,
but still soft enough to take an impression; and the surface was
covered with a maze of footprints.

We halted at the edge of the patch and surveyed the complicated
pattern; and then it became evident that the whole group of prints had
been produced by two pairs of feet, with the addition of a row of
sheep-tracks.

“This seems to raise an entirely new issue,” I remarked.

“It does,” Thorndyke agreed. “I think we now begin to see a definite
light on the case. But we must go cautiously. Here are two sets of
footprints, of which one is apparently Reed’s--to judge by the
boot-protectors--while the other prints have been made by a man, whom
we will call X, who wore boots or shoes with rubber soles and heels.
We had better begin by verifying Reed’s.” He produced the composition
strip from his pocket, and, stooping over one pair of footprints,
continued: “I think we may assume that these are Reed’s feet. We have
on the compo strip impressions of eight protectors from the rick, and
on each footprint there are four protectors. Moreover, the individual
protectors are the same on the compo and on the footprints. Thus the
compo shows two pairs of half-protectors, two single edge-pieces, and
two kidney-shaped protectors; while each footprint shows a pair of
half-protectors on the outside of the sole, a single one on the inside
and a kidney-shaped piece on the heel. Furthermore, in both cases the
protectors are nearly new and show no appreciable signs of wear. The
agreement is complete.”

“Don’t you think,” said I, “that we ought to take plaster records of
them?”

“I do,” he replied, “seeing that a heavy shower or a high tide would
obliterate them. If you will make the casts I will, meanwhile, make a
careful drawing of the whole group to show the order of imposition.”

We fell to work forthwith upon our respective tasks, and by the time I
had filled four of the clearest of the footprints with plaster,
Thorndyke had completed his drawing with the aid of a set of coloured
pencils from the research case. While the plaster was setting he
exhibited and explained the drawing.

“You see, Jervis, that there are four lines of prints and a set of
sheep-tracks. The first in order of time are these prints of X, drawn
in blue. Then come the sheep, which trod on X’s footprints. Next comes
Reed, alone and after some interval, for he has trodden both on the
sheep-tracks and on the tracks of X. Both men were going towards the
river. Then we have the tracks of the two men coming back. This time
they were together, for their tracks are parallel and neither treads
into the prints of the other. Both tracks are rather sinuous as if the
men were walking unsteadily, and both have trodden on the sheep-tracks
and on the preceding tracks. Next, we have the tracks of X going alone
towards the river and treading on all the others excepting number
four, which are the tracks of X coming from the river and turning off
towards that gate, which opens on to the road. The sequence of events
is therefore pretty clear.

“First, X came along here alone to some destination which we have yet
to discover. Later--how much later we cannot judge--came Reed, alone.
The two men seem to have met, and later returned together, apparently
the worse for drink. That is the last we see of Reed. Next comes X,
walking back--quite steadily, you notice--towards the river. Later, he
returns; but this time, for some reason--perhaps to avoid the
neighbourhood of the rick--he crosses the ditch at that gate,
apparently to get on the road, though you see by the map that the road
is much the longer route to the town. And now we had better get on and
see if we can discover the rendezvous to and from which these two men
went and came.”

As the plaster had now set quite hard I picked up the casts, and when
I had carefully packed them in the case we resumed our progress
riverwards. I had already noticed, some distance ahead, the mast of
what looked like a small cutter yacht standing up above the marshes,
and I now drew Thorndyke’s attention to it. But he had already
observed it and, like me, had marked it as the probable rendezvous of
the two men. In a few minutes the probability became a certainty, for
a bend in the creek showed us the little vessel--with the name
_Moonbeam_ newly painted on the bow--made fast alongside a small
wooden staging; and when we reached this the bare earth opposite the
gangway was seen to be covered with the footprints of both men.

“I wonder,” said I, “which of them was the owner of the yacht.”

“It is pretty obvious, I think,” said Thorndyke, “that X was the owner
if either of them was. He came to the yacht alone, and he wore
rubber-soled shoes such as yachtsmen favour; whereas Reed came when
the other man was there, and he wore iron boot-protectors, which no
yacht owner would do if he had any respect for his deck-planks. But
they may have had a joint interest; appearances suggest that they were
painting the woodwork when they were here together, as some of the
paint is fresh and some of it old and shabby.” He gazed at the yacht
reflectively for some time and then remarked: “It would be
interesting--and perhaps instructive--to have a look at the inside.”

“It would be a flagrant trespass, to put it mildly,” said I.

“It would be more than trespass if that padlock is locked,” he
rejoined. “But we need not take a pedantic view of the legal position.
My learned friend has a serviceable pair of glasses and commands an
unobstructed view of a mile or so; and if he maintains an observant
attitude while I make an inspection of the premises any trifling
irregularity will be of no consequence.” As he spoke he felt in his
pocket and produced an instrument which our laboratory assistant,
Polton, had made from a few pieces of stiff steel wire, and which was
euphemistically known as a smoker’s companion. With this appliance in
his hand he dropped down on to the yacht’s deck, and after a quick
look round, tried the padlock. Finding it locked he proceeded to
operate on it with the smoker’s companion, and in a few moments it
fell open, when he pushed back the sliding hatch and stepped down into
the little cabin.

His exploration did not take long. In a few minutes he reappeared and
climbed the short ladder to the staging. “There isn’t much to see,” he
reported, “but what there is is highly suggestive. If you slip down
and have a look round, I think you will have no difficulty in forming
a plausible reconstruction of the recent events. You had better take
the camera. There is light enough for a time exposure.”

I handed him the glasses, and dropping on to the deck, stepped down
through the open hatch into the cabin. It was an absurd little cave,
barely four feet high from the floor to the coach-roof, open to the
forepeak and lighted by a little skylight and two port-holes. Of the
two sleeping berths, one had evidently been used as a seat, while the
other appeared to have been slept in, to judge by the indented pillow
and the tumbled blankets, left just as the occupant had crawled out of
them. But the whole interior was in a state of squalid disorder.
Paint-pots and unwashed brushes lay about the floor, in company with a
couple of whisky-bottles--one empty and one half-full--two tumblers, a
pair of empty siphons and a litter of playing cards scattered
broadcast and evidently derived from two packs. It was, as Thorndyke
had said, easy to reconstruct the scene of sordid debauchery that the
light of the two candles--each in its congealed pool of grease--must
have displayed on that night of horror whose dreadful secret had been
disclosed by the ashes of the rick. But I could see nothing that would
enable me to give a name to the dead man’s mysterious companion.

When I had completed my inspection and taken a photograph of the
interior, I rejoined Thorndyke, who then descended and replaced the
padlock on the closed hatch, relocking it with the invaluable smoker’s
companion.

“Well, Jervis,” said he, as we turned our faces towards the town, “it
seems as if we had accomplished our task, so far as Stalker is
concerned. It is still possible that this was a case of suicide, but
it is no longer probable. All the appearances point to homicide. I
think my learned friend will agree with me in that.”

“Undoubtedly,” I replied. “And to me there is a strong suggestion of
premeditation. I take it that X, the owner of the yacht, enticed Reed
out here, possibly to prepare for a cruise; that the two men worked at
the repainting while the daylight lasted and then spent the evening
drinking and gambling. The fact that they used two packs of cards
suggests that they played for pretty heavy stakes. Then, I think, Reed
became drunk and X offered to see him safely off the marshes. It is
evident that X was not drunk, because, although both tracks appear
unsteady when the men were walking together, the tracks of X,
returning to the yacht are quite steady and straight. I should say
that the actual murder took place just after they had got over the
gate; that Reed’s false teeth fell out while his body was being
dragged to the rick, and that this was unnoticed by X owing to the
darkness. Then X dragged the body up the ladder and laid it in the
middle of the rick at the top, set fire to the rick--probably on the
lee side--and at once made off back to the yacht. There he passed the
night, and in the morning he returned to the town along the road,
giving the neighbourhood of the rick a wide berth. That is my reading
of the evidence.”

“Yes,” said Thorndyke, “that seems to be the interpretation of the
facts. And now all that remains is to give a name to the mysterious X,
and I should think that will present no difficulties.”

“Are you proposing to inspect the remains at the mortuary?” I asked.

“No,” he replied. “It would be interesting, but it is not necessary.
We have all the available data for identification, and our concern is
now not with Reed but with X. We had better get back to London.”

On our arrival at the station, we found the book-stall keeper in the
act of sticking up a placard of the evening paper on which was the
legend:

“_Rick tragedy; Sensational development._”

We immediately provided ourselves each with a copy of the paper, and
sitting down on a seat, proceeded to read the heavily-leaded report.

“A new and startling aspect has been given to the rick tragedy by some
further inquiries that the police have made. It seems that the dead
man, Reed, was a member of the firm of Reed and Jarman, outside
brokers, and it now transpires that his partner, Walter Jarman, is
also missing. There has been no one at the office this week, but the
caretaker states that on Monday evening at about eight o’clock, he saw
Mr. Jarman let himself into the office with his key (the rick was
first seen to be on fire at two o’clock on Monday morning). It appears
that three cheques, payable to the firm and endorsed by Jarman, were
paid into the bank--Patmore’s--by the first post on Tuesday morning,
and that, also on Tuesday morning, Jarman purchased a parcel of
diamonds of just over a thousand pounds in value from a diamond
merchant in Hatton Garden, who accepted a cheque in payment after
telephoning to the bank. It further appears that on the previous
Saturday morning, Reed and Jarman visited the bank together and drew
out in cash practically their whole balance, leaving only thirty-two
pounds. The diamond merchant’s cheque was met by the cheques that had
just been paid in. It is premature to make any comments, but we may
expect some strange disclosures at the inquest, which will be held at
Dartford the day after to-morrow.”

“I assume,” said I, “that the identity of X is no longer a mystery. It
looks as if these two men had agreed to realize their assets and
abscond, and had then spent the night gambling for the swag, and oddly
enough, Reed appears to have been the winner, for otherwise there
would have been no need to murder him.”

“That is so,” Thorndyke agreed, “assuming that X is Jarman, which is
probable, though not certain. But we mustn’t go beyond our facts, and
we mustn’t construct theories from newspaper reports. I think we had
better call at Scotland Yard on our way home and verify those
particulars.”

The report and our own observations occupied us during the journey to
London, though our discussion produced no further conclusions. As soon
as we arrived at Charing Cross, Thorndyke sprang out of the train, and
emerging from the station, walked swiftly towards Whitehall.

Our visit was fortunately timed, for as we approached the entrance to
the headquarters, our old friend, Superintendent Miller, came out. He
smiled as he saw us and halted to utter the laconic query: “Rick
Case?”

“Yes,” replied Thorndyke. “We have come to verify the particulars
given in the evening paper. Have you seen the report?”

“Yes; and you may take it as correct. Anything else?”

“I should have liked to look over a series of the cheques drawn by the
firm. The last two, I suppose, are inaccessible?”

“Yes. They will be at the bank, and we couldn’t inspect them without
an order of the Court. But, as to the others, if they are at the
office, I think you could see them. I’ll come along with you now if
you like, and have a look round myself. Our people are in possession.”

We at once closed with the superintendent’s offer and proceeded with
him by the Underground Railway to the Mansion House, from whence we
made our way to Queen Victoria Street, where Reed and Jarman had their
offices. A sergeant was in charge at the moment, and to him the
superintendent addressed himself.

“Have you found any returned cheques?”

“Yes, sir,” replied the sergeant; “lots of ’em. We’ve been through
them all.”

As he spoke he produced several bundles of cheques and laid them on a
desk, the drawers of which all stood open.

“Well,” said Miller, “there they are, Doctor. I don’t know what you
want to find out, but I expect you do.” He placed a chair by the desk,
and as Thorndyke sat down and proceeded to turn the cheques over, he
watched him with politely-suppressed curiosity.

“It appears,” said Thorndyke, “as if these two men had mixed up their
private affairs with the business account. Here, for instance, is a
cheque drawn by Reed for the Picardy Wine Company. But that company
could hardly have been a client. And this one of Jarman’s for the
Secretary of the St. John’s Nursing Home must be a private cheque, and
so I should say are these two for F. Waller, Esq., F.R.C.S., and for
Andrew Darton, Esq., L.D.S. They are drawn for professional men and
both are--like the Nursing Home cheque--stated in even amounts of
guineas, whereas the business cheques are in uneven amounts of pounds,
shillings and pence.”

“I think you are right, sir,” said Miller. “The business seems to have
been conducted in a very casual manner. And just look at those
signatures! Never twice alike. The banks hate that sort of thing,
naturally. When a customer signs in the signature book he has given a
specimen for reference and he ought to keep to it strictly. A man who
varies his signature is asking for trouble.”

“He is,” Thorndyke agreed, as he rapidly entered a few particulars of
the cheques in his note-book; “particularly in the case of a firm with
a staff of clerks.”

He stood up, and having pocketed his notebook, held out his hand.

“I am very much obliged to you, Superintendent,” he said.

“Seen all that you wanted to see?” Miller asked.

“Thank you, yes,” Thorndyke replied.

“I should very much like to know what you _have_ seen,” Miller
rejoined; to which my colleague replied by waving his hand towards the
cheques, as he turned to go.

“I don’t quite see the bearing of those cheques on our inquiry,” I
said, as we took our way homeward along Cheapside.

“It is not very direct,” Thorndyke replied; “but the cheques help us
to understand the characters of these two men and their relations with
one another; which may be very necessary when we come to the inquest.”

During the following day I saw very little of Thorndyke, for our
excursion to Dartford had put our work somewhat in arrear and we had
to secure a free day for the inquest on the morrow. We met at dinner
after the day’s work, but, beyond settling the programme for the next
day, nothing of importance passed with reference to the “Rick Case.”


The opening phases of the inquest, though of thrilling interest to the
numerous spectators and Press men, did not particularly concern us.
The evidence of the rural constable, the farmer and the police
inspector--with whom Thorndyke had a little confidential talk and
apparently surprised the officer considerably--merely amplified what
we knew already. Of more interest was that of a local dentist who
testified to having examined the dental plate and to having compared
it with the skull of the dead man. “The plate and the jaw of
deceased,” he said, “agree completely. The jaw contains five natural
teeth in two groups, and the plate has two spaces which exactly
correspond to those two groups of teeth. I have tried the plate on the
jaw and have no doubt whatever that it belonged to deceased.”

“That is a very important fact,” Thorndyke remarked to me as the
witness retired. “It is the indispensable link in the chain.”

“But surely it was obvious?” said I.

“No doubt,” he replied. “But now it is proved and in evidence.”

I was somewhat puzzled by Thorndyke’s remark, but the appearance of a
new witness forbade discussion. Mr. Arthur Gerrard was an
alert-looking, rather tall man, with bushy, Mephistophelian eyebrows
and a small, dark moustache, who wore a pair of large bifocal
spectacles, and to whom a small mole at the corner of the mouth
imparted the effect of a permanent one-sided smile.

“It was on your information,” said the coroner, “that the identity of
the deceased was established.”

“Yes,” replied the witness, who spoke with a slight, but perceptible,
Irish accent. “I saw the description in the papers of the things that
had been found in the rick and at once recognized them as Reed’s. I
knew deceased intimately and had often noticed his peculiar
watch-chain and the little china mascot and seen him smoking the clay
pipe with his initials scratched on it; and I knew that he wore false
teeth.”

“Did you meet him frequently?”

“Oh, yes. For more than a year he was my partner in business, and we
remained friends after I had dissolved the partnership.”

“Why did you dissolve the partnership?”

“I had to. Reed was impossible in a business sense. He gambled
incessantly in stocks and I had to pay his losses. I lent him, for
this purpose, at one time and another, over two thousand pounds. He
gave me bills for the loans, but he was never able to meet them, and
in the end, when we dissolved, I got him to insure his life for three
thousand pounds and to draw up a document making his debt to me the
first charge on his estate in the event of his death.”

“Had you ever any reason to suppose that he contemplated suicide?”

“None whatever. After he left me, he entered into partnership with a
Mr. Walter Jarman, and whenever I met him, he seemed to be quite happy
and contented, though I gathered that he was still gambling a good
deal. I saw him a week ago to-day and he then told me that he proposed
to take a short yachting holiday with his partner, who owned a small
cutter. That was the last time that I saw him alive.”

As the witness was about to retire, Thorndyke rose, and having
obtained the coroner’s permission to cross-examine, asked:

“You have spoken of a yacht. Do you know what her name is and where
she has been kept lately?”

“Her name is the _Moonbeam_, and I believe Jarman kept her somewhere
in the Thames, but I don’t know where.”

“And as to Jarman himself: what do you know about him, as to his
character, for instance?”

“I knew him very slightly. He appeared to be rather a dissipated man.
Drank a good deal, I should say, and I think he was a bit of a
gambler.”

“Do you know if he was a heavy smoker?”

“He didn’t smoke at all, but he was an inveterate snuff-taker.”

At this point the foreman of the jury interposed with the audible
remark that “he didn’t see what this had to do with the inquiry,” and
the coroner looked dubiously at Thorndyke; but as my colleague sat
down, the objection was not pursued.

The next witness was the caretaker of the building in which Reed and
Jarman’s office was situated. His evidence was to the effect that on
the previous Monday evening at about eight o’clock, he saw Mr. Jarman
let himself into the office with his key. “I don’t know how long he
stayed there,” he continued, in reply to the coroner’s question. “I
had finished my work and was going up to my rooms at the top of the
building. I didn’t see him again.”

“Did you notice anything unusual in his appearance?” asked Thorndyke,
rising to cross-examine. “Was his face at all flushed, for instance?”

“I couldn’t say. I was going up the stairs and I just looked back over
my shoulder when I heard him. His face was turned away from me.”

“But you had no difficulty in recognizing him?”

“No: I should have known him a mile off. He had his overcoat on, and
it is a very peculiar overcoat--light brown with a sort of greenish
check. You couldn’t possibly mistake it.”

“What should you say was Mr. Jarman’s height?”

“About five feet nine or ten, I should say.”

Here the foreman of the jury again interposed. “Aren’t we wasting
time, sir?” he inquired impatiently. “These details about Jarman may
be very important to the police, but they don’t concern us. We are
inquiring into the death of Mr. Reginald Reed.”

The coroner looked deprecatingly at Thorndyke and remarked: “There is
some truth in what the foreman says.”

“I submit, sir,” replied Thorndyke, “that there is no truth in it at
all. We are not inquiring into the death of Reginald Reed, but into
that of a man whose remains were found in a burned rick.”

“But the body has been identified as that of Reginald Reed.”

“Then,” said Thorndyke, “I submit that it has been wrongly identified.
I suggest that the body is that of Walter Jarman and I am prepared to
produce witnesses who will prove that it is.”

“But,” exclaimed the coroner, “we have just heard the evidence of a
witness who states that he saw Jarman alive eighteen hours after the
rick was fired.”

“I beg your pardon, sir,” said Thorndyke. “We have heard the witness
say that he saw Jarman’s overcoat. He expressly stated that he did not
see the man’s face.”

The coroner hastily conferred with the jury--who openly scoffed at
Thorndyke’s suggestion--and then said: “I find what you say perfectly
incredible and so do the jury. It is utterly irreconcilable with the
facts. You had better call your witnesses and let us dispose of this
extraordinary suggestion.”

Thorndyke bowed to the coroner and called Mr. Andrew Darton; whereupon
a middle-aged man of markedly professional aspect came forward and,
having been sworn, gave evidence as follows:

“I am a dental surgeon. A little over two years ago, Mr. Walter Jarman
was under my care. I extracted some loose teeth from both jaws and
made him two plates--an upper and a lower.”

“Could you identify those plates?”

“Yes. I have with me the plaster model on which those plates were
made.” He opened a bag and produced a plaster cast of a pair of jaws
fitted with a brass hinge so that the jaws could be opened and shut.
On the upper jaw were two groups of teeth separated by a space of bare
gums, while the lower jaw bore a single group of four front teeth.

“This model,” the witness explained, “is an exact replica of the
patient’s jaws, and the two plates were actually moulded on it.” He
picked up the dental plate from the table, and amidst a hush of
breathless expectancy, opened the mouth of the model and applied the
plate to the upper jaw. At a glance, it was obvious that it fitted
perfectly. The two groups of the plaster teeth slipped exactly into
the spaces on the plate, making a complete row of teeth. Then the
witness covered the lower gums with strips of plastic wax and taking
the loose teeth from the table, attached them to the wax; and again
the correspondence was evident. The teeth thus applied exactly filled
the vacant spaces.

“Can you now identify that plate?” Thorndyke asked.

“Yes,” was the reply. “I am quite certain that this is the plate I
made for Mr. Jarman and that those loose teeth are from his lower
plate.”

Thorndyke looked at the coroner, who nodded emphatically. “This
evidence seems perfectly conclusive,” he admitted. “What do you say,
gentlemen?” he added, turning to the jury.

There was no doubt as to their sentiments. With one voice they
declared their complete conviction. Had they not seen the
demonstration with their own eyes?

“And now, sir,” said the coroner, “as you appear to know more than any
one else about this case, and as it is perfectly incomprehensible to
me, and probably also to the jury, I suggest that you give us an
explanation. And you had better make it a sworn statement, so that it
can go into the depositions.”

“Yes,” Thorndyke agreed, “especially as I have some evidence to give.”
He was accordingly sworn and then proceeded to make the following
statement:

“The first thing that struck me on reading the report of this case,
was the very remarkable character of the objects found in the ashes of
the rick. They included objects composed of platinum, of pipe-clay, of
iron and of porcelain--all substances practically indestructible by
fire. And these imperishable objects were all highly distinctive and
easily identifiable, and two of them actually bore the initials of
their owner. There was almost a suggestion of the body having been
prepared for identification after burning. This mere suggestion,
however, gave place to definite suspicion when I saw the dental plate.
That plate presented a most striking discrepancy. Here it is, sir, and
you see that it is a clean polished plate of red vulcanite, with not a
trace of stain or discoloration. But associated with that plate were
two clay pipes. Now the man who smokes a clay pipe is not only--as a
rule--a heavy smoker, but he smokes strong and dark-coloured tobacco.
And if he wears a dental plate, that plate becomes encrusted with a
black deposit which is very difficult to remove. There is, as you see,
no trace of any such deposit or of any tobacco stain in the
interstices of the teeth. It appeared to be almost certainly the plate
of a non-smoker. But if that were so, it could not be Reed’s. But it
had been ascertained by the police surgeon that it fitted the jaw of
the skull and undoubtedly belonged to the burned body. Consequently if
the plate was not Reed’s plate, the skull was not Reed’s skull, and
the body was not Reed’s body. But the watch-chain was Reed’s, the
pipes were his and the mascot was his. That is to say that the very
identifiable and fireproof property of Reed was associated with the
burned body of some other person; that, in other words, the body of
some unknown person had been deliberately prepared to counterfeit the
body of Reed. This offered a further suggestion and raised a question.
The suggestion was that the unknown person had been
murdered--presumably somewhere near the spot where the dental plate
was found. The question was--What was the object of causing the body
to counterfeit that of Reed?

“Now, I knew, from the assurance company, that Reed had insured his
life for three thousand pounds. Therefore, somebody stood to gain
three thousand pounds by his death. The question was--Who was that
somebody? I proceeded to make certain investigations on the spot;” and
here Thorndyke gave a summary of our discoveries on the marsh and on
the yacht. “It thus appeared,” he continued, “that there were two men
on the marshes that night, going towards the rick. One of them was the
person whose body was found in the ashes; the other, who went back
alone to the yacht, was presumably the person who stood to gain three
thousand pounds by Reed’s death.”

“Have you formed any opinion as to who that person was?” the coroner
asked.

“Yes,” replied Thorndyke. “I have very little doubt that he was
Reginald Reed.”

“But,” exclaimed the coroner, “we have heard in evidence that it was
Mr. Arthur Gerrard who stood to gain the three thousand pounds!”

“Precisely,” said Thorndyke; and for awhile he and the coroner looked
at one another without speaking.

Suddenly the latter cast a searching look around the court. “Where
_is_ Mr. Gerrard?” he demanded.

“He left the court about ten minutes ago,” said Thorndyke; “and the
police inspector left immediately afterwards. I had advised him not to
lose sight of Mr. Gerrard.”

“Then I take it that you suspect Gerrard of being in collusion with
Reed?”

“I suspect that Arthur Gerrard and Reginald Reed are one and the same
person.”

As Thorndyke made this statement, a murmur of astonishment arose from
the jurymen and the spectators. The coroner, after a few moments’
puzzled reflection, remarked: “You are not forgetting that Reed’s
caretaker was present while Gerrard was giving his evidence?” Then,
turning to the caretaker, he asked: “What do you say? Was that Mr.
Reed who gave evidence under the name of Gerrard?”

The caretaker, who had evidently been thinking furiously, was by no
means confident. “I should say not,” he replied, “unless he was made
up a good deal. He was certainly about the same height and build and
colour; but he had a moustache, whereas Mr. Reed was clean-shaved; he
had a mole on his face, which Mr. Reed hadn’t; he had bushy eyebrows,
whereas Mr. Reed had hardly any eyebrows to speak of; and he wore
spectacles, which Mr. Reed didn’t, and he spoke like an Irishman,
whereas Mr. Reed was English. Still it is possible----”

Before he could finish, the door rattled to a heavy concussion. Then
it flew open, and Mr. Gerrard staggered into the room, thrust forward
by the police inspector. His appearance was marvellously changed, for
he had lost his spectacles, and one of his eyebrows had disappeared,
as had also the mole and a portion of the built-up moustache. The
caretaker started up with an exclamation, but at this moment Gerrard,
with a violent effort, wrenched himself free. The inspector sprang
forward to recapture him. But he was too late. The prisoner’s hand
flew upwards; there was a ringing report; and Arthur Gerrard--or
Reginald Reed--fell back across a bench with a trickle of blood on his
temple and a pistol still clutched in his hand.

“And so,” said Stalker, when he called on us the next day for details,
“it was a suicide after all. Very lucky, too, seeing that there was no
provision in the policy for death by judicial hanging.”

 THE END




 TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

This book was published as _Dr. Thorndyke’s Case-Book_ in the UK.

Minor spelling inconsistencies (_e.g._ footpath/foot-path, finger
prints/finger-prints, etc.) have been preserved.

Alterations to the text:

Abandon the use of drop-caps.

Adjust some quotation mark pairings/nestings.

Capitalize several instances of _doctor_ and _superintendent_ when
used in direct addresses.

[Chapter I]

Change “That may have been lapis _luzuli_, but more probably” to
_lazuli_.

“_As_ any rate, it is an heirloom, and I am loath to lose it” to _At_.

(“Here is the Blowgraves’ place,” said Thorndyke. “nearly in the…”)
change the period to a comma.

[Chapter II]

(“I think so, excepting that I _learn_ from Foxton that…”) to
_learned_.

[Chapter III]

“we reached a rather dark first-_door_ landing where” to _floor_.

“Now what West Central place names end in ‘n.’ It was not a street…”
change the period to a question mark.

[Chapter V]

(“who would successfully _practise_ the scientific detection…”) to
_practice_.

“a small telescopic jemmy, a jointed _augur_, a screwdriver and…” to
_auger_.

(“He must be pretty tough. Shall we be able to see him.”) change the
second period to a question mark.

“He continued to advance at _any_ easy pace, and I noticed that” to
_an_.

[Chapter VI]

“And there’s something queer _agoing_ on aboard of her” to _a-going_.

(“This’ll do your trick, _master_. Here comes a Customs cruiser.”) to
_mister_.

[Chapter VII]

“Who is to contest his family’s claim.” change the period to a
question mark.

[End of text]








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE SCARAB ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


