The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chinese recipes
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chinese recipes

Author: Nellie C. Wong

Release date: July 27, 2025 [eBook #76573]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The American Rehabilitation Committee, Inc, 1927

Credits: Alan, Mary Glenn Krause and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHINESE RECIPES ***





  Recipes From
  “THE ONLY PLACE IN PEKING”
  The Nellie Wong Tea Shop
  Peking
  China

Additional copies of this book for your friends may be had from my
little store Twelve Hundred Twenty Six Amsterdam Avenue, or from my
printer

The American Rehabilitation Committee, Inc., Twenty Eight East Twenty
First Street, New York City, New York.

[Illustration: Nellie C. Wong]




  Copyright,
  Nineteen Hundred Twenty Seven,
  by       Nellie C. Wong




EXPLANATORY NOTES


Soy bean sauce and ginger are universally used in China for seasoning.
Soy bean sauce in many instances takes the place of salt.

Mushrooms, water chestnuts and bamboo shoots are the distinctive
vegetables used in many of the Chinese dishes.

All of these supplies may be obtained in New York City at the Chinese
Grocery, Quong Yuen Shing and Company, Thirty-Two Mott Street,
Chinatown; The Cathay Tea Garden, One hundred Sixty-Four East
Eighty-Sixth Street; Yoeng’s Restaurant, Broadway and Forty-Eighth
Street or the College Inn, Broadway near One hundred Twenty-Fourth
Street.

Peanut oil, or lard are used in China for frying and cooking. Where the
recipes call for “vegetable oil or lard” any shortening or drippings
may be used, including Crisco, Best Foods Shortening Mazola and Wesson
Oil.

The ingredients noted in each recipe are enough to serve six portions.




CONTENTS


  TEA                         1

  EGG-FLOWERS SOUP            2

  CHINESE RICE                3

  LEFT OVER RICE              3

  SHRIMP STRAWS               4

  SHRIMPS AND TOAST           5

  SHRIMPS AND MUSHROOMS       6

  FRIED SHRIMPS               7

  SHRIMP CAKES                8

  SWEET AND SOUR FISH         9

  FISH BALLS                  10

  PINEAPPLE FISH              11

  PEI YU                      12

  BROILED PORK                13

  BEAN SPROUTS AND PORK       14

  BEAN SPROUTS                15

  SPRING ROLLS                16

  CABBAGE ROLLS               17

  MEAT CUSTARD                18

  CORN AND WHITE MEAT OF
  CHICKEN                     19

  WALNUT CHICKEN              20

  STUFFED MUSHROOMS           21

  WANG SHIH                   22

  STRING BEANS                23

  ALMOND CHOW MEIN            24

  SWEET POTATO BALLS          25

  PRECIOUS PUDDING            26

  SAUCE                       27




TEA


  1 teaspoon of tea leaves
  6 cups of boiling water

Scald out a crockery teapot. While it is warm put into it a teaspoonful
of tea leaves. Pour on fresh boiling water. Steep from three to five
minutes before serving.




EGG-FLOWERS SOUP


  1 quart chicken broth
  ½ cup finely chopped water chestnuts
  2 eggs
  pepper and salt

Pour half cupful of finely chopped water chestnuts into a quart of
boiling chicken broth. Cook for about five minutes. Beat up two eggs,
yolks and whites together. Pour egg into chicken broth and stir well
and slowly until it forms small flowers. Add pepper and salt to taste.




CHINESE RICE


The proper way to cook rice is to wash the rice clean, add water,
measuring one inch above the rice surface.

Let it come to a boil, then turn the gas low, let the rice simmer until
it is cooked dry. Do not open the lid during cooking. When the rice is
correctly cooked, every grain stands by itself.




LEFT OVER RICE


Chop up some left-over meat, or ham or bacon, and an onion. Brown all
together in a frying pan, with a little oil or fat. Add rice, fry all
together again until rice and meat become brown.




  This Recipe Awarded First Prize
  The Women’s Exposition of Industrial Arts, New York City
  Nineteen Hundred Twenty-Seven

SHRIMP STRAWS


  1 lb. fresh shelled shrimps
  1 lb. white bread
  whites of 3 eggs
  ½ onion
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  small piece fresh ginger

Place shelled shrimps, onion and ginger in a chopper and chop very
fine; remove from chopper into a large bowl, add the whites of three
eggs, salt and pepper, then beat the ingredients until stiff. Now
spread the mixture upon thinly sliced bread. Cut into strips about an
inch wide and four inches long. Sprinkle browned bread crumbs upon the
shrimp strips. Place in boiling deep vegetable oil or lard; as soon as
the bread turns golden brown, remove straws from fat and place upon a
piece of paper to drain off the oil.

Shrimp straws should always be served hot and fresh.




SHRIMPS AND TOAST


  1 lb. small fresh shrimps, shelled
  ½ lb. thinly sliced toast
  ½ lb. water chestnuts
  1 small piece of ginger
  pepper, salt and soy bean sauce

Toast sliced bread, butter and cut into small cubes. Fry shrimps in a
red hot frying pan, use very little vegetable oil or lard to grease
the pan; as soon as shrimps turn red remove from the pan. Fry water
chestnuts, which have been boiled a little, and cut into cubes. Add
shrimps and a little finely chopped ginger, season to taste with
pepper, salt and soy bean sauce. Now add the cubes of toast to the
cooked shrimps and stir well before serving.




SHRIMPS AND MUSHROOMS


  1 lb. fresh shelled shrimps
  1 lb. fresh mushrooms
  ¼ lb. bamboo shoots, sliced thin
  Cornstarch
  small piece ginger, pepper,
  salt and soy bean sauce

Fry shrimps in a red hot frying pan, which has been greased with a
little vegetable oil or lard, until shrimps turn red. Place in a hot
pan, which has been greased with vegetable oil or bacon fat, finely
chopped ginger, mushrooms and bamboo shoots; fry until tender. Remove
the cooked mushrooms and use drippings with cornstarch to make a medium
gravy, season with pepper, salt, and soy bean sauce. Add shrimps,
cooked mushrooms and bamboo shoots.




FRIED SHRIMPS


  1 lb. shelled fresh shrimps
  3 eggs
  ½ cup flour
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  2 teaspoons soy bean sauce

Beat up the three eggs, whites and yolks together, add flour, pepper,
salt and soy bean sauce to season, lastly add the shrimps to the
mixture. Dip out one shrimp at a time with a tablespoon, drop into a
pan of deep boiling vegetable oil or lard; as soon as it turns brown
take out of the fat and place on a piece of paper to drain. They are
then ready to serve.




SHRIMP CAKES


  6 eggs
  ¼ cup cooked shrimps, sliced fine
  ⅛ cup onion, sliced fine
  ⅛ cup mushrooms, sliced fine
  ⅛ teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper
  3 teaspoons soy bean sauce

Beat six eggs, whites and yolks together, add the sliced onion and
mushrooms, season to taste. Put a tablespoonful of the mixture into a
red hot frying pan which has been greased over with vegetable oil or
lard. Shrimp cakes are fried just the same as pancakes. Serve hot.




SWEET AND SOUR FISH


  1 large fish, well cleaned
  1 cup pickled onions, cucumbers,
    sliced thin
  2 large fresh onions, sliced fine
  1 cup cider vinegar
  1 piece fresh ginger
  2 bell peppers, red and green
  2 tablespoons sugar
  cornstarch

Slice the fresh onions and peppers, soak three hours in hot cider
vinegar which has been boiled with a little salt and sugar. After
rubbing the fish with salt and black pepper, fry it in deep cooking oil
or lard until fish skin is crisp and brown. When cooked enough remove
from the deep fat and place on a large platter. Drain the onions and
peppers. Use the same vinegar, pouring it into a frying pan which has
been greased; let vinegar come to a boil, add sugar, salt, pepper, and
Chinese soy bean sauce to taste. Then take up the ingredients spread
them nicely over the fried fish, now add the pickled mixtures to the
seasoned vinegar and let them come to a boil. Dip up the pickled
vegetables and spread evenly on top of the fish. Make a medium gravy
with a little cornstarch, using the same vinegar in which the pickled
vegetables were cooked. Pour that rich gravy over whole fish and serve
hot.




FISH BALLS


  1 lb. white fish meat
  2 ounces of pork fat
  1 piece ginger
  1 small onion
  1 teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon pepper
  3 teaspoons soy bean sauce

Remove bones and skin from fish and chop fish, ginger and onion in a
meat chopper until very fine. Take out and put into a large bowl. Beat
whites of two eggs, add fish mixture, beat the entire mixture until
light. Shape the ingredients into balls, with a spoon and knife, drop
the balls in deep red hot fat; when brown remove from fat, place the
balls on a paper to drain off the oil. Serve hot.




PINEAPPLE FISH


  1 lb. white fish
  ½ can sliced pineapple
  4 green peppers
  ¼ lb. bamboo shoots
  ⅛ cup white vinegar
  2 teaspoons brown sugar
  small piece of ginger
  soy bean sauce
  cornstarch

Wash fish clean and dry with a towel. Slice it cross-wise. Dice the
pineapple. Cut up the peppers and bamboo shoots into small pieces and
fry in a red hot pan and add ginger. Add a quarter cup full of white
vinegar, brown sugar, pepper and salt and soy bean sauce to taste. Add
the fish to the mixture, stir well until cooked tender. Lastly add the
diced pineapple, thicken the gravy with a little cornstarch. Serve hot.




PEI YU[1]


  1 lb. fresh white fish
  4 large green peppers
  4 onions
  ½ lb. mushrooms
  ½ lb. water chestnuts
  ¼ lb. bamboo shoots
  1 small piece of ginger
  1 dessertspoon of cornstarch

Wash fish (such as flounder or halibut) and dry it with a towel. Slice
cross-wise. Cut onions, green peppers, water chestnuts, mushrooms and
bamboo shoots into pieces. Grease a hot frying pan and fry all the
sliced vegetables together in the pan until tender. Then add sliced
fish. Stir the whole well, adding soy bean sauce, salt and pepper to
taste. Thicken gravy with a little cornstarch.

[1] (White Fish)




BROILED PORK


  1 lb. lean raw pork
  6 tablespoons black soy bean sauce
  2 tablespoons sugar
  2 tablespoons salt
  1 teaspoon pepper

Cut meat into strips about two inches thick. Soak meat in mixture made
of soy bean sauce, sugar, pepper and salt.

String the strips of meat on a wire, broil over a glowing charcoal
fire. If charcoal fire is not convenient, place strips of meat in a pan
and broil under a gas flame slowly, until meat is well done and golden
brown. Serve hot.




BEAN SPROUTS AND PORK


  1½ lb. bean sprouts
  ½ lb. pork, sliced thin
  1 small piece of ginger, chopped fine
  4 teaspoons soy bean sauce
  pepper and salt

Fry sliced pork with ginger in a red hot pan, with a little oil, then
add the soy bean sauce to the meat. Cook the pork until golden brown
and add the bean sprouts. Cook sprouts slightly, not more than three
minutes, season to taste and serve hot.




BEAN SPROUTS


  1 lb. bean sprouts
  1 small piece of ginger
  salt and pepper, soy bean sauce

Wash bean sprouts clean. Chop the ginger very fine. Fry sprouts and
ginger together in a hot frying pan which has been greased with lard or
vegetable oil. Cook for five minutes, season with salt, pepper and soy
bean sauce.




SPRING ROLLS


  4 large thin membranes from the
    fat of lard
  1 cup of cold ham, sliced fine
  ¼ cup mushrooms, sliced fine
  ¼ cup onions or celery, sliced fine
  ⅛ cup bamboo shoots, sliced fine
  4 teaspoons soy bean sauce
  1 teaspoon salt
  ⅛ teaspoon pepper

Fry onions, bamboo shoots, mushrooms and ham in a frying pan with a
little vegetable oil or lard, season the mixture with pepper and a dash
of soy bean sauce. Remove ingredients from pan. Spread the mixtures
evenly on each of the lard membranes. Roll them up as you would jelly
rolls. Be sure to roll the mixtures together tightly. Drop each roll
into the deep hot fat. As soon as a roll turns brown and crisp, remove
it from the fat and drain off the oil on a piece of paper.

The spring rolls should always be sliced slantwise and served hot.




CABBAGE ROLLS


  ½ lb. meat chopped fine
  2 red peppers
  1 onion
  1 head of white cabbage
  4 teaspoons soy bean sauce
  pepper and salt

Place meat, onion and peppers in a meat grinder and grind the mixture
fine. Season to taste.

Remove each leaf from the cabbage and wash and dry thoroughly. Take two
tablespoons of the meat mixture and place on the cabbage leaf, shape it
lengthwise and roll tight. Do the same thing with each leaf until all
the meat mixture is used.

Place the cabbage rolls in a steamer and steam for half an hour, or
until well done. Serve while hot.




MEAT CUSTARD


  8 eggs
  ⅓ cup water
  ½ cup cooked meat, chopped fine
  1 small square of butter
  1 small piece of ginger
  2 teaspoons soy bean sauce
  pepper and salt

Beat the eggs, add one-third cup of water, meat and ginger chopped
fine. Beat all the ingredients well and add seasoning to taste. Pour
the mixture into a large sized bowl or a deep platter. Bake the meat
custard over a pan of water in a moderate oven as you would any egg
custard. Bake until well done and serve hot.




CORN AND WHITE MEAT OF CHICKEN


  1 can sweet corn
  1 cup strong chicken soup
  ½ cup fine white meat of chicken
  ¼ cup cooked ham, chopped fine
  salt and pepper

Cook the corn and white meat of chicken just to a boil, then add soup,
stir the ingredients well, bring all to a boil and add seasoning. Pour
the cooked mixture into a deep vegetable dish, sprinkle with fine
chopped ham and serve hot.




WALNUT CHICKEN


  1 young chicken
  ½ lb. walnut or almond meats
  ⅓ lb. water chestnuts
  10 large sized black mushrooms

Fry nut meats in oven until slightly brown or crisp.

Remove meat of chicken from bones and cut into small cubes and fry in
hot pan with a little fat.

Soak mushrooms in warm water and cut into cubes.

Blanch and cut water chestnuts into cubes, then fry mushrooms and
chestnuts in same manner as chicken.

Add mushrooms and chestnuts to chicken, with a small piece of ginger
chopped fine and a dash of soy bean sauce, pepper and salt to taste. To
this mixture add the browned nut meats stirring the whole thing well.
Serve hot.




STUFFED MUSHROOMS


  1 lb. mushrooms
  ⅛ lb. chopped pork
  ⅛ lb. chopped shrimps
  3 egg whites
  small piece ginger
  pepper and salt
  soy bean sauce

Beat up the egg whites, add meat, shrimps, ginger, (chopped fine) and
seasoning. Beat the ingredients well. Drop one dessert spoon of batter
evenly on each mushroom. Place mushrooms on a large platter and steam
mushrooms and meat mixture until well done. Serve hot.




WANG SHIH[2]


  8 nice large tomatoes
  4 eggs
  1 teaspoon sugar

Remove the skins (and seeds too, if you have great patience) from the
tomatoes and put in a granite pan. Cook until water is evaporated. Add
sugar, pepper and salt, and eggs well beaten and slightly cooked. Add
soy bean sauce and serve hot.

[2] (Tomato and Eggs).




STRING BEANS


  1 lb. string beans
  ½ lb. chopped meat
  2 teaspoons black soy bean sauce
  salt and pepper

Remove strings from beans, break up into one and one-half inch lengths.
Wash clean. Put just enough water to cover. Bring it to a boil and pour
off the water.

Fry the chopped meat in red hot pan, previously greased with fat. Add
cooked beans to the meat. Cook mixture until meat and beans are tender.




ALMOND CHOW MEIN


  1 lb. noodles
  ¼ lb. mushrooms
  ¼ lb. bamboo shoots
  ¼ lb. water chestnuts
  ⅛ cup thinly sliced chicken meat
  ⅛ cup thinly sliced cooked ham
  2 fried eggs
  ½ cup roasted almonds

Drop the raw noodles into a pot of boiling water. Add a little salt and
boil for five minutes. Drain and let cold water run over it. Dry for
half an hour or until thoroughly dry. Drop into deep fat as you would
doughnuts. Take out quickly and drain off the fat on brown paper. Take
a clean frying pan, grease it and fry the mushrooms, bamboo shoots, and
water chestnuts until they are cooked tender. Season them with salt,
pepper, soy bean sauce and ginger to taste. Remove vegetables from pan
and fry noodles in the same grease. Take a large platter, make a layer
of noodles, a layer of vegetables and a layer of chicken and ham. Beat
up two eggs and fry in greased pan. Slice very fine and spread on top
of chicken and ham. Sprinkle on the almonds and trim with parsley if
desired.

 (Chinese noodles may be obtained at Thirty-two Mott Street, Chinatown,
 New York City.)




SWEET POTATO BALLS


  ½ lb. cocoanut grated fine
  1 cup chopped almonds
  2 teaspoons butter
  1 cup sugar
  ½ lb. mashed sweet potato
  1 lb. Chinese rice flour

Mix shredded cocoanut and chopped nuts with sugar and butter; steam
until butter melts.

Make the mashed sweet potatoes and rice flour into a paste. Roll out
thin on board and cut in small circles.

Fill with cocoanut filling and shape into small balls. Fry in deep fat
until golden brown and drain on brown paper.




PRECIOUS PUDDING


  1½ cups rice
   ½ cup barley
   ⅛ cup candied lotus seeds
   ⅛ cup almonds
   ⅛ cup seedless raisins
   ⅛ cup fresh peanuts
   ⅛ cup large candied cherries
   8 strips of citron sliced very thin
  1½ cups sugar

Cook rice and barley together in about one quart of water.

Take a very large deep bowl or mold that has plenty of surface; arrange
the eight precious fruits and nuts in some kind of pretty design at
the bottom of the bowl. Now pour the rice and barley, which have been
drained, into the bowl, and steam for at least an hour, until well
cooked.

Turn out with design on top and serve with sauce.




SAUCE


  1½ cups sugar
   ½ cup water, seasoned with lemon

Cook sugar and water until a thread spins and add lemon juice to taste.




  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italics are shown thus: _sloping_.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation are retained.

  Perceived typographical errors have been changed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHINESE RECIPES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


