The Project Gutenberg eBook of Slighted love
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Slighted love
        or, At her heart's expense

Author: Mrs. Alex. McVeigh Miller

Release date: June 29, 2025 [eBook #76413]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Street & Smith, 1931

Credits: Demian Katz and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy of the Digital Library@Villanova University.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLIGHTED LOVE ***





  SLIGHTED LOVE

  OR

  At Her Heart’s Expense

  By MRS. ALEX. McVEIGH MILLER

  Author of “They Looked and Loved,” “When We Two Parted,”
  “All for Love,” etc.

  [Illustration: S AND S NOVELS]

  Printed in the U. S. A.

  STREET & SMITH PUBLICATIONS, Inc.
  PUBLISHERS
  79-89 Seventh Avenue, New York, N. Y.




SLIGHTED LOVE.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER I. A MOTHER’S CONFESSION.
  CHAPTER II. IN NEW SURROUNDINGS.
  CHAPTER III. ACCUSED OF FRAUD.
  CHAPTER IV. IN A SPIDER’S WEB.
  CHAPTER V. HER FATHER’S FRIEND.
  CHAPTER VI. EMMETT’S PLEA.
  CHAPTER VII. IN DEADLY PERIL.
  CHAPTER VIII. A MOTHER’S HATE.
  CHAPTER IX. ITALY VALE’S SONG.
  CHAPTER X. BORNE ON THE TIDE.
  CHAPTER XI. WITHOUT A HOME.
  CHAPTER XII. THE BEAUTIFUL YOUNG WIDOW.
  CHAPTER XIII. NAMING THE BABY.
  CHAPTER XIV. PERCY SEABRIGHT’S ADVICE.
  CHAPTER XV. THE LAWYER’S STORY.
  CHAPTER XVI. ITALY’S RESOLUTION.
  CHAPTER XVII. MRS. MURRAY’S ANGUISH.
  CHAPTER XVIII. A LOYAL HEART.
  CHAPTER XIX. FRANCIS MURRAY FOUND.
  CHAPTER XX. MR. GARDNER PROMISES HELP.
  CHAPTER XXI. FRANCIS MURRAY RECOVERS.
  CHAPTER XXII. MRS. VALE SHOCKS HER DAUGHTER.
  CHAPTER XXIII. A MEMORABLE SLEIGH-RIDE.
  CHAPTER XXIV. PROFESSOR DOEPKIN’S HEROISM.
  CHAPTER XXV. ITALY’S CLUE.
  CHAPTER XXVI. THE DESERTED BRIDE.
  CHAPTER XXVII. IN ITALY’S POWER.
  CHAPTER XXVIII. MRS. VALE IS VINDICATED.
  CHAPTER XXIX. LOVE TURNED TO HATE.
  CHAPTER XXX. PERCY SEABRIGHT’S TRIAL.
  CHAPTER XXXI. THE WAGES OF SIN.
  CHAPTER XXXII. IN THE SUNSET’S GLOW.




CHAPTER I.

A MOTHER’S CONFESSION.


Italy Vale! When you heard her name you associated it with blue skies,
with orange-groves, and rippling streams; when you saw her face you
thought of music and poetry and flowers; of dusky pansies like her
somber eyes; of pale-pink roses like her cheeks; of scarlet geraniums
like her lips; of young palm-trees that were not more graceful than
her slender form, and of the purple bloom of the grape that seemed
to linger on her dark, waving tresses--but it was not beneath tropic
skies you found her, but on a flat, sandy, wind-swept beach of bleak
Massachusetts, at Winthrop-by-the-Sea, a brilliant, dusky-eyed,
foreign-looking girl, like some rare-plumaged, tropical bird alighted
on an alien shore.

She was young, she was maddeningly lovely, this girl, and but a few
months before she had knelt beneath the blossoming limes in an old
Italian garden, and looking up with dark, pathetic eyes into the pale,
fair face above her, had murmured anxiously:

“Mama, why do we lead so lonely a life? Why do people seem to shun us?
What have we done?”

The mother’s soft blue eyes had filled with tears as she faltered:

“So you have seen it, my darling? I can no longer hide from you our
desolation.”

“No, mama, for now I am seventeen years old, and can reason quite like
a woman. I have seen what I have told you--that we two are alone in the
world together, friendless and seemingly shunned. We rove from clime
to clime like two restless ghosts, yet everywhere some dark shadow of
destiny follows us. We seem to be known and remarked even in places
that are strange to us. As for you, I comprehend that you are bitterly
unhappy, for I have never seen a smile upon your lips. Mama, why is it
so? Why are we branded and set apart from the rest of the world?”

The blue-eyed mother sobbed bitterly:

“The moment I have dreaded so long has come at last. I must confess the
truth to my child. God grant her strength to bear the cross.”

She kissed the eager, upturned face, and her tears fell on its wondrous
beauty.

“Oh, my love, my love, how cruel Fate has been to us!” she cried. “I
might have been so happy, and you might have reigned like a little
queen, but, alas, alas! one dark moment of horror changed both our
lives--turned sunshine to darkness, happiness to despair.”

The girl’s white arms, that were a very poem of beauty, encircled the
drooping form, the red lips kissed the tears away, and the sweet voice
murmured tenderly:

“And you have not deserved that the winds of Fate should blow roughly
upon you, my dearest one.”

“God bless you for those loving words, my child. Oh, what a treasure is
your faith and love! May they not fail me when you learn of the shadow
that has darkened your life and mine,” sighed Mrs. Vale, and, after a
moment, she added falteringly:

“Italy, dear, you have been told that your father died in your early
childhood, but you have never known what I must tell you now. He--my
poor husband--was--murdered!”

“Oh, Heaven!” and Italy’s dark, silken head dropped half-fainting upon
her mother’s knee, her eyes closed upon the blue Italian landscape that
seemed blurred by a strange mist.

Mrs. Vale’s thin, blue-veined hand fell in tender caressing upon the
dark curls.

“Be brave, dear, for there is more to tell, and it is so horrible,” she
sobbed. “Oh, Italy, I, your mother, his cherished wife, was accused of
my husband’s murder, and tried for my life!”

“Oh, Heaven!” again sobbed the girl, and a convulsive shudder passed
over the kneeling form.

Mrs. Vale shuddered, too, and after a moment added brokenly:

“Tried and acquitted.”

Italy half-raised her head, a sob of joy quivering over her lips, but
again Mrs. Vale spoke:

“The circumstantial evidence was not strong enough to convict, so the
jury acquitted me--but--public opinion adjudged me guilty. The judge
and jury that acquitted me were hissed in the crowded court-room. I,
too, was hissed as I left it, and ever since that day a malicious
clamor has hounded my friendless footsteps through the world.”

She paused, and the low winds sighing through the blossoming limes
seemed to echo the despair of her voice.

The dark, silken head lay still upon her knee. Italy was past moving or
speaking for the moment, like one tranced in a terrible dream.

The low, sad voice went on:

“I should not have said that I was utterly friendless. My lawyer
believed in me, was kind to me. After the trial I stayed for years in
Boston, trying to live down the odium of my trial, but all in vain;
then this kind friend advised me to come abroad.”

“Mama, then you are an American?” cried the daughter, in surprise.

“Yes, darling, I was born on New England soil, and your father was
murdered at our seaside home at Winthrop, near Boston. It is there that
his heir lives now.”

“His heir, mama?”

“Yes, Italy; your father was very rich, but his wealth had come to him
through English ancestry, and was strictly entailed on the male issue
of the family. You were a girl, so the money went to a very distant
cousin, a young man. To me, the hapless widow, and to you, the orphaned
daughter, remained only my own small private fortune. With no relatives
to turn to, deserted by my former friends, abhorred by the world, I
soon became the restless wanderer I am now, but pursued ever by some
malignant, unknown foe, who constantly blazons my sad story to the
carping world.”

“My dearest one!” cried the girl caressingly, and her tender voice was
full of love and sympathy.

The pale, statuesque face of Mrs. Vale quivered with emotion, and she
strained the girl to her breast, sobbing convulsively:

“My child, you can never know what I have suffered! Oh, it has been a
living death, this life of mine! I loved my husband so dearly that his
loss was enough to break my heart; and to think of being accused of his
death, to think of living under a ban, acquitted by the law, and judged
guilty by popular verdict. Oh, it is enough to drive one mad!” and her
slight form shook with heavy sobs as she clung to the beloved child,
whose love was all that had saved her from utter misery.

“Mama, who did it? Who killed my father?” cried the girl.

“God alone knows, Italy. There was never any clue to any one, save some
weak evidence that threw suspicion on me. Darling, I have kept all the
papers in the case and everything relating to it--kept them for you
when you should grow to womanhood. You shall read them to-morrow, you
shall know the whole tragic story, so that you may judge the mother you
love.”

“My dearest one!” again cried the girl, and they wept together in each
other’s arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

That was long months ago, and now the girl who had knelt weeping in the
old Italian garden walked alone on the beach at Winthrop, her dark,
eager eyes fixed on a splendid old stone mansion fronting the sea--The
Lodge, where her father had been murdered and where his heir now lived.

She went toward the grand villa, her eyes bright and thoughtful, her
mind going back to that golden day in Italy when she had heard her
mother sob despairingly:

“How could they say I killed him? I loved him so, I loved him so, and
all my life is blighted by his loss!”

Her lips were trembling with the sadness of that memory as she went up
the broad stone steps to the grand portico dotted with inviting easy
chairs, while the broad double doors in front stood hospitably open,
giving a view of a magnificent hall paved with cool blue and white
tiles, and adorned with gleaming white statues between immense potted
plants of tropical beauty. The warm breeze of August, tempered by the
cool sea-air, stirred the lance-leaved palms and bright-hued caladiums.

“This would have been my home had my father lived,” she murmured, and
then she saw a tall man-servant approach her from the interior of the
hall. She roused herself from a fanciful retrospection, and asked for
Francis Murray, the master of the house.

“He is in his study. I will be pleased to take your card to him, miss.”

“I have no card. Simply tell him a stranger on important business,”
Italy answered, with a strange, defiant uplifting of her slender ebon
brows, and she sat down in one of the portico chairs to wait.

In another moment two beautiful young girls and a very stylish young
man, all in natty yachting-suits, came sauntering up the broad steps.
When they saw Italy sitting there in her simple gray traveling-dress,
quiet and yet elegant, they stared in surprise, then nodded
courteously, and also took seats at a distance, regarding her with
veiled curiosity and admiration, all unconscious that this lovely,
foreign-looking girl had brought into the quiet Lodge an element of
intense tragedy.

“Ah, Alexie, that was a glorious sail,” cried the young man gaily.

“Alys did not think so,” and the young girl nodded at the other one,
whose rosy lips were puckered in an angry pout.

“It was hateful, and I wish you would not tease me, Ralph Allen!”
exclaimed the pretty blonde petulantly, just as the servant came back
and said:

“Mr. Murray will see you, miss.”

Italy followed him through the wide hall, and the other three gazed
after the graceful form in subdued wonder.

“Whew! Alys, how do you like that?” laughed Ralph Allen.

“She is burning with jealousy of the beautiful unknown,” twittered the
girl called Alexie, and the hum of their merry badinage followed Italy
as she went with an almost tragic face toward the man she wished to
see--her distant kinsman.

She found him in a beautiful library, with most exquisite appointments,
the large open windows fronting the sea, whose salty breath blew
deliciously into the room and mixed with the fine aroma of a cigar that
Francis Murray flung away as he rose to meet his stranger guest, the
girl with the tropic face and soul, who was bringing at this moment
new, strange elements of emotion into his calm, prosperous existence.




CHAPTER II.

IN NEW SURROUNDINGS.


They stood face to face, the pair, and just for a moment Italy’s eyes
sank to the cool, blue-tiled floor, with its litter of white fur rugs.
Then she looked up and met Francis Murray’s gaze. Suddenly her breath
came in a quick gasp, she trembled strangely, and her lips, that had
parted to speak, closed again without a sound. She was stirred in a
new and subtile fashion she could not comprehend. It was the magnetic
influence of manly beauty and power combined upon a young girl’s heart.

Francis Murray was a large man, with a most attractive personality.
He was fair without being strictly blond, his splendid eyes were
blue-gray, with a sweet, serious look, his brow was white and square,
his nose straight, his face oval with a firm chin, and full, sweet
lips shaded by a drooping mustache of silky golden-brown. His hair a
few shades darker, clustered in short, wavy masses to a grandly shaped
head. He was past the early flush of youth, and looked thirty years
old, perhaps a trifle more.

On his side Francis Murray was gazing on a type of beauty entirely
distinct from his own, and quite as captivating, but thirty years, and
perhaps a store of experience, had made him unimpressionable. His fine
eyes expressed only surprise and courteous inquiry as he spoke:

“My name is Francis Murray, Miss----”

“Vale--Italy Vale,” answered the girl, and she saw him start ever so
slightly as he motioned to a chair.

“Will you be seated, Miss Vale?”

Italy was trembling strangely; she was glad to accept the courtesy.
Then she lifted up her eyes to him and continued in her sweet, liquid
voice with its distinctly foreign accent:

“Perhaps my name is familiar to you, Mr. Murray. My father was your
kinsman--Ronald Vale.”

“Ah-h!” cried Francis Murray.

He half-started from the chair into which he had gracefully flung
himself; his handsome face grew slightly pale. Before he could speak,
the low voice went on musically:

“You have a mother, sir, have you not?”

“Yes,” he replied coldly.

“And I, sir, am doubly orphaned. I--I--have--lost--my--dear--
mother----” her voice shook painfully, and her lashes fell, perhaps to
crush back rising tears.

He interrupted, in surprise:

“Mrs. Vale is dead! When?”

But the girl was sobbing hysterically in her handkerchief. Some broken
words escaped her lips--words of entreaty that he would not question
her yet, while her sorrow was so fresh, so new.

He was silent, respecting her grief, but his face was a study, it was
so thoughtful, so perturbed.

Italy looked up at him again presently, the bright tears beading her
black curly lashes, her lips tremulous.

“When I lost my mother I had--no kinspeople in the world but you,”
she sobbed. “Mama had once--told me about you--and--your mother, so
I thought I ought to come--home to you two. I call it home, you see,
although I was born in Italy and bear that name. But I am an American,
after all, you know, and my heart turned to my father’s old home. Was I
wrong to come, or--may I stay?”

He sat speechless, staring at her in blank, appalled silence. In some
fashion, although it was a far-distant relationship, this girl was akin
to him, but--he was one of those who believed in her mother’s guilt. It
made his heart freeze to her child.

“May I stay?” she repeated, in a pathetic voice, seconded by great,
appealing dark eyes.

“Miss Vale, I must consult my mother first,” he answered bruskly, in
spite of himself, and hurriedly left the room.

Italy waited, her slender hands locked together in her lap, her dark
eyes gazing through the windows at the restless sea, her face pale,
her lips compressed in a scarlet line. Her kinsman’s cold manner had
chilled her like ice. She waited a long time, it seemed to her, then
the door opened softly and a woman came in--a woman of fifty, with the
traces of former beauty still remaining, tall, slight, and _distingué_
as a duchess. She held out an aristocratic hand sparkling with gems.

“So you are Ronald Vale’s daughter? Welcome to The Lodge,” she said
courteously, but with a frosty tone that did not escape Italy’s
sensitive hearing.

But she bowed with as thoroughbred an air as madam’s own, and presented
the tips of her small, cold fingers.

“My son has told me,” continued the sweet, chilly voice, “that your
mother is dead, leaving you alone and friendless in the world. You were
right to come to us. Your father was my cousin, although a very distant
one. I was a Vale before my marriage. You resemble your father very
much.”

With those few words Italy Vale was received as a member of the Murray
family. There was no attempt at cordiality, no exuberant welcome. She
understood clearly that, inasmuch as she had thrust herself upon the
Murrays, they accepted the unwelcome charge through a sense of duty,
mixed with highbred courtesy.

Soon she stood alone in the luxurious guest-chamber Mrs. Murray had
assigned her after promising to have her small amount of luggage
brought from the station at once.

Mrs. Murray herself showed Italy her room, and, lingering a moment,
said:

“We have some Boston friends staying in the house--the Misses
Audenreid, Alys and Alexie, twin sisters, and their aunt, a young
widow--also two young men, Ralph Allen and Emmett Harlow. They are all
very pleasant people, and I hope you will get on with them. I will go
now and send my maid to assist you.”

The door closed, and Italy was alone with her own thoughts.

“It was easy--so far!” she mused. “God grant me success in my mission!”
then the dark eyes suddenly dimmed. “But, oh, how I miss you, my
dearest one,” she sighed.

Down-stairs there was a little flutter of excitement among the guests,
who had learned from Mrs. Murray of the advent of the orphan girl, who
would from henceforth be a member of the household.

Alexie Audenreid and Ralph Allen laughed, but Alys frowned at the news.
It was an open secret to all that Alys was setting her cap at the
master of the house, and that she was jealous of every possible rival.

She was bent on captivating the wary heart of the grave, handsome host,
and in this ambition she was encouraged by her dashing aunt, Mrs.
Dunn, who, by the way, was not a widow, as Mrs. Murray had said, but
a divorcee. She always spoke of herself as a widow, however, and her
friends very kindly supported the little fiction. Truth to tell, Mrs.
Murray rather seconded the designs of Alys.

She disliked to see Francis growing into a bachelor past thirty, with
no particular interest in the fair sex, indeed with a soupçon of
cynical indifference toward it. She wished him to marry, and Alys
Audenreid, only twenty years old, pretty, and with a neat fortune,
seemed a very suitable match.

Alexie was already engaged to Ralph Allen, and the twin sisters had
always planned to be married on the same night.

The wedding-day was set for January, so Alys would have to hasten the
wooing of the laggard lover.

Into this coterie of friends, with their selfish aims and desires,
Italy Vale had now entered, a jarring, unwelcome element. What would be
the outcome of it all?

       *       *       *       *       *

A week had passed--a month it seemed to the lonely girl who felt
herself an alien to those by whom she was surrounded.

To Francis Murray, the man who possessed such a peculiar interest for
Italy, she was almost as much a stranger as on the first day she came.

“He avoids me, courteously, yet palpably,” she said to herself
bitterly. “But no wonder. It is his guilty conscience. The daughter’s
presence is a reminder of the parents whom he wronged. Oh, Heaven,
can it be true that this noble-looking man is the criminal I suspect,
whom I have vowed to hunt down? But who else was there to profit by
my father’s death?” and she watched Francis Murray with a painful
intensity, till she grew to know almost every expression of the
thoughtful, handsome face that was so grave and cold whenever it
turned to her, the girl who had thrust herself upon his care.

Almost the first day of her coming, Mrs. Murray had said to her almost
apologetically:

“My son is very quiet and studious. You must not expect him to be very
cordial. It is not his way. He likes best to be left alone in his
library among his books.”

“I shall not intrude upon him, madam,” the girl answered almost
haughtily, and her footsteps never strayed near the beautiful room
where she had first met the gaze of the startled, blue-gray eyes of
Francis Murray.

She quite understood the delicate hint that she was to keep out of his
way. But she did not believe that it was not his way to be cordial.
She noticed him with the others. She saw that he could unbend from his
grave dignity to jest and laugh with them.

Italy soon found out that Alys Audenreid adored her host. She owned to
herself that it was not strange. There was a fascination about this man
that made itself felt even without effort of his own.

“I, too, could admire him, but for my terrible suspicions,” she owned
to herself, with unwilling candor.

The days went by, and it seemed as if, after all, she might win a few
friends in the household. Ralph Allen and Alexie, his pretty fiancée,
were kind to her, and soon she found that Emmett Harlow was often at
her side, his clear blue eyes expressing a very decided admiration for
the handsome stranger. He had a kind heart, and he tried to make up to
her for the coldness of the others.

“You must not mind Alys,” he said. “She is jealous of every pretty
face that comes under the eyes of Francis Murray, and as for her aunt,
she is spiteful because there is a man she likes very much, and she is
afraid he will fall in love with you when he comes here next week.”

“He is coming here, then?” she asked, without much interest in the
subject, so dull are we when Fate knocks at our doors.

“Oh, yes, he is a particular friend of the Murrays, and a member of our
yacht-club--a Bostonian when he is at home, but something of a rover
and Bohemian in his tastes. Mrs. Dunn has been in love with him for
years, and I do believe he has promised to marry her, only the marrying
never comes off, nobody just knows why. Maybe he don’t like it the way
she throws herself at his head. Well, you’ll see them together next
week, and can judge for yourself. But don’t permit him to make love to
you, or she is quite capable of scratching your black eyes out.”

“I shall not enter the lists for her lover’s smiles,” Italy answered
coldly, and she felt so little interested that she did not even ask his
name. What did she care for the men or women here, save only to find
out that for which she had come--the secret, silent purpose that swayed
her in remaining the unwelcome guest at The Lodge.

“I have been here a week. It seems like months, but I am no nearer the
clue I came to seek,” she sighed. “Oh, that I could find my father’s
missing diary--the gold-clasped book--whose contents he guarded so
jealously even from my mother’s eyes! She believed that its contents
might throw some possible light upon the mystery of his death. What
became of that volume? Did my father hide it away before he died, or
did the murderer destroy it? My father always kept it in that very
desk before which I found Francis Murray sitting the day I came here
first--the very desk, the very library where my parent met his tragic
death, and which I am tacitly forbidden to enter. Oh, how can that man
bear to sit there day by day among his books? I hate him, oh, I hate
him!” and she burst into tears.

It chafed her almost to fury, the cold indifference of this man. She
repaid it in kind by silent scorn, but beneath it all her heart burned
like fire, yearned to punish him, to prove him guilty of that which she
suspected.

She did not know that Francis Murray watched her always with a painful
interest, and that he had told Mrs. Murray one day that he was glad
Italy resembled her father more than her mother. Mrs. Murray had agreed
with him, and added:

“She had the face of an angel, but I shudder when I think of those
dazzling, dark-blue eyes with their long, curling lashes, and that
exquisite face in its framing of golden-brown locks. How beautiful she
was, and how wicked! How could she die with her sin unconfessed and not
even repented?”

“Italy will tell you nothing of her death?” he asked.

“Nothing. The mere mention of her mother’s death throws her into such
agonies of hysterical grief that I am forced to avoid the subject
entirely. But it is evident that she loved her far more than she ever
deserved!”




CHAPTER III.

ACCUSED OF FRAUD.


“Will you bring me some roses, Italy?” Mrs. Murray asked one day,
handing the girl a pretty willow basket.

She had discovered that Italy was always restless and unhappy in the
house, and that she liked best to wander alone in the garden among the
flowers, or down by the beach, where the great waves came rolling in
with their hollow, mysterious murmur of ships gone down at sea.

Italy wandered along the graveled paths, snipping roses into her basket
until it overflowed with the fragrant beauties, then she sat down to
rest on a rustic bench beneath a magnificent tree.

Her lovely, pensive face grew sad even to pathos. She drew a little
heart-shaped gold locket from the chain at her throat, and, unclasping
the lids, gazed long and earnestly at a face within. Then she kissed it
with clinging lips.

“My dearest one!” she cried passionately aloud.

An approaching step made her conceal the pretty souvenir. The intruder
was Francis Murray. There was a strange expression upon his face,
something of aroused interest, and, instead of passing by, he bowed and
seated himself at the other end of the bench.

“She has a lover, this fair young thing. It was his face she kissed in
her locket, it was of him she spoke,” he thought.

He gazed with intent and thoughtful eyes at the slender, white-gowned
figure, with its dainty, curving outlines and the lovely face with its
proud, dusky eyes.

The lights and shadows of the August moon shifted down through the
leaves upon the purplish-dark of her rich, waving hair, and the
delicate coloring of her skin, that deepened warmly under his strange
gaze. Her heart fluttered with something like pain, and she rose to go.

“No, stay, Miss Vale. I wish to speak to you,” said Francis Murray, in
gently imperative tones, and she paused, startled, yet half-defiant,
awaiting his will. Looking straight into her face, he asked:

“Miss Vale, are you a sleep-walker?”

Startled, she answered breathlessly:

“No!”

“Are you sure?” quizzically.

“Certainly,” she answered, cresting her little dark head angrily.

“Yet,” said Francis Murray coolly, “you were in the library last
night at midnight, dressed in your night-robes. You carried a small
night-lamp that you placed upon my desk while you proceeded to search
all its compartments that were accessible to your prying eyes. Failing
in your eager search, you sighed despairingly, and left the room.”

“Impossible!” cried the girl, in something like horror. Waves of
crimson went over her face at first, then it became dead white.

For answer, he held out to her a little comb of carved dead gold,
crusted with rubies. He said:

“While you were searching my desk I took this from your hair without
waking you. Permit me to restore it.”

She took it with trembling fingers, her face burning with mortification.

“Miss Vale, what motive was it that dominated you in your sleep, and
sent you upon that fruitless quest?”

“I cannot tell you,” she faltered, drooping in her seat, her eyes hot
with the tears she was too proud to let fall.

“Then I will tell _you_,” said Francis Murray sternly. “You were
searching for your father’s lost diary, the one on whose disappearance
so much anxiety hung during your mother’s trial for her husband’s
murder.”

Her pale lips parted with a gasp, then closed again without a sound.
She could only stare at him with somber, dilated dark eyes.

“I shall tell you something else, also, Miss Vale,” he continued almost
angrily, his handsome face quite pale, his blue-gray eyes gleaming with
repressed excitement. “I have found you out. You are not the innocent,
friendless orphan you pretended when you came here. You are a beautiful
little fraud, a clever schemer! No, hear me out--what I have to say.”

Had a yawning chasm opened at her very feet, Italy Vale could scarcely
have been more startled and alarmed than she was at the bold accusation
of Francis Murray. A smothered cry escaped her lips, and she fell back,
half-fainting, in her seat, her dilated dark eyes staring wildly at her
accuser, while his words seemed to ring in her ears in clarion tones:

“I have found you out. You are a beautiful little fraud, a clever
schemer!”

Yet his voice, though deep and stern, had been very low. He did not
wish to attract listeners.

Her stifled outcry, her alarm, looked to him like detected guilt, so
that, after that stern, “You _shall_ hear what I have to say,” he went
on determinedly:

“You came here, Miss Vale, with a settled purpose. You wish to find out
the real murderer of your father. You suspect _me_. Your only grounds
of suspicion are the simple and shallow ones that I was the only
beneficiary by your parent’s death. So you came to Winthrop to watch
me, to hound me down. Would to God that your wretched mother had lived
to save you from this madness!”

“Madness!” echoed the pale, writhing lips of the girl.

He answered hoarsely:

“Yes, madness! You think to avenge your father’s murder. A laudable
ambition, Miss Vale, but one fraught for you with inconceivable
horrors, for the closer you trace the thread of damning guilt, the
deeper will you blacken the memory of your dead mother.”

In her fierce anger she found voice:

“How dare you adjudge her guilty whom the law found innocent?”

Francis Murray groaned:

“I crave your pardon, Miss Vale, for filial affection always merits
respect and honor. But, alas, in warning you and dissuading you from
this Quixotic venture, my interest and my care are all for Ronald
Vale’s daughter--for his memory and for your sake. I conjure you as a
friend, let the case rest where it is. Be satisfied with the verdict of
the jury--not guilty.”

“Not guilty by the jury, but guilty by the world’s verdict,” she
muttered, half to herself, and in her eyes there gleamed a helpless
wrath more terrible than tears.

“Will you give up this insane quest?” he demanded earnestly.

The somber eyes flashed defiantly, as she breathed:

“I have not owned to that charge, remember.”

“Yet I have been reading it in your face and actions ever since the
first day you came to The Lodge.”

She lifted her dark head proudly, the angry color flaming into her
lovely face again.

“So then you are my only accuser--you--and upon no evidence but your
own fancy--I will not say a guilty fancy!”

She saw him wince under her intolerable sarcasm, and was bitterly glad
that the poisoned dart had struck home.

He looked at her in grave displeasure for a moment, then asked
pointedly:

“Do you deny my accusation?”

But Italy was ready with her answer.

“I neither deny nor acknowledge. You have made specific charges against
me. It remains for you to prove them!”

But in spite of the pride of her look and tone, he saw that she was
ready to burst into tears. She was barely more than a child, in spite
of her keen intelligence, but she had been tutored in the hard school
of experience, poor Italy. She rose from the seat, taking up the basket
of flowers with trembling little hands.

“One more word--Italy!” he exclaimed, with repressed agitation, and she
made an impatient pause.

“You are very angry, I know,” he said; “but, believe me, child, all
I have said to you was for your own good. I know more of these past
matters than you do, more than you ever shall know, if I can keep it
from you. No effort of yours, poor child, can ever fasten on me the
stigma of a crime of which I am innocent. Let the dead past rest. You
must do so. I command you, as your father’s kinsman, as your present
guardian, not to interfere with the long-pronounced verdict of the
jury--and the world!”

His voice sank almost to a whisper and his face was pale as death, but
the pose of the girl’s dark head spoke only defiant scorn. Her eyes met
his one moment, and in their somber depths he read her frank conviction
of his guilt. Then Italy left him without a word, going along the path
to the house, a slim, white shape, peerless in her pride and in her
beauty, the flowers carried carelessly upon her rounded arm.

Francis Murray remained some time where she had left him, with a very
grave expression on his fair, handsome face. Some troubled words
escaped him.

“How beautiful she is, and how wilful and defiant! Will nothing turn
her from her purpose?--nothing except the confession to her of the
terrible evidence against her dead mother that was withheld at the
trial by a true friend for sweet pity’s sake? How could I tell her
that, how stab her loyal young heart with the knowledge of her mother’s
guilt? Heaven help me, I could not do it. I must find some other way to
thwart her insane purpose.”

A strange restlessness had come upon the grave, self-possessed man.
Over and over in his mind arose the vision of Italy in every phase
in which he had seen her--Italy as she had looked the first day she
came, and the days following--Italy last night searching his desk in
her somnambulistic sleep--Italy to-day kissing the face in her locket
with tender lips--Italy a little later, proud, sarcastic, defiant, yet
beautiful in every phase.

He did not feel like returning to the house. He went around to the
stable, and had his favorite horse, Rex, saddled, and rode for some
time along the beach, until the soothing murmur of old ocean had calmed
his restless thoughts.

Later, when he reentered his library, a little white note lay on his
desk, addressed to himself, in a refined and girlish hand distinctively
beautiful. He read:

 “Although I have been your guest for two weeks, I have not failed to
 understand that I was at The Lodge merely on sufferance, an intruder
 treated courteously for my dead father’s sake. After what you have
 said to me to-day, it seems quite clear that you wish me to go away.
 I will not wait for you to put your desire into plainer words, but,
 taking the hint, go at once. I hope that you will permit my trunk to
 remain at The Lodge until I can make it convenient to take it away.

 “Begging your pardon for having trespassed so long upon your
 hospitality,

                               “Sincerely yours,      ITALY VALE.”

Pale with excitement, he burst into his mother’s presence, and thrust
the note before her eyes.

“Do you know aught of this?”

She read it with startled eyes.

“Nothing--except that I saw her go out two hours ago, dressed in the
plain gray costume she wore when she first came here. I thought she
was going to walk by the sea, or, perhaps, for a sail with the young
people. She must have gone straight to Boston.”

“To whom?” he asked.

Mrs. Murray mused a moment, then said:

“Did not Mrs. Vale’s lawyer--the only one who believed in her
innocence--live in Boston? Perhaps she has gone to him.”

“Gardner, yes, there can scarcely be a doubt of it. I will follow and
bring her back.”

He was turning hastily, when suddenly his mother’s hand fell on his
coat-sleeve detainingly:

“Frank!”

It was his boyhood’s name. His dignified mother only called him that
now in her tenderest moments. He looked back, and she said:

“Lawyer Gardner will take the best of care of the headstrong girl. Why
not leave her where she is?”

“Mother!”

Unheeding his surprise, she went on:

“Believe me, it would be for the best. Frank, I have never felt well
pleased with Italy’s being at The Lodge. I cannot tell you why, but
ever since her coming I have been haunted by a subtle premonition
that evil would result from her presence here. There is something not
quite frank about her--a veiled something in her eyes that haunts and
troubles me. She will bring us sorrow in some shape or form we do not
foresee. Let her stay with Lawyer Gardner if she chooses. She is not
dependent. Her mother left her a small income that will support her in
comfort.”

There was a look in his blue-gray eyes she did not like nor understand.

“I am surprised at you, mother. The girl is our kinswoman; to Lawyer
Gardner she is only the daughter of a woman who employed him to defend
her against a charge of murder. She has no claim on him.”

“Nor on us,” she ventured feebly.

“Mother, you are unjust. She came to us, she claimed our protection in
her orphanage, remember. And she is Ronald Vale’s daughter. Had she
been a son, this noble inheritance would never have come to me. We have
been cold and unsympathetic to her, both of us. By harsh words to-day I
drove her from The Lodge. I shall follow and bring her back at once to
a kinder home.”




CHAPTER IV.

IN A SPIDER’S WEB.


Mrs. Murray was right in believing that Italy would seek the protection
of the lawyer who had been her mother’s trusted friend.

A railway-journey of only half an hour took the girl away from the
pretty New England hamlet, Winthrop, and brought her into the noise
and bustle of busy Boston. She engaged a cab at the station, and drove
straight to the lawyer’s office on Tremont Street.

It had been late in the afternoon when she held that angry interview
with Francis Murray. It was nearly sunset when she paid and dismissed
her cab, and, passing across the pavement through the hurrying throngs
of people, stepped into the office.

A pert office-boy dashed past as she entered--quitting-time, evidently,
and he did not mean to be hindered.

She found herself quite alone in a gloomy little anteroom. But a door
was ajar at one end, and she heard the busy scratching of a clerk’s
pen. She crossed and looked in.

She saw a handsome office, well furnished, and before a large desk a
young man sat alone, scribbling very busily. She rapped softly.

“Come in,” said a curt voice, and the young man looked around, showing
a dark, strong face, good-looking, but rather sinister in its impatient
scowl. But the frown turned into a smile at sight of the beautiful
intruder.

“I--I wish to see Mr. Gardner,” she said timidly.

“Certainly, certainly, miss”--he sprang to his feet with a courteous
bow--“I am Craig Severn, his head clerk, and I will hand him your card,
please, as our office-boy has gone.”

Italy handed him a dainty bit of pasteboard. He glanced at the pretty
name, and again at the pretty face, then disappeared through an open
door that led into a narrow hallway. In a few minutes he returned, and
said regretfully:

“Mr. Gardner is out at present. Be seated, Miss Vale; he will probably
return in a short time.”

He placed a chair for her, and assumed an engaging air.

“Client of Mr. Gardner?”

“No.”

“Relative, eh?”

Italy had heard something about Yankee inquisitiveness, so she smiled
just a little, and answered again:

“No.”

“Ah, friend!”

“Ye-es,” she answered timidly, without comprehending the veiled
significance of the tone.

She had never known Mr. Gardner, but she felt she had a right to claim
her mother’s friend as her own.

Craig Severn smiled broadly, and added:

“Mr. Gardner is a married man, you know?”

“Of course,” she replied carelessly, and added:

“Do you think he will come in soon?”

“I cannot tell. In fact, I expect he has gone home. It is past
office-hours now, and I only remained to finish up some papers I was
working on.”

Italy rose hastily, her beautiful face clouded with disappointment.

“Where is his home? I must take a cab there at once,” she cried.

“Then you did not know that he lived in the country?” asked the
inquisitive clerk.

“No, no”--impatiently. “I may as well tell you, sir, I am a stranger in
Boston. Although I was born in America, I have lived abroad since my
early childhood. But now I am an orphan, with no near relations, and as
Lawyer Gardner was my mother’s true friend, I sailed for this country
thinking, thinking----” but her voice faltered and she paused.

“Does he know--does he expect you?” Craig Severn asked eagerly.

“No; I shall take him quite by surprise,” she replied; then, weary of
his questioning, that began to appear almost rude, she crested her dark
head almost haughtily, and added:

“You must not detain me, sir, with idle questions. Please give me Mr.
Gardner’s address at once.”

Craig Severn’s intensely black eyes were glittering strangely. It was
most unfortunate for her that she had thoughtlessly confided her sad
story to his ears--an orphan and a stranger, alone and friendless in a
great, wicked city--and she so beautiful!

“Mr. Gardner’s house is out in the suburbs of Boston--several miles
distant,” declared the clerk. “But I am going in that direction, for I
live close to him, so I will be glad to show you the way, if you will
accept my escort.”

Unnerved and troubled by the occurrences of the day, she did not notice
how ambiguous his words were. She bowed assent to his offer, glad of
assistance in her search for the only friend she could claim in all
wide America.

A few moments later they were seated side by side in a cab, riding
rapidly toward their destination. Italy’s companion exerted himself
to be entertaining while she listened almost in silence and with a
desolate pain at her heart as she thought how easily she had been
vanquished in her brave attempt at piercing the dark veil of a hidden
and torturing mystery.

Was it a mockery of Fate that within a few blocks of the law-office
there whirled past them a light, open vehicle, in which sat a man of
magnificent physique, with a fair, handsome face, clouded and grave
now with keen anxiety? Italy saw him and drew back from sight with a
stifled cry.

“What is the matter?” asked Craig Severn, and she answered evasively:

“Nothing.”

But to herself she said:

“Mr. Murray suspected I had gone to Mr. Gardner for protection. He is
following, searching for me. Perhaps he repents his harshness, and
has come to take me back. He will soon find me at the lawyer’s,” and
somehow the desolate pain at her heart grew less keen and bitter.

“Here we are,” said Craig Severn presently, and, having dismissed
the cab, he led Italy up a broad, graveled path to a house built of
red bricks in an old-fashioned style, and standing in a thick grove
of trees. It was at some distance from any other habitation, and the
dark front and shuttered windows looked very gloomy in the deepening
twilight and the shadows of the trees.

Italy’s heart sank strangely while they waited after ringing the
door-bell. Would Mr. Gardner be angry at her unceremonious invasion?
Would his wife be kind and tender? Would they help her in her quest,
or, like Francis Murray, “command her not to interfere with the
long-pronounced verdict of the jury--and the world?”

A trim maid admitted them into a dim, square hall, and then to a
bright, well-furnished parlor.

“You will wait here just one moment, while I bring Mr. Gardner from his
study to welcome you,” Craig Severn said, disappearing.

Italy’s glance, roving carelessly at first from one to another of the
handsome pictures that adorned the walls, suddenly paused with some
interest before a portrait, half life-size, that hung over the mantel.

It was a man’s face, not strictly handsome, but fascinating, as many
faces are. The brow was high and white, the hair dark and thin, with
curling locks at the parting; the eyes were dark, keen, and mirthful,
closely set together over a handsome nose, large in size and almost
Roman in shape, just enough to give the face a slight Jewish cast.

A round, almost womanish chin, indented with a very slight dimple,
supplemented a weak mouth, the curve of whose thin red lips was
scarcely hidden by a thin black mustache, elaborately curled at the
ends, bespeaking some masculine vanity. At first glance this face
seemed very boyish. A closer inspection showed the lines of at least
thirty years. To this portrait Italy’s eyes returned again and again
while she waited.

“How handsome it is, how winning,” she thought; then she grew restless.

She contrasted it in her thoughts with the fair, grave, intellectual
face of Francis Murray.

“Pshaw! I do not think it compares with Mr. Murray. It looks like a
Jew!” she murmured, beginning to find flaws all at once; and she was
just turning her back on it, when the door opened and Craig Severn
returned, accompanied by a fine-looking, showily dressed woman past the
middle age.

“Mrs. Gardner, your husband’s friend, Miss Vale,” he said smoothly.

Mrs. Gardner welcomed her effusively.

“I am charmed to welcome you to my home, dear Miss Vale, and I hope you
will remain our guest for a long time. I am so sorry that my husband
went out to a neighbor’s a while ago, to write a will for a dying man,
but he will be back in about an hour, I think. Let me help you to
remove your hat, dear child, and then, if you will excuse me, I will go
out and send a servant to hasten my husband’s return.”

Purring like a graceful tabby cat, she hastened out, leaving the pair
of young people alone.

Craig Severn immediately drew his own chair close to Italy’s side, and
murmured tenderly:

“I am very glad to have this opportunity of declaring my sentiments for
you, Miss Vale. Fair one, your grace and beauty have carried my heart
by storm. I love you!”

He attempted to take her hand, but she withdrew it indignantly, her
large eyes flashing with surprise and scorn.

“Sir, your words are presumptuous. You are little more than a stranger
to me!”

“No, no. I love you as fondly as though I had known you for years!” he
cried, and flung himself at her feet with passionate protestations of
devotion.

Italy was bitterly disgusted. She repulsed her would-be lover angrily.

“Rise. I will hear no more,” she exclaimed.

“You _shall_ listen!”

“I will not. I dislike you very much, and no power could force me to
marry you!” she cried.

Craig Severn laughed harshly, and sprang to his feet.

“Who was talking of marriage? I only asked you for your love, my pretty
queen,” he cried insolently.

With a face of horror, Italy flew to the door.

“I will appeal to Mr. Gardner for protection from your insults!” she
cried stormily.

Her persecutor laughed tauntingly, for the door resisted her efforts.
It was locked on the outside.

“Open the door at once, or I will scream and rouse the whole house!”
she exclaimed imperiously.

But he stood calmly in the middle of the room, surveying her
ineffectual struggles with the door-knob with a tantalizing smile.

“Scream as much as you like, pretty one, but no one will heed you,” he
returned coolly; “Mrs. Gardner--Smith is her real name, by the way--is
only the housekeeper here, and will not interfere with me. I’ll make a
clean breast of the whole thing, my sweet little girlie. Mr. Gardner
is abroad, and I’m in charge of his office till he returns. When you
came to seek him I fell in love with your black eyes and red lips, and
as soon as you owned up to the facts about yourself, I pitied your
loneliness and fixed up this little plan to win your heart!”

“Fiend!” cried the girl indignantly; but with that cool smile, he
continued:

“This house isn’t Gardner’s, either. It belongs to a rich bachelor
friend of mine, now absent, who keeps up the place as a sort of
private club-house for his intimates. We have jolly times here, I tell
you--suppers, cards, wine, and--sometimes--pretty women, actresses
and dancers, you know, but all on the strictly quiet, for if it were
known of any woman that she ever set foot here she could never have any
social standing afterward.”

He paused, for the white horror and anguish of her lovely face showed
that she took in all his brutal meaning.

“Oh, Heaven!” she thought, “how careless I was to fall into this trap!
To think, only to think, how I drew back from Mr. Murray’s sight but a
few hours ago, when I ought to have been crying out to him to save me
from this demon! May Heaven guide me now!”

Her tormentor resumed calmly:

“You came here with me willingly, and in so doing placed the stain
upon your reputation that nothing can ever wipe out. But what does
that matter, since you have no friends to miss you? I love you madly,
and you are wholly in my power. I shall keep you shut up in this house
until you consent to love me and be mine. That will not be long, I’m
sure, for many other women have loved me, and so will you at last. You
need not look so pale and alarmed. I shall attempt no harshness. I
shall woo you like a lover till I win your heart. I will be patient,
darling, but one kiss you must give me now to pay me for my waiting!”

“Back! Do not dare to touch me!” she cried madly.

But his outstretched arms clasped the shuddering form, his hot breath
fanned her cheek.

She struggled wildly, but she was like a reed in his strong grasp, and
his lips almost touched hers, when--suddenly there rang through the
room a pistol-shot!

A pistol-shot--a flash of light so close that it scorched Italy’s
cheek, a thread of thin blue smoke, a sharp report--then--the arms that
held Italy so tight fell apart, the lips that would have pressed hers
parted with a groan, the blood spurted from Craig Severn’s heart, and
he fell backward--gasping, dying, _dead_! But who had fired the fatal
shot?

As the victim fell Italy heard one great cry of horror and despair.

“Oh, God, I have killed _him_!”

Her eyes flashed toward the window, for she recalled the crashing of
glass mingling with the sound of the shot.

She saw that the silken curtains were looped aside, and that some one
had opened the outside shutters of the window. In the sash there was
one pane, shattered into fragments. Above it Italy saw gleaming a wild,
white, anguished face, a woman’s face--one that she knew, one that she
had seen only that forenoon, bright, insolent, smiling.

One moment that face gleamed ghostlike in the gloom outside the
window, and it seemed to her, too, that there were white hands flung
upward--white, jeweled hands, writhing in fierce despair--then the
eerie vision faded from her sight, and Italy was alone--alone with the
dead man whose treachery had brought her to this awful pass, and whose
punishment had been meted out to him so swiftly.

She stood silent one moment, like one in a trance. She heard, as in a
painful dream, steps and voices in the hall outside the door--the key
grated in the lock. Somebody was coming. Perhaps it would be said that
she killed this monster--Craig Severn.

Her tortured senses reeled and failed. She fell in a crouching,
senseless heap behind the door, and her dark robes trailed in the pool
of warm blood.




CHAPTER V.

HER FATHER’S FRIEND.


To the guests of Mrs. Murray the news of Italy’s sudden departure had
proved as great a surprise as her coming.

Mrs. Murray had simply announced that Italy Vale, after a
misunderstanding with Francis, had left the house in a pet, going, no
doubt, to Lawyer Gardner, her mother’s old friend, in Boston. Francis
had gone to bring her back, but she supposed that the girl was too
deeply offended to return.

The lady had frankly told all that she knew. Her son had withheld from
her his suspicions of Italy and the sleep-walking incident. It seemed
to him a disloyal thing to betray her, so he kept everything hidden in
his own breast.

Mrs. Dunn and her niece, Alys, looked delighted at the news. Alexie and
the two young men frankly expressed regret.

“I was beginning to love her,” said Alexie, unmindful of her sister’s
frown.

“And so was Emmett, I think,” laughed Ralph Allen, with a twinkling
glance of raillery at his friend Harlow.

“Useless to attempt a denial. Circumstantial evidence convicts me,” was
the gay retort.

Mrs. Dunn looked disgusted.

“I do not admire your taste,” she said tartly. “That foreign creature
never had any attractions for me!”

“Oh, Aunt Ione, she was very charming!” cried Alexie warmly, but her
aunt silenced her with a scowl of displeasure, and Alys snapped rudely:

“I hope she will never come back!”

Mrs. Murray was too courteous to express her opinion aloud, but at
heart she agreed with Alys Audenreid.

Mrs. Dunn presently discovered that she wished to go to Boston that
evening, to remain until the next day.

“Some shopping,” she said carelessly, and declining the offered company
of the girls, and promising to return the next afternoon, she made a
smiling adieu and departed.

Francis Murray, too, remained in Boston until the next morning. At
breakfast he showed a very pale and anxious face to all.

“I am very much troubled,” he said frankly. “Lawyer Gardner, I learn,
has shut up his house and gone to Europe, so if Italy went to him she
was disappointed. I have been the round of the hotels, but she is not
at any of them, and I feel very uneasy over her fate.”

“You should not worry, for the girl is quite capable of taking care of
herself. Remember, she came here alone from Europe,” said his mother,
in a tone of slight impatience.

She felt sure herself that all was well with the wilful girl.

“You do not suppose that she can have--committed suicide?” queried
tender-hearted Alexie anxiously.

“Certainly not!” he answered almost sharply, but his face grew paler
still, and he wished to himself that Alexie had not put such an uncanny
thought into words.

Alys had drawn the morning’s paper from her host’s plate, and was
scanning it eagerly. She looked up, and said, with a malicious smile:

“Here is a young girl found wandering the streets of Boston in her
night-dress at midnight. Perhaps that is your protegée, Mr. Murray.”

“Read it aloud, Alys!” cried her sister eagerly.

Alys smoothed out the paper with deliberate white fingers while they
waited impatiently, then she said:

“I don’t like to read aloud, and this is such a long paragraph, so
I’ll tell it in my own words. A beautiful young girl was found last
night by a policeman walking along the street, clad only in a thin,
white night-dress. She seemed to be in a somnambulistic sleep, and was
frightened nearly to death when the policeman woke her. She would not
or could not tell anything about herself, so they carried her to a
police-station, and placed her in the matron’s care.”

No one was usually more calm and courteous than Francis Murray. But at
this thrilling moment excitement overcame him. He took the newspaper
hastily from Miss Audenreid’s hands, exclaiming hoarsely:

“Permit me!”

What he read there decided him. He rose hastily without finishing his
breakfast.

“I will go and see this girl,” he said, and his mother cried out
impatiently:

“Do finish your coffee, Francis, before you start on such a wild-goose
chase, for I am sure the girl cannot be Italy Vale.”

He did not tell her what good grounds he had for supposing that the
mysterious somnambulist was Italy. He only answered:

“Something tells me I had better go! Mother, I should like you to send
your maid along with me, with some clothing for Miss Vale to wear home.”

“Certainly,” she answered, but her heart was at war with her promise.
The eager interest he betrayed in Italy Vale troubled her mind.

“Surely the girl has some other friends in the world, and I hope she’s
gone to them,” she thought. “I am frightened at the strange interest my
son has suddenly displayed in this missing girl. Last night was spent
in the search for her, and this morning he looks careworn and haggard.
What if he is unconsciously falling in love with this beautiful
creature whom no one would care to marry, on account of her mother’s
deep disgrace?”

She sighed deeply. She was proud--very proud. She could not contemplate
such a thing without horror.

“Yet what can I do?” she thought helplessly. “Francis will do as he
pleases. There’s no fool like an old fool, they say, and my son is
really getting on in years--thirty-two his next birthday. Italy is too
young for him, but there’s Alys just of a suitable age, and a better
match. She loves the ground he walks on, too, and if he would only
marry her I would be quite happy.”

But it is not given to many people in this world to be “quite happy,”
and the Fates we pursue elude us ever. What is to be, will be.

Francis Murray, with all his years and experience, was stumbling
blindly forward on a road that he called Duty.

He had no difficulty in finding out the police-station where the
beautiful somnambulist had been detained until she could give some
account of herself or her friends.

The elderly matron was cheerful and polite. She told him that her
charge had been very strange--like one dazed--and refused to tell her
name, begging for clothes in which to go away.

“She is asleep on my little cot now, sir, but if you wish I will open
the door and you may look in to see if it’s the one you’re looking
for,” she said kindly.

He had told her simply that a young schoolgirl, an habitual
sleep-walker, had wandered away from her home last night. Her friends
had searched for her in vain, and were glad to find out her whereabouts
from the morning papers, but thankful that she had declined to give her
name. If it proved to be the girl he thought, he hoped no more facts
might get into the papers. As he said this, the gentleman slipped the
good soul a bank-bill, murmuring something about “a new bonnet.”

Her heart was instantly won, and, whispering back that she would see
that his wishes were obeyed, she opened the door and beckoned him to
approach.

He followed with a quickened heart-throb, and gazed eagerly into the
tiny apartment where, on a narrow cot-bed lay the form of a young
girl at rest, the white coverlet drawn up to her shoulders, a mass
of tumbled, black silken curls straying over the pillow, her cheeks
flushed with the warmth of slumber, her red lips parted a little with
now and then a sobbing breath, as though she could not forget her
sorrows, even in sleep--Italy!

“It is she!” he said, in a strange voice, and beckoned to the maid.

“Go in and awake her. Help her to dress, and tell her I am waiting to
take her home,” he said.

He withdrew and closed the door. In a little while the maid came out
again.

“Miss Vale is up and dressed, sir, and wishes to speak to you alone a
few moments.”

The maid had brought Italy a dark summer silk figured with violets, and
a dainty hat to match. She looked very lovely in them as Mr. Murray
entered with a quiet:

“Good morning.”

“How did you find me?” she exclaimed abruptly, and when he told her she
blushed deepest crimson.

“Walking again in your sleep,” he said. “Really, Miss Vale, I would
advise you to lock your doors and hide the keys before retiring
hereafter.”

“I will,” she replied earnestly, and he continued:

“I ought to scold you for running away like a naughty child, but I
suppose you have been sufficiently punished by finding Mr. Gardner gone
away.”

“Yes, oh, yes,” she sighed.

“Do you know that I was in Boston all night searching for you? I went
the rounds of all the principal hotels, and I was surprised not to find
you at any of them. Where did you stay last night?”

There was a moment’s blank silence. Italy’s slender gloved hands were
writhing together nervously in her lap, and her face flamed burning
red, then pale again. She faltered, with downcast eyes:

“I--I--did not go to a large hotel. It was a small house.”

“If you will give me the address, I will send the maid there to settle
your bill and bring away your clothes.”

She lifted up wild, frightened eyes, and she gasped faintly:

“I--I--paid my bill in advance, and the clothes really do not
matter--that old gray traveling-dress, you know. And, indeed I don’t
think I can recall the address. I have forgotten the street.”

“Then are you ready to come home with me?”

The dark eyes looked up at him with strange, piteous doubt, the red
lips faltered, as she asked:

“You cannot surely wish me to come--after yesterday?”

“Let us forget yesterday,” Francis Murray answered, with a constrained
laugh. “Perhaps I was too harsh and you too hasty. At least, you were
wrong to go away like that. Your proper home is with my mother, so you
must come back with me to The Lodge.”

Her eyes kept searching his face. She was surprised that he was so much
kinder now than in the weeks past.

“I ought not to go back again. You--you--hate me!” she cried, and he
smiled at her vehemence, and answered coolly:

“No, not quite!”

She looked so frightened, so doubtful, he was moved to a little act of
kindness. He put out his hand and took her cold, trembling one in a
firm clasp.

“I am your friend, Italy--your true friend,” he said gently. “And for
your father’s sake, I want to watch over you. Come with me now. The cab
is waiting.”

She drew her hand quickly from his, startled by the thrill that stirred
her heart at his warm, magnetic clasp. And to herself she cried
shudderingly:

“My friend, no, no; I must not call him my friend. I ought to go back
to Europe. What is the use staying here now? He suspects me--watches
me. My hands are tied.”

“Come,” he repeated, with gentle impatience, and some compelling power
in the clear voice, resistless as the tide of fate, made her rise and
follow him.

On the way to Winthrop they said but little. The curious maid was close
at hand always, but Italy did not care to talk. She was recalling with
horror last night’s events--events that must remain forever locked in
her own breast.

And Italy, who had gone away so angrily yesterday from Winthrop, was
now secretly glad to get back; so glad of the peace and security to
which she was going back that she could have fallen at Francis Murray’s
feet in gratitude for the gentle force that had compelled her to return.

“Have I wronged him by my suspicions? Is he as good and true and noble
as he seems?” she asked herself, with strangely softened feelings.

They were going up the walk to the house. A chattering group was on the
broad porch, and suddenly Francis Murray exclaimed:

“There is our friend that we have been expecting for a week past. He
must have arrived after I left this morning. You will like him, I
am sure, Italy, for he is very pleasant, and, besides, he was your
father’s dearest friend. Perhaps you have heard your mother speak of
him. His name is Percy Seabright.”

“No,” she answered, in surprise, and then she saw that the subject of
their talk was running down the steps to greet them. He was tall,
slender, elegant, and Italy looked up eagerly to meet her father’s
dearest friend. That face! She gave one look and fainted at his feet.

It was no wonder that Italy’s senses had failed her, for at the first
glance at Percy Seabright she had recognized in him the original of
the fascinating portrait she had seen over the mantel in the parlor of
that horror-haunted house last night--the same face exactly, although
older by at least five years, but carrying the marks of age so lightly
that at five-and-thirty the handsome, Jewish-looking face still bore an
expression of debonair youth and almost boyish beauty.

Italy had fallen on her face, and both men stooped quickly to raise her
up.

Francis Murray was first, and slipping his arm beneath her shoulder he
lifted the death-white face. The girl’s eyes were closed, and her head
fell heavily back against him. He took her into his arms and carried
her into the porch, followed by Mr. Seabright, who exclaimed ruefully:

“I must be turning into an ogre, the way I am frightening ladies
to-day! First there was Mrs. Dunn, who shrieked and fainted when I made
my bow to her this morning, and now here is Miss Vale frightened at the
first sight of me! Do you see anything alarming about me, Mr. Murray?”

“Nothing!” answered Francis Murray, almost curtly, as he laid Italy
upon a couch where the wind could blow over her pale face revivingly,
but Ralph Allen exclaimed banteringly:

“You strike them all senseless by the power of your fascinations,
Mr. Seabright. I am surprised that Alexie and Miss Alys did not fall
unconscious, too, before your dazzling glance!”

The ladies, with the exception of Mrs. Dunn, all crowded round Italy,
but the more skilful maid motioned them away.

“I think Mr. Murray had better carry her to her room. I want to loosen
her clothes, for this is no common faint,” she said gravely.

So once again Francis Murray took Italy up like a child in his arms,
and carried her to the room she had left in bitter anger yesterday. She
lay still as death against his breast, but his face looked calm and
quiet as usual. Who was to tell that his heart was beating violently
against its precious burden? Who could guess that a mad longing
overcame him to strain her close and kiss the white cheek lying on his
shoulder so near to his lips? It wrenched his heart to put her out of
his arms and leave her there to the care of the maid and his cold-faced
mother, just now entering.

“Shall I call a physician?” he asked anxiously.

“It is not necessary,” she replied indifferently, and closed the door
on his troubled face.

He could not return to the guests below just yet. He walked the length
of the hall and paused a while in the embrasure of the window, looking
out at the restless sea.

There had been a high wind last night, and in the storm a pretty little
sloop had gone to pieces. The wreck had washed up on Winthrop beach,
and lay there now idly in the full sunlight of the day, while the
waves, still a little rough and heady, came breaking against the ruined
hull with sharp reports, spattering the powdery spray high in the
air. Some heaps of drift dotted the sands, and the glancing wings of
sea-gulls flashed over the waters here and there. Francis Murray seemed
to be looking at these things, but in reality it was a vacant stare. He
was looking into his own heart.

He was startled at the violence of his own emotions now and while he
had carried helpless Italy close in his strong arms.

Since the day when she had come first to The Lodge, and he had received
her unwillingly as a guest, his life had been altered--into its calm,
scholarly quiet had crept a strange and subtile unrest.

He had begun by disliking Italy Vale for her mother’s sake, and this
very dislike created a strange tumult within him. He had watched her
closely, and yesterday, when he had spoken to her so harshly it had
seemed to him that dislike had turned into actual hate.

What had happened to him since yesterday? Was his heart in revolt
against his judgment and his reason? Was it a boy’s heart, still to
be thrilled by somber dark eyes, a red mouth like a flower, and the
warmth of a little helpless form carried tenderly in his arms?

“I cannot help but pity her,” he murmured, as if that accounted for all.

He was startled from his musings presently by the voice of his mother.

“After all, Frank, I believe you had better call in Doctor Barksdale.
Italy’s swoon is so heavy that we do not know what to do.”

Doctor Barksdale came promptly, but it required all the skill he was
possessed of to restore the young girl to consciousness.

Then a week passed before she came out of her own room again.

A light attack of brain-fever had followed her swoon. Fortunately, it
was very mild and soon subdued.

In the meantime the Boston papers had duly chronicled the mysterious
disappearance of Craig Severn, a young lawyer, who had been in charge
of Lawyer Gardner’s office while the latter was abroad resting from
overwork. The young wife of Mr. Severn, it was said, was almost frantic
with grief, and feared foul play.

Uncharitable people declared that Severn had led a fast life, and had,
perhaps, disappeared with his employer’s funds. Mr. Gardner had been
advised by cable of the facts.

On the very day that Italy arose from her sick-bed, the newspapers
announced the finding of Craig Severn’s body in the river, badly
decomposed, and with a bullet-wound in the breast, showing that he had
been murdered.




CHAPTER VI.

EMMETT’S PLEA.


“Miss Vale, I hope you did not conceive an aversion for me the day you
fainted so tragically at my feet,” said Percy Seabright.

He had found Italy alone on the wide porch fronting the sea, a few
days after her recovery. A chilly east wind blew from the beach, in
spite of the warm sunshine, and she wore a picturesque dark-red cloak
about the shoulders of her white serge yachting-dress with its smart
gilt anchors. She had promised to join the yacht-club in a charming
excursion that day. His voice was very kind and solicitous, and she
answered frankly:

“Oh, no, no, Mr. Seabright. On the contrary, I was prepared to like you
very much, for Mr. Murray had been telling me that you were my father’s
dearest friend.”

Instantly a peculiar change came over his face. He had been smiling,
but the smile faded into sadness and gloom on the lips and in the eyes,
and his dark cheek seemed to grow livid with silent emotion.

“Oh, forgive me!” cried the girl impulsively, and her heart warmed
toward him. “You loved him, and it grieves you still to remember his
sad fate.”

“Yes, I loved him,” Percy Seabright answered huskily, “and as Mr.
Murray has told you, I was Ronald’s dearest friend. Will you be my
friend, too--for his sake?”

He held out to her a graceful white hand, and after a moment’s
embarrassed pause, Italy placed hers in it, meeting a warm, strong
pressure that she permitted but did not return. Some strange emotion
thrilled her at the touch, she hardly knew whether it was pleasure or
repulsion.

“Will you promise to be my friend?” he repeated, in an eager, impulsive
way, with a winning smile.

“I--hope--I--will,” she answered, a little deliberately; “I scarcely
know you yet, you know, and I am not used to choosing friends so
quickly. Mama always told me it was rash to do so--that one might be
mistaken, and that friends should be tried and proved--but still, you
were my father’s friend. He loved you, trusted you.”

“And why not you?” he exclaimed, with a persuasive glance of his bright
dark eyes that somehow won her to reply:

“I will.”

He thanked her fervently, and then she continued:

“I am so glad to have a single true friend--one who knows the past, one
who might help me.”

“Tell me what I can do for you. I am ready and willing”--eagerly.

The surf beat loud and sharply on the beach, the wind rose and whistled
around the corners of the house and through the stately fir-trees with
a soughing murmur. If she had listened to them, they would have sounded
eerily, warningly, in her ears, but she heard only that low-toned,
persuasive voice, saw only the dazzling dark eyes bent with an intense
gaze upon her own, inviting her confidence. She looked up at him with
big, solemn eyes.

“I will confide in you,” she said impetuously. “I will tell you the
dream, the aim, the purpose of my life. It is to clear the memory of
my mother from the stain that rests upon it, to find and to punish my
father’s murderer.”

The girl’s low voice was tragic in its intensity. No wonder it
impressed him, no wonder he suddenly grew ghastly pale and grave.

“You are mad!” he uttered hoarsely.

“No, no; do not say it,” she breathed imploringly. “Listen--my mother
was innocent--she swore it to me before she--before I lost her. She
believed that the clue to the murderer would be found in some of the
secrets of my father’s diary. You remember how eagerly she sought for
the diary after his terrible death? Well, it was never, never found,
you know, and she believed that it was carried off or destroyed by the
murderer. Oh, I would give the world to find that missing book! Help
me to seek it, help me to find it, my friend!” cried Italy, in rising
agitation.

Emmett Harlow came up to them before Percy Seabright could reply to her
words.

“Miss Vale, we are going to start now. Are you ready?” he asked.

Something of surprise in the clear blue eyes of the young man struck
Italy with sudden embarrassment, and she rose quickly.

“Yes; I am quite ready,” she said, and moved away by his side, to join
the house-party who were waiting. Mr. Murray with Alys Audenreid, Ralph
Allen with his sweetheart, Alexie, and Mrs. Dunn alone, expecting to
have Percy Seabright for her escort.

As Italy came up with Emmett she flashed a look of furious anger at the
girl from her peculiar eyes that could change rapidly from the soft
blue of love to the greenish fires of jealousy and hate.

Italy started as she met that baleful look. She remembered suddenly
what Emmett Harlow had once told her about Mrs. Dunn’s love for Percy
Seabright.

A cold chill of terror crept along the girl’s veins. She knew that Mrs.
Dunn was a woman to be feared, and she comprehended that the compact of
friendship just made between herself and Mrs. Dunn’s lover would expose
her to the former’s jealous wrath.

When the party were all upon the yacht and she was floating in graceful
majesty upon the blue waves, Emmett Harlow found a seat for himself
and Italy a little apart from the rest. Then looking tenderly into her
serious face, he said:

“Mrs. Dunn was watching you at a little distance while you carried on
your little flirtation with her lover.”

“Flirtation!” cried Italy, with a resentful toss of her pretty head.

“It looked like it,” he replied pointedly, although with a smile. “He
clasped your hand, and you looked into each other’s eyes with absorbing
interest.”

“So you were watching, too!” the girl exclaimed, provoked.

“I was with the others. Pardon me,” Emmett answered, in a quiet tone,
but with a look of pain.

She saw the pained look and her anger melted quickly. Emmett Harlow had
one of those rare natures that always inspire kindly thoughts. No one
could be angry with him long.

“It was not a flirtation, Mr. Harlow,” she said gently. “Mr. Seabright
was only asking me to be his friend. He was my dead father’s friend,
you know, and he wished also to be mine.”

“And you promised him?” asked Emmett Harlow gravely.

“How could I refuse his offered friendship--I who have so few friends?”
she exclaimed pathetically.

“You have one friend, Miss Vale, who would lay down his life for you!”
exclaimed the young man fervidly, and Italy, with a blush and start,
realized that she had a lover--a lover, that desire of every young
girl’s heart. But when he went on in tender, fervent words to tell her
of his love and his hopes, she begged him to desist.

“I will be your friend always, but I shall never love nor marry. I have
no time for such trivial things. I have a greater mission in life,”
she replied, almost loftily.

The rejected lover stared at her in profound surprise.

“A greater mission,” he murmured. “Not--not--woman’s rights, I hope.”

“N-not exactly,” Italy answered vaguely, and at this moment she became
aware that Mr. Murray and Alys Audenreid were observing her rather
closely. She could fancy without hearing a word that Alys was saying
something spiteful. What she was saying was this:

“Mr. Murray, your little protégée is a dreadful flirt.”

“How can you say so?” he cried, but yet he was not blind.

“Only look at her now how she is leading poor Emmett Harlow on,”
continued the pretty blonde; “and just before we started she was making
love with her eyes to Mr. Seabright. She even gave him her hand to
hold. I could see that Aunt Ione was furious. You know, he tries her
sorely with his flirtations. I do believe that his promise to marry her
is all moonshine.”

“Why don’t she give him his congé, then? He has postponed the wedding
twice, I know, and the old women say, don’t they, Alys, that postponed
weddings are unlucky?” he rejoined carelessly, trying to attend to her
and yet lose no glimpse of the pretty by-play over yonder, the eager
face of Emmett, the downcast one of the girl.

“Emmett is rich and well-born. Would he marry poor Italy, with the
brand of her mother’s disgrace hanging darkly over her young life?” he
mused.

At that moment Emmett was saying to the young girl:

“You will think me jealous and envious now, perhaps, and yet I must
tell you that I am sorry you have promised your friendship to Mr.
Seabright. I do not like that man. He is different from what he
seems--cold at heart and deceitful.”

“I thought _every one_ liked him!” she cried.

“Every one but me,” he answered frankly; “I am the only one to find a
fault in him. And yet his faults are patent to all if they would only
realize the fact.”

“Tell me of one single blemish!” the girl cried, half-offended.

“Very well. He is not sincere. He makes game of the friend he professes
to love. He is witty, and they all become targets for his wit. Poor
Mrs. Dunn, sitting so happily by his side there, she would never speak
to him again if she knew how he talks her over to his friends.”

Italy was looking and listening in wonder. Could these facts be true?

“He has carried on a flirtation with her for years, and yet she is so
blind she will not see that he is only trifling,” continued Emmett.
“Yet he has made fun of her from the first time he met her till now.
You see that beautiful diamond ring on his little finger? He has told
dozens of people that Mrs. Dunn begged him for it the first time he
ever called on her, and he said he told her the first ready lie that
leaped to his lips, that the ring belonged to his brother. He says she
is rapacious, that she lives above her means, and cares for nothing but
show and pleasure. Oh, he has said so many things of her that I would
hate to repeat, but I call it mean, don’t you? to ridicule a woman, her
house, her relations, and everything about her, and still pretend to be
her friend, even her lover?”

“It is wicked, shameful,” she exclaimed warmly. “How can any one be so
deceitful? I am sorry for Mrs. Dunn.”

“As to that, she is as mean a woman as he is a man, and if they ever
do get married they will be fairly matched. To tell you the truth, I
dislike them both, so let’s drop the subject and talk of something
pleasanter, for to-morrow I am going to leave Winthrop,” replied the
young man, with as indifferent an air as he could assume, for the pain
of his rejection, although so gently spoken, still hurt bitterly.

“Going away!” she cried.

“Yes; back to Boston, and I shall probably sail for Europe next week,”
sighed the rejected lover sadly.

“Oh, I am so sorry, for I shall miss you very much. You have been so
good to me.”

“Then perhaps you will relent”--pleadingly--“you will let me try again
to win your love. Oh, Italy, think how lonely you are, how alone in
the world, and surrounded by people some of whom dislike you, while the
others only tolerate you. But I--I worship you, my darling, and I would
be so happy if you would only let me marry you and take you away to a
happier home.”

Profoundly moved as she was by his words, she still shook her head.

“I cannot marry you,” she said simply but conclusively.

“Then, dear, I shall go away, as I said, and not trouble you with my
love, but when I am far away will you think of me sometimes, Italy,
and--if you should ever need me or want me--send for me, for if you
will not have me for your husband, I can still be your friend,” said
the young man earnestly and sadly.

Before Italy could answer in the grateful words her heart prompted,
Ralph Allen called to them across the deck:

“Why are you two over there looking so glum? Do come over here and
listen to the funny joke Alexie is telling me.”

“Let us hear it, too,” exclaimed Percy Seabright. “Come, Ione,” and he
led her rather unwillingly to join the gay group, for Mr. Murray and
Alys also came with several more of the excursion-party--all friends,
and quite at home with each other. Mrs. Dunn did not like to place
herself in close contrast to young girls, for she was thirty-five,
though she claimed to be ten years younger, and her figure, which was
short and dumpy, did not look well in yachting-costume. She wore an
immense red hat which served to increase the squat effect of her plump
form in its showy costume of garnet and gold.

She was in an ill-concealed temper, and it did not improve it to see
her betrothed place himself close to Italy’s side, where she stood
leaning against the deck-rail, looking down with sad, somber eyes
into the deep-blue water. Emmett Harlow was on the other side of
her, and his expression of profound melancholy told the story of his
disappointment without words.

“Go on with your story, Alexie,” exclaimed Ralph Allen, who was in
a very happy mood to-day, and no wonder. A favorite of Fortune from
his birth, betrothed to a sweet and lovely girl, and afloat on the
daintiest yacht in Winthrop harbor, upon billowy blue waters, under
sunny blue skies, with gay companions, how could he be aught but happy?

Pretty Alexie laughed and blushed.

“I’m not sure anybody will be interested in it, but, as I was
saying----” she began, when she was interrupted by Percy Seabright.

“Oh, come quick, everybody, and see this great fish!” he exclaimed
eagerly, and every one crowded over to the side of the deck, laughing
and hustling each other in their haste.

Italy Vale, close to his side, leaned forward with the rest, craning
her graceful neck eagerly to catch a sight of the wonder.

How did it happen? Did she lean too far over? Did she lose her balance?
All in a moment, Italy’s light form flashed over the rail, and she was
struggling, sinking, in the deep-blue sea.




CHAPTER VII.

IN DEADLY PERIL.


Italy’s sudden and terrible accident caused the wildest consternation
to the gay pleasure-party on board the beautiful yacht, _White Wings_,
and the shrieks of startled women filled the air. Above all rose the
anguished voice of Alexie Audenreid:

“Save her! Oh, save her!”

“My God, I cannot swim!” exclaimed Emmett Harlow despairingly, but even
while he spoke there was a splash in the water.

Ralph Allen had thrown off his coat and leaped boldly into the sea
at the spot where Italy was sinking from view. He would have been
anticipated by Francis Murray, but as he was about to spring over the
rail, Alys and her aunt clutched him with all their strength and held
him back.

“Oh, do not, do not risk your life for that creature!” shrieked Alys,
in hysterical entreaty.

With gentle violence he pushed away their clinging hands.

“For God’s sake, let me go! She will perish!” he exclaimed, and flung
off his coat to leap into the sea. But another detaining hand grasped
his arm.

“Wait, Francis. Ralph will save her, and there is no need for you to
venture.”

It was Percy Seabright. He was pale to ghastliness; his deep eyes
glittered with a strange fire. With fierce but repressed anger, Francis
Murray struggled out of his grasp.

“There’s no danger. I’m a splendid swimmer!” he cried, and sprang into
the sea, mad with anxiety over Italy’s fate.

But Ralph was an athlete, too. He had made a magnificent spring into
the water, diving deep down where Italy had sunk. He caught the skirt
of her heavy serge gown, clutched it, and rose to the surface with her
just as Francis Murray sprang over the rail.

By this time the yacht had been stopped, but there was still one great
danger--those in the sea might be sucked down under the yacht by the
swirling waters about her prow.

But a little sail-boat at some distance away, having seen the accident
and the danger, now came rapidly nearer, and the occupants shouted to
Ralph to approach with his burden.

Italy was not unconscious, only terribly alarmed and frightened. When
her rescuer brought her up to the surface she caught him wildly about
the neck with frantic arms that almost strangled him.

“Do not hold me so tightly; you’ll drown us both!” he cried, trying to
unloose her clinging clasp.

But maddened with fear, and deafened by the ocean’s voice, she did not
comprehend him; she only clung tighter, shrieking wildly in her terror
and fear of death.

It was so terrible to be struggling there in the deep-blue waves, so
beautiful, yet so deadly--to be struggling, drowning there beneath the
bright, blue, sunny sky, while far away in beauteous Italy one whom she
loved was waiting for news--news that would be so awful when it came,
telling of the loved one drowned in the cruel sea!

Keen despair, maddening fear, thrilled the poor girl’s heart, and
she clung, gasping, desperate, to Ralph Allen’s neck, her white face
upturned to the sky, her rich dark tresses streaming on the water,
while he, trying in vain to release himself from her frantic embrace,
realized with despair keen as her own that death was imminent,
inevitable. Both must sink unless she would release her strangling hold
and permit him to swim to the approaching sail-boat.

Those who witnessed the struggle from the yacht said afterward that it
was the most tragic scene ever witnessed, as Ralph fought wildly for
relief from the desperate hold of the white arms of the girl he was
trying to rescue.

It must have ended in the death of both, but at that perilous moment in
which Ralph began to resign himself to certain death, Francis Murray,
swimming like another Leander crossing the Hellespont, came to their
assistance. With gentle force he released Ralph, and, taking Italy into
his own charge, turned toward the sail-boat that now approached near
enough to throw a rope.

The almost-exhausted Ralph clutched it, and strong hands drew him out
of danger. In a few moments all three were aboard the sail-boat, and a
husky cry of triumph arose from the watchers on the yacht. They were
safe, safe!

Presently the sail-boat came alongside the yacht, and they were taken
on again, wet and shivering, but not much the worse, after all, for
their impromptu immersion.

Restoratives were brought, and the draft seemed to put new strength
into the young girl. They were about to lead her into the cabin, but
she drew back, and stood among them, pale as a ghost, her dark hair
dripping, her face stern. She had heard them whispering whether it was
an accident or attempted suicide.

She stood there among them, in her wet, clinging robes, and though
she trembled with cold and excitement, her eyes were blazing with
indignation.

“No, it was not an accident!” she cried, and her young voice rang sharp
and clear, “and neither did I attempt to commit suicide. Why should I
wish to die? I am young, and life is sweet. But though I have never
harmed any one in my life, I have a secret, unknown enemy aboard, some
one who wishes my death!”

Emmett Harlow was close to her side, watching her with eager, loving
eyes. As she spoke he started violently, and, in spite of himself, his
eyes fastened suspiciously on Mrs. Dunn, who stood a little apart,
with her full lips curled into a disdainful sneer. She caught his
mutely accusing glance, and answered it with one of venomous hatred.

Italy, without observing this little by-play, went on:

“I did not jump into the sea, nor fall by accident. As the crowd closed
in about me, looking for the great fish, I leaned forward very far--and
then--then--some one--oh, who could have been so cruel?--gave me an
adroit push; I lost my balance, and was struggling in the water.”

A swelling murmur of surprise and incredulity arose from the dozen or
so people on the yacht. Faces grew pale and horror-stricken. Surely
nothing so horrible could have happened. Fear had turned the girl’s
brain.

“Impossible!” cried a shocked voice, but Italy answered fearfully:

“It is true. In this crowd about me there is some one guilty of
attempted murder--some one who hates me and wishes me dead.”

“She speaks the truth,” cried a mocking voice. “I saw the cowardly
wretch push her over the rail! Ah, rejected love can sometimes turn a
man into a fiend.”

It was Mrs. Dunn. Her glance fixed itself boldly on Emmett Harlow, and
every eye followed her look. Their glances seemed to transfix him with
a basilisk stare. Was it true? Could he be such a monster?

He turned burning red, then ghastly pale beneath their eyes, and cried
out wildly:

“Do you suspect me, friends, of so terrible a deed?”

Italy cried out quickly:

“It is not true. Emmett is my true friend. He would not harm one hair
of my head.”

Mrs. Dunn’s mocking laughter rose up over the shocked silence of the
others.

“No, not your friend--your rejected lover!” she exclaimed. “Your
rejected lover maddened by despair, and so jealous that he would rather
see you dead than won by another!”

A hand fell suddenly on her arm, and the splendid eyes of Francis
Murray looked sternly, rebukingly, into her own. He said earnestly:

“Do not make this awful accusation against our young friend unless you
are quite sure of your facts. Perhaps you have made a mistake.”

Under his searching gaze she cowered and crimsoned.

“I--I am certain I saw some one push Miss Vale,” she stammered. “Mr.
Harlow was close by her side, and it looked like his arm that gave the
push. But--there was such a crowd about them, and, of course, I might
have been mistaken. Miss Vale ought to know best. If she thinks I am
wrong, I do not wish to press the charge.”

Her eyes fell, but under the lowered lids there was a greenish glitter
of gratified hate, and beneath her demure look she was saying to
herself:

“I have punished Emmett Harlow. He has always despised me, in spite of
his courteous manners. Now I have my revenge.”

A bright glance of thanks flashed from Emmett’s boyish blue eyes upon
Francis Murray.

“I thank you, my friend, for your faith in me,” he cried, and they
clasped hands.

Then the older man looked confidently around him, saying cordially:

“I believe Mrs. Dunn and Miss Vale were both mistaken in believing
the accident was the result of murderous intention. Some one may have
jostled Miss Vale, but I feel sure it was accidental.”

Every one took his cue from him, and declared that it was certainly
accidental; but Mrs. Dunn, when his back was turned, shrugged her plump
shoulders and looked knowing.

The excursion came to a premature end, for Italy had to be taken back
at once to change her wet clothes.

When back at The Lodge they all made light of the affair that had been
for a few moments so terribly serious.

Ralph would not discuss in earnest his sensations when Italy’s frantic
clutch was dragging him down into deadly peril. He declared lightly
that his chief anxiety was lest Alexie should be jealous of Italy’s
frantic embrace.

But Emmett Harlow felt that he could not remain beneath the same roof
with Mrs. Dunn an hour longer. Her deliberate malice had cut him to
the heart. He bade a dejected farewell to them all, except the wicked
woman who had wronged him so deeply. Her he passed without notice, save
one slight glance of withering contempt.

The dew of tears was in Italy’s somber dark eyes as the door closed
upon her rejected lover, going away so sadly to forget his brief
love-dream. She felt more alone than before, as if some strong, true,
protecting influence had gone forever out of her life.

Pale and troubled, she leaned back in the large armchair where Alexie
had installed her as a semi-invalid. The others were grouped in
careless attitudes about the airy drawing-room, into whose open windows
came the strong, sweet scent of the sea, mixed with the odor of flowers
in the garden. The ladies were still in their yachting-suits, all but
Italy, who wore a half-loose robe of soft white cashmere, with gold
embroidery.

Alys Audenreid drew a long breath, and exclaimed:

“I should not look sad over the going of such a cowardly lover as that,
Miss Vale. For all he has hung about you and pretended to adore you, he
would not risk his life to save you to-day, but left that task to other
people’s lovers.”

Alys was almost bursting with jealous anger and resentment, and as Mrs.
Murray and Francis had courteously followed Emmett Harlow from the
room, she took that opportunity to vent her anger on Italy.

But good-natured Alexie quickly interposed:

“For shame, Alys, when you know Emmett could not swim. He said so.”

Mrs. Dunn, who was sitting at the window, with her betrothed, gave a
short laugh.

“That was not true,” she said. “I saw Emmett Harlow at Virginia Beach
last summer. He swam splendidly every day there. You were there, Mr.
Seabright. Do you not remember it also?”

“Yes,” he replied; adding, “although I do not like to betray Emmett
after his singular behavior to-day.”

“Then I am sure he was not feeling well, for I don’t like to believe
harm of Emmett. I always liked the boy,” declared Alexie generously,
and Italy thanked her by a grateful look. She, too, hated to believe
harm of her frank, ingenuous young lover.

“But really, there was no use in Emmett’s risking his life, since Ralph
had already jumped. I myself would have sprung to her assistance, only
that I saw it was not necessary,” said Percy Seabright.

“I thank you for your kind intentions,” Italy said, giving him a
half-sarcastic little nod.

She was watching him under her lowered lids, as he hung around Mrs.
Dunn with that air of deep devotion, wondering if it could be true, all
that Emmett had told her about this man and woman. Seabright had the
courteous manner and airy persiflage of a Frenchman. Was he insincere,
as Emmett said? Did he invite and accept the devotion of this woman’s
heart, only to laugh at her behind her back with other friends?

She longed to know the truth, for she had promised him her friendship
for her father’s sake; she had asked him to help her to trace her
father’s murderer. Then, too, she felt inclined to like him. The
fascination she had felt for the portrait extended itself to the man.

“But what was it doing there in that dreadful house?” she asked herself
shudderingly, “that house of horror and mystery?”

And again that night of horror rushed over her mind--that night of
horror, and the woman’s face at the window. She shivered and closed her
eyes.

She opened them again and looked at Mrs. Dunn, with her smiling face
uplifted to her lover’s gaze. Her very ordinary face was looking its
best now; and her peculiar, restless eyes, the only striking feature
she had, gleamed with the fires of love. And certainly those glittering
dark eyes looking into hers spoke devotion.

Italy gasped and sighed. Could that smiling woman’s face be the same
that she had seen convulsed with anguish and horror, those white hands
toying idly now with her many rings be the same that were tossed up so
desperately into the night and the gloom? Oh, it was like some terrible
dream!

“And what was she doing there, watching Craig Severn? Why did she kill
him? Was it for my sake, or does she know even that that frantic girl
was I? I do not believe that she does,” she decided.

Italy had read the paragraphs in the papers relating to Craig Severn’s
mysterious death; she wondered, like every one else, how the body had
come to be in the river.

For all of that night was blank to her from the moment when she had
fallen senseless in a pool of Craig Severn’s spurting life-blood.

She had read about the lovely young widow who, believing her husband
true to her and bitterly lamenting his death, had offered, out of her
small fortune, a reward for the apprehension of his murderer.

“How can men be such fiends as that man was while his wife believed him
so true and fond?” she thought, with a shudder; and just then a voice
sounded in her ear--a very low and gentle voice.

“You look deathly pale and ill, child; you ought to lie down. Permit me
to assist you to your room.”

She was glad of the offer, and quickly put her small hand on the
offered arm, going out with a small bend of the head to the others, and
followed by a glance of jealous hate from Alys Audenreid.

Francis Murray bent his tall head gently to his trembling companion.

“I did not mean to deceive you,” he said gently, “but--before I take
you to your room--may I speak to you a few minutes in the library?”

She bowed in silent surprise. What was it now? Was he going to scold
her for something?

Opening the door, he led her to a luxurious sofa.

“Rest there while I talk to you,” he said kindly, and the tired head
dropped wearily on the silken pillow.

“Emmett has told me everything,” he said. “I am sorry you could not
make him happy as he wished. He is good and true. You need not believe
what Mrs. Dunn said on the yacht.”

“Yet she is your friend,” the girl returned pointedly.

“Yes--a friend of the family--Percy Seabright introduced her to us,
and we made friends with her for his sake. Yet she is in some ways
not quite admirable--a strong nature, full of prejudices, and--but we
will not discuss the guest beneath our roof--that would be ungenerous.
Suffice it to say, she and Emmett Harlow disliked each other, and
she--made a mistake. She as much as acknowledged she was wrong,
remember.”

“Yes,” she faltered.

“And so I want you to believe in Emmett Harlow, child. He is good and
noble. If you could have married him, it would have been a good match.”

“I am not looking for a match of any sort, Mr. Murray.”

“Perhaps not; you are such a child. Yet Emmett could have made a new
world for you. He is rich, you know.”

“What does that matter? I should never marry a man for his money!”

He gave a short laugh of veiled approval.

“For what, then--love?”

“No, nor even love while this dark shadow of a mother’s disgrace rests
on my name. Do you think I could drag down a man to my level, and
through his love for me bring shame upon him? No; but if I loved a man
and he loved me, I should say to him: ‘If you indeed love me, help me
to clear my mother’s memory from the tragic shadow resting on it, and
then I will marry you.’”

Her white arm supported her dark head, and her eyes flashed with
intense fire. The loose, curling tresses fell away from her brow and
made a rich frame for the small, pale face and exquisite white throat.
It flashed over him how maddeningly beautiful she was--beautiful beyond
all other women.

“No man can ever help you to do that, Italy, for, alas! it is beyond
mortal power,” he sighed.

“I do not believe you!” she flashed wilfully.

But he regarded her with intense pity.

“You are like a helpless little canary beating its wings against its
prison-bars,” he said.

“And I will beat my wings until I am free--until my mother’s name is
vindicated!” she exclaimed, and again the grave eyes surveyed her in
pain and pity, and he breathed:

“God help you, poor child!”

It made her angry. She rose to go.

“One word!” he exclaimed, barring her way. “Italy, I think my mother
has told you that I was selfish about the library--that I liked no one
to come here. She made a mistake. Will you consider yourself free
to come when you choose, to use my books, anything you like, feeling
yourself fully welcome?”

His face was flushed--eager. She colored suddenly, too.

“Thank you. Yes, I will come,” she said, moving to the door.

And as he again gave her his arm she murmured very low:

“Do not think me ungrateful to you for helping to save my life because
I have not thanked you yet. Believe me----”

“Do not mention it,” he said abruptly and led her in a strange,
embarrassed silence to her own door.




CHAPTER VIII.

A MOTHER’S HATE.


At breakfast the next morning Alexie said regretfully:

“Heigho! It is but a few days to the first of September, when we shall
all have to go home.”

“We must get all the fun we can out of these last few days,” cried
Percy Seabright, as gaily as a boy, and then Ralph Allen said:

“Yesterday, before Italy’s accident, the folks on the yacht were
proposing a moonlight party, and wanted us to join them.”

“A moonlight party!” they all echoed.

“You see,” went on Ralph, “the idea is this: You pick out a picturesque
place, and sit up to see the moon and sun rise. You have refreshments
with plenty of hot tea and coffee; you walk on the beach, you tell
stories, you sing, you recite, and perhaps go sailing. I am told
that the chaperons frown on courting; but if we can get Mrs. Dunn to
chaperon us I am sure she will be more lenient out of sympathy for us.”

“Splendid!” they all cried, for the plan was full of the romance and
poetry so dear to youthful hearts.

Mrs. Murray alone tried to throw a damper over them.

“You will catch cold and be sick the next day.”

“We can dress warmly,” said Alys. “I am sure it will not hurt any of us
who are used to the climate. But perhaps Miss Vale had better stay at
home. She is not used to the raw, eastern winds of Massachusetts.”

“I am going, though. I wouldn’t miss it for anything!” declared Italy,
with a spice of girlish diablerie, and thus it was settled.

But Alys was at the point of tears. She wanted to have Francis Murray
all to herself on this moonlight party; but she foresaw that he would
have to divide his attentions between herself and Italy. She wished now
that Emmett Harlow had not gone away.

That night she talked alone with her aunt, complaining bitterly of
Francis Murray’s indifference.

“He will never care for me. I have given up all hope of it. He has eyes
only for that hateful foreign girl!”

“Indeed, you are mistaken, dear. Mrs. Murray thinks he was quite angry
because Italy refused Emmett. That looks as if he was anxious to get
rid of her, don’t it?” replied Mrs. Dunn soothingly.

“Oh, if I could only be sure of it,” Alys cried hopefully. “But if she
goes on this moonlight party I shall give up all hope. Can’t you hint
to Mrs. Murray to keep her at home?”

“I’ll try, dear, and you must keep up hope; she shall not take him
from you. I am watching over your interests all the time,” said the
scheming aunt, who was very fond of this niece who resembled her in
her disposition.

Alys retired much consoled, for she knew that her aunt would stop at
nothing to gain her ends.

She was gone, and Mrs. Dunn lay back at ease in her armchair, the loose
folds of her gorgeous silk dressing-gown falling richly about her, her
strange eyes gleaming with excitement. She mused softly:

“I have Percy Seabright in my power now, and he shall trifle with me
no longer. Twice he has postponed our marriage for idle reasons, but I
will bear it no longer, and when Alexie marries Ralph, in January, my
own wedding shall come off, too, and Alys shall marry Francis Murray
then, also, if I can manage it. And I will manage it, unless I have
lost my cunning. Francis Murray is losing his head over that girl, I
can see it plainly, but his mother will not permit him to marry her,
even if he could so far forget himself. But she must be driven away
from The Lodge soon, or she will outwit me.”

Then a softer light came into the large blue eyes.

“I feel happy to-night, knowing that Percy does not love Italy,” she
thought. “Oh, I have been miserable believing that he did, but, of
course, I know better now after what happened to-day. How cleverly I
shielded his crime, and punished Emmett Harlow at the same time. And
now Percy’s dangerous secret is mine, thank the Fates, but yet I wonder
why he hates Miss Vale, and wants her dead?”

Mrs. Dunn thought she had the game in her own hands the next day,
when Francis Murray announced at noon that he was compelled to go into
Boston for the day, to meet some old friends who were passing through
and had written for him to join them in their brief stay in the city.

“You will probably be off on your moonlight party before my return,” he
said.

“But you will join us there--oh, do say you will join us there!”
exclaimed Alys pleadingly.

“Thank you, I shall be very glad to come,” he answered; then he looked
at his mother. “Do not look for me home this evening, for I shall
probably be late, and I will go from the station to join the party,” he
said.

He went away, and soon Mrs. Dunn found an opportunity to speak alone
with her hostess.

“Mrs. Murray, you look unhappy,” she purred sympathetically.

“Oh, no, I am not feeling well to-day, that is all, Mrs. Dunn.”

“My dear friend, you cannot deceive me like that. I am such a true
friend to you and yours that I take the privilege of offering you my
sympathy. You _are_ unhappy, and it is because you see the growing
infatuation of your proud son with this girl, this Italy Vale, whom no
man ought to marry because of the stain she will bring upon his name.
Oh, it is terrible, the daughter of a vile murderess aspiring to wed
one so proud and noble as Mr. Murray!”

Mrs. Murray’s cold, proud face was bitterly troubled.

“I do not want to be unkind to Italy Vale,” she said. “She has a claim
on us, and she needs a home, so I cannot conscientiously send her away,
and yet I own I am troubled as you describe. Francis has shown strange
interest in her, and--and it would break my heart for my son to ally
himself to the daughter of a wicked murderess. I will try to keep them
apart.”

“That is right. No one could blame you,” cried the wily adviser, and
Mrs. Murray, taking courage from her sympathy, declared decidedly:

“She shall not go to-night. Francis will not be here to contradict my
authority, and I am determined she shall stay at home.”

And that very hour she said to Italy:

“You look quite pale and ill from your dreadful experience yesterday,
and you must not think of going out on the beach with the party
to-night.”

“Dear Mrs. Murray, I would not miss it for anything! The very idea has
a fascination for me. Please do not oppose my going. I will wrap up
warmly, and not take cold,” pleaded Italy.

“I am very sorry to disappoint you, but I am sure you are not well
enough, and I distinctly forbid your going,” was the calm reply, in a
tone of assured authority that forbade remonstrance.

Italy’s heart sank with disappointment at the arbitrary command, but
she offered no rebellion, and saw the gay party leaving for the tryst
with unshed tears in her proud dark eyes. She was young, and in spite
of her sorrows, had looked forward with eagerness to the moonlight
party, which, to her girlish fancy, seemed full of romantic promise.
Mrs. Murray’s cold refusal seemed unjust, cruel.

“And,” she said to herself bitterly, “she has no good reason for it.
It is only an exhibition of despotic power. She secretly hates me, and
likes to make me unhappy.”

With a cold excuse, she left the triumphant woman and retired to her
own room, to sit alone by the window and watch the sea and muse upon
her own loneliness.

The weather was very warm for the raw climate of Massachusetts. The
last days of summer were most balmy and beautiful. It was an ideal
night for the moonlight party. The night was calm and clear, and the
stars were already sparkling through the purple twilight haze, and
beginning to mirror themselves in the heavy sea, but it lacked two
hours yet to moonrise.

A sob rose in Italy’s throat as she pictured the gay party on the beach
just two miles away, enjoying themselves, while she was so sad and
lonely here in the window.

She wondered if Mr. Murray was there yet, and what he would say to her
absence. Would he approve of his mother’s arbitrary decision?

As she pictured him by the side of Alys Audenreid, laughing and
talking, a strange sense of loss and desolation swelled her heart. She
bent her head on her hand and wept wildly.

A quick step came along the hall to her door, paused, and then there
was a rap twice repeated, for Italy’s bursting sobs drowned it.

A voice spoke clearly outside:

“Italy, will you please come to the door? I wish to speak to you.”

She caught the voice, the words, and with a joyful heart-throb sprang
to open the door.

When Francis Murray spoke, Italy forgot her tears and her
sorrow--forgot that she was sitting in the dark, forlorn and wretched.

The light from the hall streamed in upon her pale, tear-wet cheeks and
quivering red mouth, and touched him with keenest pain, for before
he opened the door he had caught the sound of her bursting sobs.
Involuntarily he caught her hand and drew her up close to him, looking
at her in deep distress.

“In tears, my--child!” he exclaimed huskily. “Are you ill, or--only
sad?”

She drew back quickly from him, ashamed of the tears she had forgotten
in the joy of his coming.

“It’s nothing, nothing!” she answered. “You--you--think me a great
baby, sitting up here in the dark crying over a little disappointment,”
and she brushed away the tears with a furtive hand.

But something in his deep glance made her feel that he had a silent
sympathy for her grief.

“Poor little one! Yes, I know how you feel,” he said warmly. “But I
have come to take you to the party. As soon as I joined them and found
you were not there, I came away to bring you.”

“Oh, how good you are!” she cried gratefully, then thrilled with a
guilty pang. _She_ to call Francis Murray good! Was she turning traitor
to that dear, loved mother who had sobbed beneath the blossoming
lime-trees:

“Oh, my love, my love, how cruel Fate has been to us!”

He could not tell what she was thinking; he only heard her gracious
words, and thrilled with a painful delight.

“I am fully repaid for coming now; so get ready, and I will be waiting
for you down-stairs,” he said kindly, moving a little away and fighting
down an impulse almost stronger than his will to catch the slender form
in his arms and press the lovely, grieved face against his heart.

“Oh, I must not go. Your mother----” she began falteringly.

“Yes, I know; Alexie told me that my mother had taken a notion it was
not prudent for you to go out. But take some wraps with you, and you’ll
be all right. I will be fixing it up with my mother while you are
dressing.”

He smiled at her--a smile so deep, so kind, it seemed to draw the
heart from her breast. Then he turned away, and Italy closed the door
and turned up the light--her brain whirling.

“What is this? What has come to me?” she whispered to herself, in a
sort of rapturous terror. She sank on her knees and hid her burning
face against the bed, whispering painfully:

“I--I--am getting to like him very much. I was so glad when he came,
so glad that he thought of me, wished for me! And how strange that he
should be kind to me, knowing what he does, suspecting what he does. He
has a noble nature, to be so kind to me when he must despise me in his
heart! But no, it was not hatred that looked out of his beautiful eyes.
Does he ever look at Alys like that, I wonder? Ah, Heaven, what am I
dreaming? I must not, must not go mad! For this is _madness_! Heaven
help me, help me!”

She rose up and began to make her toilet for the moonlight party. Some
reckless mood overcame her, a longing to look fair in the eyes of
this man she ought to hate--to eclipse blue-eyed Alys, who had wished
her not to come. She chose an exquisite dress--warm, yet elegant--a
light-blue broadcloth embroidered in silver, and clasped at the throat
by the pure fire of a twinkling diamond star. She pinned back her dark
curls with a silver butterfly, with diamond eyes, and placed on her
head a bewitching cap, all blue and silver. Then she smiled at herself
in the mirror.

“This dress will be very pretty in the moonlight,” she said, and ran
down to Mr. Murray.

He was waiting for her in the drawing-room--alone.

“Mother felt indisposed--so she has retired,” he said, not choosing to
mention that there had been a scene, Mrs. Murray fighting bitterly for
her own way, and--getting vanquished by her son’s calm determination.

He loved his mother, he yielded to her in many things, but while she
argued there was one thing that haunted him--the grieving face of
Italy, with its tearful eyes and quivering red lips, as it had appeared
on the threshold of the dark room where she had been weeping alone.

“Poor little one, breaking her heart all alone without a friend,” he
thought indignantly, and stood firm to his determination.

Nay, more, when she had retired in bitter anger he went out and
gathered some flowers for Italy--fragrant white carnations--and gave
them to her when she appeared, radiant in her beauty, but with her
brilliant eyes a little misty still with the tears that she had shed.

“All ready?”--smiling.

“Oh, yes.”

“Come, then; the carriage is waiting.”

And he drew her hand through his arm and led her out.

The wheels seemed grinding Mrs. Murray’s heart as they crunched on the
gravel, bearing her son away with the beautiful girl who had triumphed
for this time over her foes.

A proud woman seldom forgives a defeat. Mrs. Murray had pitied and
tolerated Italy before, but from this hour she hated her with resentful
rancor.

“She has outwitted me, turned my son’s heart against me, and I will
never forgive her--never!” she muttered. “And what will Mrs. Dunn say
when she sees how the girl sets at naught my authority? She will think
me weak as water. But I will show her, show her yet that though the
girl is related to me, I will cast her off. She shall not disgrace the
name of Murray by bearing it as my son’s wife!”




CHAPTER IX.

ITALY VALE’S SONG.


As the carriage rolled away along the level beach Francis Murray said
amusedly:

“I think you will find the gayest party you ever encountered, Italy.
There are about a dozen of them, and they have taken possession of the
hull of an old wreck washed up last spring upon the beach. The girls
have brought several varieties of musical instruments, and when I came
away they were all singing a glee song with the whole strength of their
lungs. At a little distance away it sounded quite sweet.”

“I should fancy so,” she answered, in that quiet way she always had
with Francis Murray. Sitting there close by his side, she was thrilling
with a strange sense of utter content and peace. She did not feel the
least eagerness to reach the party. She knew too well that no one would
give her a welcome, except Alexie and Ralph.

But the two miles were quickly passed over, and they saw at a little
distance ahead in the starlight the old black hulk of the wrecked ship
and light figures moving about it. Blent with the voice of the sea came
the soft notes of a guitar, and Ralph Allen’s rich tenor voice singing
very sweetly a little song of love and sorrow.

The pathetic last words were dying on the air as Francis Murray gave
Italy his hand to assist her from the carriage. But why did both their
hearts sink so strangely as he released the little fingers? Why did
both sigh in unison? The melody with its sweet refrain had touched them
with audible sadness.

Italy went toward the party a little timidly, as one uncertain of a
welcome, but Alexie had an eager embrace ready.

“You darling, I’m so glad Mr. Murray brought you! Come, I’ve saved
you a seat. Miss Vale, ladies and gentlemen--but I think you’re all
acquainted. The same crowd we had on the yacht, dear. You’re just in
time; the moon will soon be up. You have missed some lovely singing by
not getting here a little sooner. Can’t we have it all over again?”

“No, no!” vociferated all the singers. “It is our turn now. Let Miss
Vale give us a song.”

“Let her rest first,” Francis Murray said, in a voice of quiet
authority. Then he went and stooped over Alys, where she was sulking a
little apart.

“You will give us that pretty little recitation of yours--‘A
Portrait’--will you not?”

He knew that Alys loved him, and he guessed at his mother’s hopes and
plans. He was sorry for the fair, blue-eyed girl who had set her heart
on him only to be disappointed.

Perhaps--if Italy had never come, with her voice like music and her
dusky Oriental eyes--he might in time have grown fond of pretty Alys,
and if he had never discovered what a petty, ignoble soul she had, he
might have married her, but--now all was changed. His heart had proved
traitor to his will. He could never feel for the pretty blonde anything
deeper than pity.

Alys was furious because he had gone back for Italy. She had, indeed,
now given up all hope of winning him, and considered dissimulation no
longer necessary, so she tossed her golden head angrily, and curtly
refused his request.

He turned away from her, and asked her aunt for that sweet little song
she had composed herself, and the lady very willingly complied, though
her voice was too weak and thin to do justice to her little ballad of
love and jealousy.

She had written it at a moment when her fiery heart was consumed with
pain over her lover’s attentions to a beautiful, dark-eyed coquette in
New Orleans, and it was quite meritorious. She did not dream that Percy
Seabright, who listened with such sympathetic eyes, had often given his
convulsed friends a ridiculous parody of her style of rendering the
song.

But Mr. Seabright, although very fond of directing his wit against
other people, was quite vain himself, and responded cordially to the
call upon himself for a recitation, giving one of some length, with
good effect, albeit with rather theatrical style. Then he sat down, and
the girls began to tell ghost-stories and startling dreams.

“Make them stop it--oh, do, they frighten me!” Italy whispered
nervously to Alexie.

“Hush, girls, I don’t like to hear such things!” cried the lovely
blonde, who looked like a piece of Dresden china, so fair, so fragile
was her bright, blonde beauty.

Never were two girls more different at heart than Alys and Alexie, in
spite of their being twins. They looked alike, but there was more soul
in Alexie’s face, and her heart was noble and true, while Alys was
selfish and unprincipled. Neither was there between the two girls the
affection usual between twins. Alexie was always chaffing Alys, and
Alys was always sneering at Alexie. They could not harmonize.

“A song from Miss Vale,” cried several voices, but she drew back
unwillingly.

“Do not refuse them. Every one is expected to contribute to the
amusements of the night,” cried Ralph Allen, putting the guitar-ribbon
over her head. “Please give us that sweet thing you sang for Alexie and
me the other night in the garden among the roses.”

Francis Murray turned quickly. He had never heard Italy sing. He did
not know that there was a little song-bird pent up in that graceful
white throat, and yet he fancied that with those wondrous eyes she
could sing well.

He saw the lovely white hands fluttering over the guitar-strings.

A strain of exquisite melody mingled with the ocean tone, then Italy’s
face turned upward to the stars, and she sang a love-song.

Not a sound from any one broke upon the divine sweetness of the night
and the song, but every eye lingered in almost wonder upon the lovely
young girl singing to the stars of love in a voice as sweet and clear
as the nightingale’s.

The song died into silence, the white fingers fell from the strings.
There was tumultuous applause.

“Miss Vale, you are a born prima donna,” Percy Seabright said
gallantly, unheeding Mrs. Dunn’s envious frown.

The young men began to crowd about Italy. Her beauty and her genius had
charmed them. They pleaded for another song; Francis Murray, like one
waking from a dream, added his entreaties. She smiled dreamily and sang
again.

    “I want you, my darling, my darling!
      I’m tired with care and with fret;
    I’d nestle in silence beside you,
      And all but your presence forget.
    I call you, my darling, my darling!
      My voice echoes back on the heart;
    I stretch my arms to you in longing,
      And, lo, they fall empty apart.

    “I need you, my darling, my darling!
      With its yearnings my very heart aches;
    The load that divides us weighs harder,
      I shrink from the jar that it makes.
    Old sorrows rise up to beset me,
      Old doubts make my spirit their own;
    Oh, come through the darkness and save me,
      For I am alone!”

It was a heart’s cry. The girl was thinking sadly of her loved and lost
mother, but the listeners believed that she was singing to some lover
over the dark-blue sea.

“That is sweet, but too sad, Miss Vale,” said one of her admirers.
“Please give us a happier strain.”

And Percy Seabright chimed in vivaciously:

“She seems to agree with the poet:

    “‘Each note recalls some withered leaf;
    I’m saddest when I sing!’”

“Oh, see the moon!” cried Alexie suddenly, and they all started and
turned to the sea, where the silver rim of the moon was just rising
over the dark-purple line of water, building a silver bridge of
resplendent beauty across the restless waves.

With cries of eager admiration they all scrambled out of the wreck and
hastened down to the beach, where the rolling surf boomed in and kissed
their feet, then receded with a hollow murmur.

Italy did not know how it happened, but she found Francis Murray by her
side as she stood gazing delightedly at the full moon rising as if from
a bed in the sea. In the silvery rays of light it seemed to her that
his face was godlike in its manly beauty. She drew a long breath that
was half-pain, half-pleasure, and exclaimed:

“Ah, if one could cross to the other shore on that silver bridge!”

“Are you home-sick?” he asked gently.

And she sighed:

“You know I have never really had a home. We were wanderers, mama and
I. But yet I love the Old World, and, most of all, my birthplace, sunny
Italy. I should like to be there to-night.”

“Would you like to have a moonlight sail? The wind is freshening
nicely, and here is a little boat,” he said.

“Yes, I should like it,” she answered, and he helped her in, saying
gaily:

“We will sail a little way on that bridge of moonlight.”

“Oh, how romantic!” cried several of the young people, as the
white-sailed little dory skimmed lightly over the waves, right in
the silver path of light, looking in the strange radiance like two
glorified beings setting sail for Paradise.

“Come back soon. I want to take Alexie sailing!” called out Ralph Allen.

Alys Audenreid was close to her aunt’s side. She whispered vindictively:

“I hope they will both get drowned.”

“So do I,” was the instant reply, in a tone of sibilant hate and envy.

Then the little dory sailed away until it grew a mere speck on the
water, and they ceased to watch it, the young people pairing off and
walking up and down the sands.

“Let us go back to the wreck. I want to talk to you,” Mrs. Dunn said
imperiously to her cavalier.

He gave her his arm, and they returned alone to the old hull and sat
down side by side. Usually Percy Seabright was very gay and dashing in
manner, and a great favorite with women for his courtliness, but at
times he was a victim to the blues, and made himself a most unsocial
companion to any one into whose company fate threw him.

One of these moods had suddenly overtaken the dashing bachelor
to-night. He lounged at Mrs. Dunn’s side, in gloomy silence until
she began to rally him upon his depression. He turned his strange,
glittering eyes upon her smiling face, and said abruptly:

“Don’t jest with me, Ione. I am wretched. I can scarcely restrain
myself from leaping into the sea and so ending the misery of my life!”

His look was wild, his voice tragic, but Mrs. Dunn did not know that
the woman who wants to be charming to a man must fall in with his
moods--“from grave to gay, from lively to severe.”

She pouted prettily.

“You pay a poor compliment to me, permitting yourself to be unhappy in
my presence,” she exclaimed, dropping her chin into two jeweled hands
that held a tiny lace handkerchief, and looking up at him with arch
reproach.

But the coquetry was wasted on Percy Seabright. He sighed wearily, and
looked away from her at the moonlit sea.

“Can’t you see that I am troubled, Ione?” he said fretfully. “You know
I have these fitful moods and that nothing can charm me out of them.”

“But what is the cause of them, Percy?” she asked curiously.

He looked back at her, and answered restlessly:

“I will tell you what has caused these moods since I came back to The
Lodge. It is the look of Ronald Vale in his daughter’s face.”

“Italy Vale--so she resembles her father? But what is that to you,
Percy?”

“Everything, for it gives me the heartache. Ione, you know Ronald Vale
was my dearest friend. I loved him with all the devotion of a boy’s
warm heart. I have never known one happy hour since his tragic death,
and that girl’s eyes--so dark, so glorious, so like her father’s--they
break my heart.”

“Is that the reason you hate the girl so bitterly?” she asked, with
veiled malice.

“Hate her?” he exclaimed.

“Yes, you hate her and wish her dead,” was the strange reply.

He started and gazed at her wildly, and she said significantly:

“Italy Vale spoke the truth the day she said that some enemy had pushed
her into the water. I lied when I said that I saw Emmett Harlow do the
dastardly deed. It was your arm, Percy, but--I love you, and I know how
to shield those that I love.”

Even in the moonlight she could see his face whiten with awful terror.
She laughed low and harshly.

“Do not be frightened. I am not going to betray you--that is, unless
you play me false. A woman whose trust is betrayed is usually capable
of doing anything for revenge,” she said. “But I am sure you will not
give me any cause for anger. We will be married soon, you know, and I
should have no cause to betray your crime.”

He stared blankly at her, and she heard his writhing lips repeat
faintly:

“‘Soon’?”

She smiled at him with cool assurance.

“Yes,” she replied. “You know my niece, Alexie, is to be married in
January. I have decided that you and I will be married at the same
time.”

“Yes,” he replied, without remonstrance, but it piqued her that he
received the communication without any sign of pleasure.

“We will go abroad on our bridal tour,” she continued. “You know it is
the great hope of my life to visit Europe.”

“Yes,” he said again passively, as if she were making plans for another.

But suddenly his dark eyes beamed, and he cried feverishly:

“I have been abroad many times, but I remember my first trip with
the keenest pleasure. Ronald Vale and I went together. We were
chums--brothers. No woman had then come between us. It was the happiest
time of my whole life.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“Isn’t it really time for Italy and Mr. Murray to be getting back?”
inquired Alexie, at length, as she and Ralph walked, arm in arm, upon
the sands, happy lovers that they were.

He looked at his watch in the clear rays of the moonlight, and
exclaimed:

“Positively, my darling, it is close upon midnight. I had no idea the
time was going so fast.”

“A tribute to my charms--thank you,” replied his pretty sweetheart
vivaciously. “But, really, they have been gone two hours, have they
not?”

“It is nearer three hours. It was only nine o’clock when they started,
and I’m sure they only meant it for a short sail. I hope nothing has
happened them----” began Ralph anxiously. Then he stopped short and
laughed. “Oh, what a joke! Feel the air, dear, how calm and still,
almost sultry--not a breath of wind stirring. As sure as you live, they
are becalmed, Alexie. There is not enough wind to fill their sail.”

Some others of the party came up just then, and they all agreed that
Ralph’s idea was the correct one, and that there was no cause for
anxiety.

“They are becalmed, and will have to wait for wind and tide, that is
all,” said one vivacious young man; “but I am tremendously hungry, and
don’t want to wait any longer for my lunch.”

Every one else was of the same mind; so, while they discuss their
dainty midnight supper, let us take a bird’s-eye view of the wide waste
of moonlit waters in search of the truants.

At first the dainty little dory sailed blithely before the freshening
breeze, and the two occupants reveled in the beauty and sweetness of
the summer night.

Francis Murray, as if tempted for once to show his latent powers, bent
his energies to the task of entertaining his lovely companion.

He threw aside his usual air of hauteur, and showed himself brilliant,
witty, and interesting, keeping through it all a dangerous softness of
manner, an empressement that would have made the most finished coquette
believe that he was about to throw himself at her feet and declare his
love.

Italy was no coquette, however, and was not well versed in the signs of
love, so she could by no means read her companion’s mood.

But she thought him kind, very kind, and she had a struggling
consciousness that she had done wrong in coming. Yet she could not
resist the charm of his manner. It inspired in her an irresistible
joyousness. She, too, threw off the diffident manner that had
dominated her in his presence until now, and replied to him freely
and vivaciously. Her soft laugh, as it echoed over the rippling waves
sounded to him like sweetest music.

Time flew fast, and suddenly he observed that the boat was going slower
and slower, and the wind dying away.

“I could stay out here on this beautiful sea for hours with you, Italy,
but yet I think we must be going back, or we shall have no wind,” he
exclaimed, and turned about to return.

Slowly, more slowly than they knew, absorbed in their own thoughts, the
dory moved through the small, crisp wavelets. The wind that had fanned
their faces so joyously a little while ago lulled and stopped, the sail
drooped dismally, they came to a dead pause out there in the open sea
under the starry sky.

“Do not be frightened, Italy,” he said to her anxiously. “We are
becalmed and must wait till the wind rises before we can get back to
shore.”

Her face grew pale, and she asked:

“How long?”

“I cannot tell you, but I hope not long. The wind will be almost sure
to rise at midnight, if not before, but it is more than an hour off
yet. Can you be patient, and wait, or will you scold me for bringing
you into such a predicament?”

“Is there any danger?” she asked, in a subdued tone.

“None, unless a heavy fog comes up. But it is very clear now. We are
not more than two miles from shore. See, there is Great Head in the
distance and the lights of Winthrop. You need not be alarmed. It is
only a vexatious delay, and I will try to amuse you so that the time
will go fast.”

“Thank you,” she said very low, and both were quite silent for a few
moments. Italy was looking down at the rippling waves with a solemn
face.

“Are you frightened, or are you angry?” her companion asked gently.

“I am neither,” she answered. “But I am suddenly sad. There came into
my mind this moment a picture of my mother.”

“Your mother was a most unhappy woman,” he said half-inquiringly.

“Oh, Heaven, how unhappy!” sighed the girl; some impulse of confidence
seized her, and while they waited there becalmed on the wide ocean,
seemingly alone in the world, she told him something of the lonely life
she had led, hounded through the world by a foe in ambush.

“Oh, Mr. Murray, tell me if you have any suspicion who that enemy could
be?” she cried imploringly.

But he was honestly surprised and startled.

“I have not the least idea. I did not know your mother had an enemy in
the world. I heard that she had placed you in a convent to be educated,
and was living there herself in quiet comfort.”

“We were only two years at the convent. My mother’s health could not
bear the sedentary life, and----” But suddenly she looked up and cried
in a startled voice:

“Why, how strange! I cannot see Great Head and the lights of Winthrop
now. It seems misty.”

“There is a fog, and it is growing quite thick, but I hope the wind
will rise presently and blow it away,” he answered in a troubled tone.

He had been watching the creeping mist with startled eyes while she
talked to him. It had stolen on them like a thief in the night. They
could not see the sky nor the stars now, and scarcely each other’s
faces for the insidious white fog.

Suddenly there came a sound that struck terror to their hearts.

“A steamer is approaching us!” cried Francis Murray wildly. He leaned
forward and caught her cold little hand.

“Italy, my love, my darling, say that you forgive me for bringing you
into this deadly peril, and let us pray God that we be not in the track
of the coming horror!”

She could not answer. Her lips seemed frozen, but Francis Murray lifted
up his voice and shrieked a warning to the steamer. Too late! She bore
down swiftly upon them, cutting the little dory in twain.




CHAPTER X.

BORNE ON THE TIDE.


The gay party on shore discussed their warm coffee and elegant lunch
with such keen appetites that the absentees were almost forgotten,
until the increasing fog suddenly awoke a feeling of alarm in Ralph
Allen’s breast.

“I wish now that they had not gone out sailing,” he said. “It is no
joke to be becalmed in a fog. What if they should be run down by a
steamer?”

Several members of the party began to express alarm, but Percy
Seabright cried out boisterously:

“Do not let us borrow trouble. It is not likely that anything will
happen to them. Indeed, I envy Francis his good luck in getting
becalmed in a fog with such a pretty girl. What a chance for a
flirtation! Ten to one they come back engaged, and this winter we will
get cards to the wedding.”

He had quite recovered from his melancholy of a while ago, and was the
life and soul of the party, singing songs and telling anecdotes to
while away the long hours. The young people fell in with his infectious
gaiety and took his bright view of the situation, all but Ralph and
Alexie.

These two felt seriously uneasy over their friends, and from time
to time went arm in arm down to the beach, watching to see the fog
lift, or the air freshen and the tide come in, but the winds remained
quiescent in their mysterious caves, and the fog hung like a white
gauze veil over a still and glassy sea.

But no one else shared their anxiety. Percy Seabright and Mrs. Dunn
were boisterously gay, and Alys Audenreid had a strange look in her
eyes and a strange tone in her voice. She believed that the powers of
evil had granted her wicked wish, and that Francis Murray and Italy
were both drowned in the cruel sea. So hard and cruel had jealousy
made her heart that she exulted secretly in the belief. She would
much sooner have seen him dead than happy with her rival--beautiful,
dark-eyed Italy Vale.

In her blind fury of jealous rage, Alys wanted the world to end for
those two who had made her so unhappy. She had grown hopeless of
supplanting Italy in Francis Murray’s heart.

Francis Murray had never shown Alys one sign of love, but she chose to
consider herself wronged and deserted, and exulted in the speedy ending
of those two lives. What a cruel thing is the jealousy of an ignoble
mind--strong as death and cruel as the grave!

It was almost two hours past midnight when Ralph Allen uttered a cry of
the keenest joy:

“The wind is rising, the fog lifting!”

He and Alexie ran down to the beach again. The sea was ruffled with
little white-capped wavelets, and the tide began to roll in upon the
shore with a wailing voice. The wind was high and the fog was rolling
away. They stretched their eyes over the wide expanse of water, hoping
to see the little dory riding in with the tide. Ah, joy! There it came,
far away as yet; but no--what was it tossing on the waves like a sail?

Ralph Allen gave a loud shout, and the whole party ran down to him.
They did not have to wait and watch long. Directly the strong tide
brought in and cast at their feet the broken sail of the dory, with a
half-unconscious girl clinging despairingly to the rope!

Washed ashore on a broken sail that clung to some fragments of a
shattered boat--oh, what an eloquent story was told in that occurrence!
All of Ralph’s forebodings were dismally realized. He knew that the
worst had happened, that the dory had been run into and destroyed by
some monster steamer--but--where was Francis Murray?

The wailing wind and the moaning sea gave no reply, and Italy’s lips
were silent, too. Only a faint pulse at her heart gave signs of life.

It was well that there was a physician with the party, and that warm
coffee and wine were at hand. Everything necessary was quickly done,
and then she was taken back to The Lodge breathing faintly but looking
like a dead girl and quite unable to speak. They did not stay to see
the sun rise, but disbanded mournfully--mourning Francis Murray as
dead, and dreading lest Italy’s life should also be offered up as a
sacrifice to the pitiless sea.

Only Percy Seabright said hilariously:

“It is evident that Miss Vale was not born to be drowned. She has had
two hairbreadth escapes from the sea, and the Fates that pursue her had
better change their tactics if they wish for success.”

Mrs. Dunn and Alys said nothing, but they wished in their hearts that
Italy had perished and Francis Murray escaped. Then they might have
woven anew their spider’s web to ensnare a good man’s heart.

Too late! Too late! There could scarcely be one hope that he had
survived, for the next day, when Italy was able to speak, she told
feebly the story of their accident, how the dory had been cleft in
twain by the steamer, and that she had been swept instantly away and
never heard his voice again.

The day succeeding was the first of September, when the house-party was
to break up. Mrs. Dunn and her favorite niece, Alys, took leave with
silky purrings of sympathy for the bereaved hostess, but Alexie begged
frankly to stay and nurse the sick girl, who was too weak yet to leave
her bed.

Mrs. Murray was glad to have her stay, glad for some one else to watch
over Italy, whom she hated now with more virulence than ever.

“Through this girl I have lost my son, and I will never willingly look
upon her face again. When she gets well, either she or I must leave The
Lodge,” she avowed before them all.

Mrs. Dunn and Alys vowed that she was right, Percy Seabright said
nothing, but Ralph and Alexie looked shocked and indignant.

“But, dear Mrs. Murray, the accident was not Italy’s fault,” cried the
warm-hearted girl.

But Mrs. Murray’s terrible bereavement had but hardened her cold heart.

“The girl disobeyed me in going with Francis that night. Had she
remained at home, as I bade her, he would now be alive and well. No, I
will never forgive Italy Vale for my son’s tragic death, and as soon as
she recovers I shall ask her to make her home elsewhere.”

Alexie looked pleadingly at her aunt.

“May I ask her to become our guest this winter?” she murmured.

“Decidedly not. Mrs. Murray’s cause is mine, and I fully endorse her
course,” was the brusk reply.

The quick tears came into Alexie’s sweet blue eyes as she turned them
on Ralph. He whispered tenderly:

“When we are married you shall have our friend for your guest as long
as you like. In the meantime I will see if we cannot find a pleasant
home for her as soon as she is able to leave The Lodge.”

He went away with the rest that day, but Alexie knew that he would
return on the morrow, for all the sunshine of Ralph Allen’s life lay in
those sweet, blue eyes of his fair, betrothed bride, and for them the
course of true love had always run smooth.




CHAPTER XI.

WITHOUT A HOME.


Overwhelmed with grief and horror at her son’s fate, Mrs. Murray held
firmly to her resolve not to see Italy again. She regarded the hapless
girl as a murderess. In vain did Alexie try to assuage her keen despair
by pointing out to her that there was no certainty of her son’s death,
but that he might possibly have been saved by the very steamer that had
destroyed the little dory and set Italy adrift upon the wide sea.

“Dear Mrs. Murray, he was such a splendid swimmer, it is not probable
he could have perished in so calm a sea,” she cried.

“Why, then, does he not return to me?” cried the anguished mother; and
she added:

“It is three days ago now, and if he had been saved he would surely
have come back ere now. No, no, he must have been killed by the stroke
that cut the little boat in twain.”

It seemed so plausible that this was true that Alexie could not think
of any more words of comfort. She had to leave the bereaved woman to
her terrible despair.

But strangely enough, Italy Vale would not believe that Francis Murray
was dead.

“Something tells me that he escaped--that he is alive somewhere in the
world to-day, and that he will return,” she cried, her eyes beaming, a
faint color staining the ivory pallor of her delicate cheek.

It was the fifth day after the moonlight party, and Italy was sitting
up for the first time in an easy chair, wrapped in a loose, furred
dressing-gown and warm slippers, for the day was chilly.

A storm had raged the night before, and the sea was high and rough, and
a chilly wind was whistling along the New England coast, while heaps of
drift lay along the sands that were dotted with screaming sea-gulls and
sand-pipers.

Sweet Alexie Audenreid had been talking to the lonely girl with all the
tenderness of a sister, telling her the truth that could be withheld
no longer, but softening its harshness all that she could by her own
expressions of affection.

But when she had ended she looked away from the keen pain in the dark
eyes as Italy realized that she was an object of dislike to Mrs.
Murray, an unwelcome guest whose departure was eagerly wished for--that
she was homeless. She could not speak for some moments for the keen
hurting in her throat, and the wonder in her mind.

Mrs. Murray had been kind to her when she first came to Winthrop.
What had changed her so as the weeks went past? What had made her so
bitterly unkind and cruel? As she thought it over, a dimpled white
hand clasped hers tenderly, and sweet Alexie whispered:

“Do not mind this hard-hearted old woman, dear. I love you and so does
Ralph, and when we are married we want you to be our guest for as long
as you will stay. And in the meantime we have a plan to propose to you.”

The pathetic dark eyes turned on her in grateful wonder.

Alexie continued tenderly:

“You will wish to leave here as soon as you can. Do you know where you
will go?”

“I--I--have not decided yet,” Italy gasped.

“Then I think Ralph’s plan is a good one. You see, he is boarding with
a nice, quiet old lady in Boston while his folks are abroad. This old
lady is quite a lady indeed, but in reduced circumstances, and takes a
few boarders to eke out a genteel support. The family is small, herself
and a daughter lately widowed. She has Ralph and a few other boarders,
all good people. It is quite near us, too, which is another reason why
I want you to go and board with this old lady, for then I could come
and see you so often, dear.”

“You are a darling to plan everything for me like this. I will go to
the old lady, and a thousand thanks to you,” Italy sobbed gratefully.

Italy’s two devoted friends removed her the next day from The Lodge to
her pleasant new home in Boston.

Mrs. Murray remained cold and unrelenting to the last, and returned no
reply to the brief note of thanks and farewell that Italy sent to her
by her maid. She stayed closely shut in her own room until Italy had
left the house, and heard with vindictive pleasure the crunching of the
carriage wheels that bore her away.

And yet Mrs. Murray was not a mean or unprincipled woman. She had only
been led astray by blind prejudice and the evil counsels of interested
friends. She knew in her heart that Italy Vale was beautiful, pure, and
good, and in consenting to receive her into the household at The Lodge
she had put aside selfish prejudice and acted from a high sense of
womanly duty combined with pity.

But her pride and prejudice had both taken serious alarm as she noted
the interest that her son was taking in his protégée. This alarm
skilfully fostered by the scheming Mrs. Dunn and her crafty niece,
Alys, had developed into actual dislike and jealousy of the hapless
orphan girl.

But as she listened to the grinding carriage wheels and exulted in
Italy’s departure, the still, small voice of conscience was murmuring
in her breast, although she tried to drown it. She knew that Italy was
not to blame for Francis Murray’s death, if he were really dead, and
she knew that if he returned he would censure her course in turning
adrift on the world the lonely orphan who but a month ago had come to
Winthrop pleading for a mother’s love to replace that which she had
lost.

Alas! the world is but a cold, bleak place to a friendless orphan
girl, and those who should love her most often goad her to despair by
harshness or indifference. Mrs. Murray’s heart had shut itself against
poor Italy, and she resolutely stifled the accusing voice of her
sensitive conscience. But in Italy’s heart there was no resentment for
Mrs. Murray’s course. Her heart was full of pain and sympathy for the
sadly bereaved mother.

“Oh, that I might imbue her with some of my sanguine faith that Mr.
Murray is not dead, and that he will yet return!” she exclaimed often,
yet as weeks went on with no tidings she, too, began to lose heart of
hope.

It was far into October now, and the autumn leaves were turning from
red and gold to russet-brown and whirling through the chilly air; the
nuts were ripe in the woods, and in the city streets people began to
appear in warm clothing and furs; and Italy remembered that it was in
the waning days of the bright summer that she had gone on that fatal
little sailing trip with Francis Murray--far back in the last of summer
since she had heard his voice, full of love and yearning, calling her
“love,” “darling,” then fading out into the silence of a terrible
mystery.

She awoke one stormy midnight, weeping, from a dreadful nightmare dream
in which she had seen Francis Murray lying dead and cold upon the beach
at Winthrop. It was storming wildly outdoors, and the noise had seemed
to her, in her sleep, like the rush of waves that threw that pallid,
drowned corpse at her feet.

Italy flung herself, in her dream, upon the cold, dead form and kissed
the glorious face that she had never kissed in life--kissed the closed
eyes, the marble-white brow, the cold, stiff lips that had called her
in that last, supreme moment, “love,” “darling.”

“Oh, I love you, I love you!” she cried out to the dead, and then she
awoke, weeping wildly.

She heard the wild rain swirling against the windows, and the gale
shrieking around the corners of the streets. In the darkness she groped
her way to the window and looked through the curtains into the street.
By the white electric lights she saw the swirling sheets of rain go
dashing past, swept by the cyclonic force of the wind, and the branches
of the leafless trees bending and writhing and snapping off as though
in the embrace of a gigantic monster. With a shudder she dropped the
curtains together and crouched miserably upon the floor, her face in
her hands.

“Oh, how dreadful it is, how dreadful--yet not so terrible as my
dream!” she moaned. “Oh, is he dead, dead, and lost forever? Or did I
wrong him with my wild suspicions? Was he noble and true, as he seemed?
Who, then, was the fiend that murdered my father? Not Francis Murray,
ah, no, no, no! Let me do him justice, now that he is dead. He was not
the fiend I came here to find. He was noble, godlike, and I--loved him.
Yes, I loved him from the first hour we met. I realize it now, in the
darkness of my great despair.”

She thought of the bereaved mother, alone and lonely in the splendid
home at Winthrop, and her heart yearned over her.

“God pity her, God comfort her!” she sobbed. “Ah, no wonder she
execrates me! Through me she lost her noble son. Why did I ever come
under her roof, and bring with me the doom of that tragedy? What have I
accomplished? Nothing--less than nothing. I have wronged a true heart
by a monstrous doubt, and through me he came to his death. And I am
just as far as ever from keeping my vow to clear my mother from that
dark cloud of shame! Oh, my dearest one, how could I ever meet you
again, even in heaven, if I had broken faith with you! No, no, I cannot
go to you, my vow binds me here!”




CHAPTER XII.

THE BEAUTIFUL YOUNG WIDOW.


As Italy crouched there, weeping in wild abandon, she heard a door
open, lower down the hall, then footsteps coming along, accompanied by
the crying of an infant.

The footsteps stopped at her door, there was a light rap, then a
woman’s voice said deprecatingly:

“I beg pardon, Miss Vale, but I heard you up. May I speak to you?”

“One moment,” answered Italy. She hurriedly lighted her gas, threw on
her dressing-gown, and opened the door to Mrs. Mays, her landlady, who
entered with the crying infant in her arms.

“My dear, I beg a hundred pardons, but my daughter is taken suddenly
very ill with convulsions, and there is not another lady in the house
that I can appeal to for help. The nurse left to-day, and the baby
cannot stay in bed with its sick mother. It is crying from loneliness
and cold. Will you, my dear, let it lie in bed with you to-night while
I attend to my daughter?”

“Certainly,” Italy answered, taking the screaming bundle of flannel and
lace rather gingerly into her arms, “but, dear me, Mrs. Mays, how can I
stop its crying?”

“It will stop itself as soon as you get into bed, and let it snuggle up
close on your arm and get warm. You see, it has been used to sleeping
with its mother and in the dark, but her restless tossings and the
light in her room keep it awake and sick. Do the best you can with it,
my dear, and God bless you!” cried Mrs. Mays, hurrying from the room,
while Italy locked the door, lowered the light, and crept into bed with
her wee charge that, sure enough, as soon as it became conscious of the
warmth and the darkness, cuddled close within her warm arm and fell
asleep.

“Poor little girlie,” murmured Italy, with that rush of tenderness
every womanly heart feels for helpless infancy.

But the chances are that had Italy guessed whose child lay on her arm
she would have recoiled from it with something near akin to loathing.

Italy had been an inmate of this pleasant boarding-house almost two
months, but she had never seen Mrs. Mays’ widowed daughter nor heard
her name, although she knew that she was very young, and had been
suddenly widowed in barely a year after marriage.

For two months she had been ill, and since the birth of her child, six
weeks before, her life had been almost despaired of. But in the last
few days she had shown signs of rapid improvement, and the sick-nurse,
having another engagement, had left the invalid to her mother’s care.

It was most sad to think of the hapless young mother widowed so
suddenly before her child was born, and Italy’s heart swelled with
grief and pity for the fatherless babe.

In the pretty parlor down-stairs was a lovely crayon of a young girl
with dark hair and eyes, and a wilful, pouting mouth, and Mrs. Mays had
told her one day that it was her daughter Isabel.

“Taken when she was at boarding-school just a few weeks before she ran
off to marry a dissipated scamp. Yes, he was a scamp, Miss Vale, or he
would have asked my consent, and not carried her off in that fashion,
almost breaking my heart, for Isabel was my only daughter, and I loved
her better than life. But perhaps he knew I would refuse, for though he
was handsome and had a little money, he had a bad reputation as a fast
man, and I would not have let my child marry him for wealth untold. But
she married him without my consent, and I never forgave her till after
his death, when she came home to me broken-hearted.”

The little babe slept sweetly, the storm muttered on outside, and
Italy, too much disturbed to sleep, lay among the pillows thinking,
thinking, till her brain seemed to burn.

She was glad that she could at last believe Francis Murray innocent of
the sin of which she suspected him. Her heart had rejected the belief
all the while, and now reason came to her aid. It could not be true.
She had been mad to cling to that ignoble suspicion, after she had
seen and known him in all the quiet nobility of his daily life.

“I wronged that grand soul, and may Heaven forgive me!” she sobbed.

A new plan had been forming in her mind for days, and she suddenly
resolved to carry it out.

Lawyer Gardner had been back in Boston some time, but as she was
comfortably situated with Mrs. Mays, she had never opened communication
with him, fearing his disapproval of the object that had brought her to
America. But now rendered desperate by failure and hopelessness, Italy
resolved to seek his sympathy and advice.

“I will go to him this day,” she resolved firmly.

A little after daylight Mrs. Mays came for the child.

“Isabel is better, much better,” she said. “To tell you the truth, Miss
Vale, it was partly hysteria that ailed her. She got to weeping over
her dead husband, and then there was no controlling her nerves until
the violence of her grief wore out her strength. She is calmer now, and
begging for the baby. Thank you for keeping it so long for me.”

She went away with the sleeping babe, and then Italy fell into a long
sleep that lasted until she was aroused by the breakfast-bell.

She rose and made a careful street toilet.

“The sun is shining after the storm--a happy omen,” she said; “I will
go to Mr. Gardner after breakfast.”

She went down and had her morning meal with Ralph Allen and the only
other boarder, a grim professor of Greek, who hurried out as soon as he
had bolted his meal.

Ralph lingered for a few moments’ chat with her before he strolled off
to his studio. He was a rising young artist.

“I saw Alexie yesterday, and promised her for you that all three of us
would go to the theater this evening. Was I impertinent?” he queried
brightly.

“Not at all. I shall be very glad,” she replied smilingly; for Ralph
seemed like a brother to her, he was so genial and kind. She was going
up-stairs for her hat and jacket when she met Mrs. Mays coming down.

“Miss Vale, you have been so kind. Will you do me another favor?” she
inquired deprecatingly, and as Italy gazed at her inquiringly she added:

“Will you come in and see Isabel a few moments. She is so grateful for
your kindness last night, and wants to thank you herself.”

“It was nothing----” Italy began, but she followed Mrs. Mays along the
hall to her daughter’s room.

The invalid was lying in bed propped up in pillows, with the dimpled
little baby held to her breast with one arm. A warm shawl of
rose-colored cashmere was draped about her shoulders, and above it
shone a face of wondrous beauty, dark in the eyes and hair, arch in the
features, but ghastly pale and wasted now, with big eyes, too solemn
and somber for her age, that could not have exceeded nineteen at the
most.

Mrs. Mays led Italy to the side of the bed.

“My dear, I’ve brought her, the sweet girl that took care of baby last
night, so that you could thank her for her goodness to us. Miss Vale,
my daughter, Mrs. Severn.”

Italy bowed, muttered some almost inaudible words, then sank helplessly
into a chair by the bedside, her brain whirling.

Severn! Severn! That name had struck her like a blow! She recalled what
she had read in the papers about the beautiful young wife of Craig
Severn who was nearly crazed by his tragic end! Could this be Craig
Severn’s widow?

“Miss Vale, are you ill? You have grown very pale,” cried Mrs. Mays.

“No, no, it is nothing serious--just a dizziness! I am all right now,”
gasped Italy, lifting her head quickly, then she looked at Mrs. Severn.

“I am glad that you are better. I hope you will soon be well,” she said.

“I don’t want to get well--I want to die!” was the answer, in a voice
of passionate despair.

“Isabel!” cried her mother remonstratingly, but the unhappy creature
looked at Italy, exclaiming:

“You don’t blame me, do you? Oh, Miss Vale, you know my sad story,
of course. I had the dearest husband in the world, and he was
murdered--foully murdered--before we had been married a year. What is
there left for me to live for now?”

“The baby,” Italy said falteringly.

“Yes, yes, my little treasure!” cried the poor young mother, pressing
the infant to her breast. Then her dark eyes gleamed. “Yes, I must
live, live to hunt down Craig’s murderer and bring him to justice!”

Italy’s eyes had been wandering helplessly around the room. Suddenly
they stopped at a portrait on an easel. Her frame seemed to grow rigid.

“It is the face of that monster--and I have lived two months under the
same roof with his widow--the woman he was false to--yet who mourns him
so truly,” she thought shudderingly.

Again Mrs. Mays interposed anxiously:

“Isabel, dear, do not talk so wildly! You frighten Miss Vale with your
talk of bringing murderers to justice.”

“Mama, go away and leave us, please, I want to ask Miss Vale to help
me name baby. You know she has never had a name yet,” the sick girl
answered more calmly, and with a wan smile.

Mrs. Mays, mindful of pressing household duties, retired, and then Mrs.
Severn resumed eagerly:

“Mama does not care anything about poor Craig because she hates him and
believed slanders about him; but they were not true, Miss Vale, indeed
they were not true. He loved me devotedly, and I worshiped him. Yes,
and I have sworn to bring the murderer to justice.”

A faint film seemed to pass before Italy’s eyes. The room seemed to
fade, and in its place gleamed a window-pane shattered by a bullet.
Behind it shone the white face and lifted, writhing hands of the
murderess! She was back in fancy with that fatal night, struggling with
the villain who had lured her to that house where he met his sudden
death.

“Miss Vale,” began Mrs. Severn, and Italy came back to the present with
a dreadful start, and looked into the big, solemn black eyes opposite.
Their owner was saying:

“I have the greatest faith that I shall succeed, for already I have one
important clue. You see, my husband was never seen alive after he left
Mr. Gardner’s law-office on the evening of the eighteenth of August.
But there was a woman mixed up in the mystery, somehow. Mr. Gardner’s
office-boy has told me that a beautiful young girl went into the office
just before closing-time, and that my husband took her away afterward
in a cab. The boy says that he would know the girl’s beautiful face
again anywhere. He is watching for that face and will let me know when
he sees it again.”




CHAPTER XIII.

NAMING THE BABY.


Italy Vale sat looking at the beautiful, excited young widow with a
white face of utter consternation. The words that she had spoken seemed
to burn themselves in on her brain in letters of fire.

“The boy says that he would know that beautiful face anywhere, and he
is watching for it, and will let me know if he sees it again.”

It seemed to Italy as if she were walking over a powder-mine that might
at any moment explode beneath her feet. Yet she knew that she was not
guilty of Craig Severn’s death.

She knew who was, for the wild white face was indelibly printed on her
memory, and often, when she had seen it--proud, gay, smiling--she had
wondered how Mrs. Dunn could smile with that terrible deed upon her
soul.

And yet she did not wish to betray the guilty woman, for, no matter
how she had come to be peeping in through the window, Italy believed
that the fatal shot had been fired to protect herself from a villain’s
power, and she had kept silent from blended feelings of gratitude and
honor.

Yet she had often wondered at the apparent unconsciousness of Mrs.
Dunn upon the subject, wondered the more because she knew herself to
be an object of dislike to her, and therefore thought it strange that
she had cared enough to protect her from the stranger’s insults by the
perpetration of a crime.

But the real facts were quite different from what Italy imagined, and
Mrs. Dunn was ignorant both of the name of the man she had slain and of
the girl whose honor she had defended.

She was a woman of strong passions and the fiercest jealousy, and
while vainly awaiting the coming of her laggard lover at Winthrop, had
conceived the idea that he was entertaining guests at his suburban home
a few miles from Boston. Curiosity and resentment had led her upon a
secret mission of discovery to the house, and at the moment when Craig
Severn had stooped to embrace the struggling Italy, Mrs. Dunn had just
arrived and become a witness of the scene.

Severn’s back was toward her, and in the dim light he looked so exactly
like Percy Seabright, that she had no doubt of his identity with her
lover. The girl she did not recognize; but, believing that she must
be both young and beautiful, she was seized with an impulse of such
murderous hate, that, pressing her pistol against the window-pane, she
fired pointblank at her rival.

What was her horror when she saw the man fall dead in a pool of his
spouting life-blood, and the girl she hated with such murderous fury
standing erect, terrified, but entirely unharmed?

With a wild cry of horror and despair, she threw up her white hands,
from which the instrument of death had fallen unheeded, and a minute
later fled from the scene as though pursued by avenging furies,
believing that she had slain her lover.

Accordingly, when Percy Seabright came to Winthrop the next day, she
fell fainting at his feet, believing for an instant that his wraith had
appeared to haunt her for her sin. But later on the truth came home to
her. She had made a mistake. It was not her lover she had killed, but
another man, an entire stranger. She wondered whom it could be; but she
kept her own counsel, and though she read in the papers of the finding
of Craig Severn’s murdered body in the river, she did not by any means
associate the fact with her own sin.

In an impulse of mad, unreasoning jealousy she had committed a terrible
deed, but the name of her victim and of the girl from whom she saved
him remained a sealed mystery to her--but a mystery that haunted her,
for often in her dreams she lived over those dreadful moments and
the night of horror in which she believed that she had killed Percy
Seabright, and she would awaken with her face bathed in a cold dew of
anguish. But all the time she believed that her dread secret was known
to God alone--to God and her own self.

Little did she dream that her life lay in the slender white hands of
the girl she hated, but who, knowing herself thus hated and persecuted,
was too generous to betray her foe.

So Italy, knowing all the fatal truth, was suddenly confronted with
the startling fact that a Nemesis was on the track of Craig Severn’s
slayer--a Nemesis in the shape of the beautiful young widow, who held
it as a holy mission to bring the criminal to justice and avenge his
death. She was startled, unnerved, utterly confounded by the suddenness
of the knowledge.

She felt that if she stayed there another moment with Craig Severn’s
portrait staring at her from the easel, and his broken-hearted widow
whispering to her of the clue she had found, she would have to scream
out aloud in her distress. She rose up abruptly, her lovely young face
as white as it would ever be in its coffin.

“I--I must go. Pray excuse me, madam,” she faltered, and hurried to her
own room as fast as her trembling limbs would permit.

Then she fell upon the bed and lay for some time unconscious. She came
back to herself presently with a long, shuddering sigh, and remembered
everything.

“I was going to Mr. Gardner’s office, but--I must not now, for that
terrible boy would see me and know me,” she thought, and she suddenly
realized that it was almost providential--that interview with Mrs.
Severn.

“For if she had not sent for me I should have gone on to the
law-office, and blundered straight upon that terrible boy that is
watching for my face,” she thought.

It seemed to Italy as if the tables had been turned with a vengeance.
Hitherto she had been trying to hunt down a murderer and bring him to
justice. Now she was being hunted down herself. The sensation was not
agreeable. At the end of her cogitations she decided:

“Self-preservation is the first law of nature. If the worst comes to
the worst, and I am accused of Craig Severn’s murder, I shall have to
denounce Mrs. Dunn for her crime.”

Then she began to wonder what Mrs. Severn would think of her wild exit
from the room.

“Perhaps she will suspect me of being the very girl she is after. I
must go and make some excuse,” she thought.

She bit her lips and rubbed her face to bring back some of the vanished
color, then she stopped a minute to pet her canary that was chirping
forlornly in his gilded cage.

“Darling little Frankie, I will lay it all on you,” she cooed sweetly.

She closed the door, and hastened back to the invalid’s room. The young
widow lay back among the pillows, her eyes closed and the dew of tears
glittering on the dark fringe of her lashes.

“Dear Mrs. Severn,” cried Italy, and the invalid looked at her with a
wan smile, “I have come back to apologize for my ridiculous haste in
leaving. I have a canary, you know, I was not certain that I had closed
my door tightly, and I feared the cat might get him.”

“Ah, I thought you had a frightened look!” cried Mrs. Severn. “But I
hope you found your little pet safe.”

“Yes, quite safe, thank you.”

“Then sit down again, won’t you, for I was in earnest when I told mama
that I wanted you to help me select a name for my baby. I have been so
ill and unhappy since she came, I could not choose her name. Won’t you
suggest something?”

Italy was so glad that she did not recur to the subject of her
husband’s murder that she very willingly consented to this request, and
a half-hour was spent by the two new friends in suggesting and weighing
the merits of respective names.

“Let it be Mabel,” Mrs. Severn said at last, and then burst into tears.
“Oh, to think of Craig being dead, and never seeing and knowing baby,”
she sobbed.

Mrs. Mays entered at that moment, and while she was comforting the
mourner, Italy made her escape to her own room.

“What shall I do now?” she wondered; “I cannot go to Mr. Gardner as I
wished, and I cannot decide whether it is best for me to send for him
to come to me and confide in him or not. I will wait until to-morrow
before I make up my mind.”

A servant tapped at the door and handed in the morning’s mail, a letter
with a foreign postmark. Italy saw that it was in the writing of her
young lover, Emmett Harlow. He had been abroad two months now, and
absorbed in her recent troubles, she had scarcely thought of him for
weeks, but the exquisite poem that dropped out of the envelope when she
opened it proved that Emmett had by no means forgotten the fair girl
who had rejected his love.

The verses closed without signature, but Italy knew the firm, bold hand
too well to doubt who had sent this tender token from across the sea to
hint of his unchanged devotion. She sighed as she thought of the warm,
true heart whose love she could not return.

Not for one moment did Italy believe Mrs. Dunn’s accusation against
Emmett. She thought the lady was mistaken, and that, after all, the
whole affair had been an accident. Francis Murray had done all that he
could to foster this belief in her mind.

It seemed to him impossible that this young and innocent girl could
have a murderous enemy, and he was acting in blind faith when he
assured Italy of this belief.




CHAPTER XIV.

PERCY SEABRIGHT’S ADVICE.


While she was musing, with gentle regret, over her absent friend,
Emmett, the little bell-boy reappeared with a card that bore the name:
“Percy Seabright.”

Mr. Seabright had been absent from Boston nearly six weeks, visiting a
brother out West, he said, and Italy had not thought of him during his
absence. The episode of that day at Winthrop when she had asked him, as
her father’s dearest friend, to help her trace her father’s murderer,
had almost passed from her mind, in the stress of later hurrying
events. But everything rushed back upon her now, and she descended in
eager haste to meet and welcome the caller.

Fresh, bright, debonair as the morning, he took her hand, exclaiming:

“It is a great pleasure to meet you again, my little friend.”

His beaming smile, his friendly voice went like a ray of sunshine to
Italy’s sore heart.

“I only returned yesterday, and called on Mrs. Dunn last evening, of
course,” he went on, in his blithe fashion, his bright eyes searching
hers almost tenderly. “I saw Alexie, and she told me where to find you,
so I came at the earliest permissible hour this morning. Have you
forgotten our compact of friendship, little one?”

She smiled in answer, and he chattered on:

“You have thought hardly of me, perhaps, for appearing to neglect the
earnest request you made of me the day we went yachting. Well, there
were reasons--and I came here to-day to explain them. And I brought
these as peace-offerings.”

The peace-offerings were a new novel by a fashionable author, and an
exquisite bunch of hothouse flowers.

“Alexie told me you were going to the theater to-night, so I thought
the flowers would be very welcome.”

“They are. Thank you very much for remembering me,” she answered
gratefully.

She was so lonely, poor child! and kindness went straight to her sad
heart.

His keen eyes were regarding her expressive face intently.

“You don’t look happy,” he said tenderly. “Never mind, I will try to
cheer you up, now that I am back in Boston. So you are intimate with
the Audenreids, eh?”

“Only with Alexie. Alys and her aunt seem to dislike me.”

“Jealous of you,” he commented gaily. “Ever been to their house, Miss
Vale? Ever seen Mrs. Dunn’s mother?”

“No,” she answered.

“Well, you ought to. ‘Ma,’ as Mrs. Dunn calls her, is such an oddity
she would amuse you, only they keep her so carefully in the background.
Give you my word, I was engaged to Ione before she ever permitted me to
see her ma. Kind old soul, but ridiculous--very. Shoddy in the extreme.
Parlor hung round with glaring, cheap chromos.”

There rushed over Italy the words Emmett Harlow had said to her:

“Percy Seabright is not true nor sincere. He makes fun of everything
about Mrs. Dunn, yet pretends to be her friend, even her lover.”

The smile froze on her sweet lips, and her glance grew severe.

“I beg your pardon, Mr. Seabright,” she exclaimed, “but I do not like
to hear you ridicule Mrs. Dunn in that fashion. It is not fair. She is
your fiancée, is she not?”

“It is nothing but a flirtation, I assure you, Miss Vale. I am not a
marrying man. I like my liberty too well. But I have offended you by my
levity. I am sorry.”

Her fair face was still very grave.

“I have no right to lecture you,” she said, “and yet, since you were
my father’s friend and mine, I will speak out. Your levity grieves
me, makes me distrustful of your sincerity. For since you can speak
so lightly of the woman you profess to love, how can I trust to your
friendship? Perhaps you will go back to her this evening and hold me
up to her idle laughter.”

“Heaven forbid!” he exclaimed earnestly. “Miss Vale, will you believe
that I gave vent to all that nonsense just because I wanted to brighten
that grave little face with some laughter and dimples? But I have
offended you instead. I will go.”

But he did not move to do so. He sat still, fixing his bright, dark
eyes on hers with a gaze so strange and intent that it made her shiver,
although she could not take her eyes away. Gradually a hard, cold gleam
crept into his bright gaze. It was a serpent charming a bird.

Suddenly Italy seemed to realize that he was trying to dominate her
mind by a subtle will-power of his own. With an effort she turned aside
her head, avoiding that baleful gaze.

Percy Seabright gave a low, strange laugh.

“So you will not forgive me?” he said regretfully; “and yet you have no
call to take Mrs. Dunn’s part; she has always openly hated you.”

“And for that reason I can but pity her more. Her ignoble nature can
but evoke the pity of a nobler mind,” Italy answered gravely, then
continued: “If you wish me really for your friend, you must give over
these witticisms at the expense of your friends. They pain me, they
turn my heart cold with distrust of your professions.”

It was true. At that moment her heart felt a strange recoil against
the man whom she wished to like for her dead father’s sake.

Perhaps Emmett Harlow’s warning was working in her mind; perhaps it
was the strange expression with which he looked at her, a sneering
smile and a strong uplifting of the black, arched brows that gave
him a startling resemblance to Mephistopheles in “Faust,” completely
transforming the usual sweet, winning expression into something
positively uncanny.

“Oh, don’t look like that!” she cried, lifting her hand with a gesture
of strong repulsion. “I--am--afraid--of--you.”

Percy Seabright threw back his head and laughed convulsively.

“What do you mean, Miss Vale, you amusing little girl? How did I look?”

“This way----” she replied frankly, and quoted the lines:

    “‘There was a laughing devil in his sneer,
    That raised emotions both of hate and fear;
    And where his glance of hatred darkly fell,
    Hope writhing fled, and mercy sighed farewell.’”

Again he laughed convulsively, but her grave expression presently
restored his composure.

“Thanks for your compliment. You are very candid, I am sure,” he
replied gaily. “You tempt me to go upon the stage. I might get an
engagement in ‘Faust.’”

“Yes, if you could act the part as well as you looked it just now,” she
replied spiritedly.

Suddenly Percy Seabright’s smile faded, and he assumed a repentant air.

“A truce to jesting,” he exclaimed. “My little friend, you are rather
hard on me, I think. I assure you that ridicule of each other is
current coin in society, and that it holds no real malice, only simple
pleasantry. Mrs. Dunn, whose part you so nobly take, doubtless makes
fun of me to her intimates, and I am positively certain that her ma
detests me. So let us forget this little episode, and permit me to
remind you that your noble father loved and trusted me to the hour of
his death, so that you ought to consider his judgment equal to your
own.”

It was his trump-card, and he played it skilfully. The cold lines of
her lovely face softened insensibly, and he looked up with a flickering
smile.

“If I have been too harsh you must pardon me,” she said. “I am but
little versed in the ways of society. My mother’s gentle teachings and
my own instincts are the only guides I have had to what is right and
just.”

At the mention of her mother’s name he turned aside his head to hide
a frown of sullen anger, and did not look back at her until he had
summoned an artificial smile.

“I am sure that these guides have been the most correct ones, Miss
Vale; better, far better than the hollow teachings of society,” he
exclaimed. “In future I will try to restrain those faults that arise
only from a thoughtless levity, not from a vicious mind, and perhaps I
may better deserve the boon of your sweet friendship.”

With a graceful gesture he lifted her small hand and pressed his
lips upon it, then let it fall, with a deep sigh. He was, in fact,
dropping suddenly, as was his wont, from levity into a mood of profound
melancholy.

Italy took it for sincere repentance, and softened toward him more and
more. Somewhat embarrassed by remembering the impulsive lecture she
had given him, she dropped her eyes to the pages of her book and was
cursorily reading when he said gently:

“Now that we are good friends again, let us return to the subject on
which we were interrupted in August, and to resume which I came here
this morning.”

“Yes,” she answered eagerly, her eyes bright with interest.

He continued, low and earnestly:

“You asked me to help you to find a clue to your father’s murderer that
the stain of unmerited disgrace might be washed from your mother’s
name.”

“Yes, oh, yes,” breathed the eager young girl.

“Miss Vale, or Italy, if I may call you so--it seems so much more
friendly--you cannot guess what a thorn was implanted in my heart by
your request. I had loved your father dearly--dearly, and it was but
natural I should wish to bring his slayer to justice. Yet--yet--suppose
that my suspicions pointed to another friend whom I also loved? Can
you fancy a situation more harrowing?”

His face was deathly pale, his eyes gleamed wildly, his voice was low
and intense.

“Tell me,” he said persuasively, “have you not suspected a certain man
we both know? Yes, I see it in your eyes.”

“No, no, I was wrong--I feel that I was wrong. I must seek elsewhere
for the clue,” she cried wildly.

“No, you were right, Italy. Your instinct was correct, although now
you wish to deny it out of a chivalrous respect for the memory of the
dead--yes, the dead, for he whom we both suspect is no longer amenable
to the law for his crime. He has passed to his dread account.”

Her eyes grew dim, her face ghastly.

“Oh, you cannot mean Francis Murray?” she breathed, in a voice of
absolute agony.

“Alas! that I must answer yes, for it is plain to me that you gave him
more regard than was his due. But, Italy, who else was benefited by
your father’s death?”

“That is no proof of crime,” she cried desperately. She who had come to
Winthrop to fasten that guilt upon Francis Murray was now mad to prove
him innocent.

“True,” answered Percy Seabright sadly, “but suppose I tell you that
Francis Murray, then a poor young man, at odds with fate, living far
from Winthrop, was at The Lodge secretly the night of your father’s
murder--came there secretly, went away secretly, and the next morning
found himself heir to the Vale millions--what then?”

“If he were alive he could prove his innocence, no matter how dark the
cloud of circumstantial evidence!” she cried.

“Poor child! you loved him, and your love blinds you. How can I blame
you? for I loved him, too, he was so winning. In spite of what I knew
I tried to believe him innocent, and I would never, while he lived,
have betrayed my knowledge of the hidden crime of which I feared--not
believed--he must be guilty. Yet he is dead--betrayal cannot harm
him now--and how can I withhold from your desolate, orphaned heart
the evidence of your mother’s innocence? But it is yours to do with
as you will, to make public or keep secret as you will. Yet my own
advice would be--let them rest, those two--your mother and the man you
loved--in their quiet graves. By so doing you can shield his memory;
and as for her, the jury found her innocent, and public opinion does
not matter.”

“It does matter. Alas! you do not understand!” she cried out, in bitter
anguish; then, desperately:

“What did that secret visit count against him? He was poor, you say?
Perhaps he came to ask his kinsman for assistance.”

“And being refused took a dastardly revenge, eh?” returned Percy
Seabright, with a grim pleasantry that made her shudder, it was so
heartless.

“Oh, this is terrible!” she cried helplessly; then, with sudden,
strange defiance: “You cannot prove what you have declared!”

“I _can_ prove it--to Francis Murray’s face, if he were alive. Yet I
do not say I can prove the murder. It is circumstantial evidence, you
see, the same as it was against your mother. But both of them might
be perfectly innocent. Suppose you employ a detective to ferret out
the affair--only the publicity would break the loving heart of Francis
Murray’s mother.”

“True, true, I will do nothing yet. I will wait--a little while--until
I can make sure of something,” she declared, and Percy Seabright
eagerly applauded her resolution.




CHAPTER XV.

THE LAWYER’S STORY.


Italy had made up her mind by the next day, and a brief note to Lawyer
Gardner brought him quickly to her side. He had not heard of his former
client for years, and it was a great surprise to him to receive a
letter from her daughter stating that she had lost her mother, and,
having come to Boston on a matter of business, desired his advice.

He was a fine-looking man, between fifty and sixty, with a kind,
shrewd, yet benevolent face that drew the girl’s heart to him at once.

As for him, he looked at her in pity and admiration, she was so
beautiful, yet her lot was so sad.

“You were my mother’s friend and lawyer,” she said; “I want you to be
both to me.”

She held out her little hand to him, and he pressed it warmly.

“I will do all that I can for you in both qualities,” he replied, and
then she poured out to him her sorrows, the story of her mother’s
tortured life, and her own vow to bring the real murderer to justice
and clear her memory from all stain.

“I will confess to you that I at first suspected the man who succeeded
my father in the Vale fortune, but he was lost at sea some time since,
and is believed to be dead,” she added.

“You were wrong, Miss Vale. Francis Murray was one of nature’s
noblemen, incapable of an ignoble action. I knew him well, and esteemed
him highly as a gentleman, and admired his talents as an author.”

“But, Mr. Gardner, appearances are often deceitful. Remember _Arthur
Dimmesdale_, in the ‘Scarlet Letter,’” she said.

Mr. Gardner answered decisively:

“Francis Murray was no criminal. Put that idea out of your head at once
and forever, Miss Vale.”

His words were like sweet music to her ears. She decided not to tell
him yet of what Percy Seabright had asserted.

“I want you to help me trace the murderer,” she said pleadingly.

“Miss Vale, I cannot take the case,” he replied, so abruptly that she
flushed with anger, and retorted:

“I will go to another lawyer.”

“You must not--you shall not!” he cried out agitatedly, and caught her
hand. “In mercy let this matter rest. You can do nothing but ill by
reviving the case.”

“What _can_ you mean?” she cried, startled by the similarity of his
words with the advice of Francis Murray.

He looked at her doubtfully a moment, then said resolutely:

“God knows I hate to wound you, Miss Vale, but unless I tell you the
truth you will go on with this Quixotic thing, and perhaps bring out
hidden facts that your friends would be glad to shield from public
knowledge.”

“Explain!” she cried out haughtily. And then he said:

“Listen, then, my poor child. After I succeeded in clearing your mother
from the charge of murder, there came to me from a private source some
evidence that was so black and conclusive that it would most surely
have convicted her if given to the jury. But this evidence had been
withheld by friends who loved Ronald Vale so dearly that they shielded
the guilty woman, to save his child from the black disgrace that would
have been her portion had the truth been known.”

Her bosom heaved, her eyes blazed, she cried out imperiously:

“I demand to know the nature of this hidden evidence, although even
before I hear it I stamp it as an infamous lie!”

“Would to God it might be proved so, for your sake, my poor girl,”
Lawyer Gardner answered sadly. “But, alas! it carries such conviction
with it that even I, who had all along believed in your poor mother,
was forced to accept it as conclusive. But for your own dear sake, I
beg you not to insist upon hearing the story!”

Italy Vale caught her breath with a great strangling gasp at those
words from the lawyer, and sat staring at him for a moment in appalled
silence.

He on his part looked at her in sympathy and pity mixed with
admiration. She was the most dazzlingly beautiful creature he had ever
beheld, and as he noted the exquisite face and form, the white-rose
skin, the magnificent eyes, the scarlet lips, the shining hair with its
rich waves, he thought what a pity it was that this exquisite creature
should have had so weak and wicked a mother, should have had the fair
promise of her life darkened and blighted by the stain of a mother’s
sin.

He saw the slender white hands writhing in and out of each other upon
the dark crimson of her rich morning-dress, saw the fair face change
from horror and shame into swift anger and incredulity. Then she spoke
resolutely:

“It is good of you to try to spare me, but I am not afraid to hear the
story you have to tell, for no evidence can make me believe ill of my
mother.”

“You have a loyal heart,” the lawyer exclaimed admiringly.

“I worshiped my beautiful mother,” she answered, with pearly tears
starting out upon her lashes. “Ah, Mr. Gardner, if you had known her as
I did, her love, her sorrow for her dead husband, the ineffable sadness
of her whole life, you could not doubt she was an angel.”

“I hope you will always keep this noble faith in her,” he replied, with
a sigh from the bottom of his kindly heart.

“I shall, Mr. Gardner, but I must make the world believe in her, too,
I must prove her innocence to all.”

“My dear Miss Vale, she was acquitted by the law. I beg that you will
rest satisfied with the verdict of the jury.”

She crested her proud head impatiently.

“Listen,” she said, and he wondered that one so young could cling so
tenaciously to a purpose.

“The world was not satisfied with the verdict,” she said. “Oh, I
know it all, how she was hissed by the populace when she left the
court-room, how popular clamor branded her, how friends fell away from
her, and left her alone in the world with her little child.

“Ah,” she cried, with clasped hands and streaming tears, “it is the
most pathetic story ever known, the sufferings of my martyred mother!
But she shall be cleared, the truth shall be known, the world shall do
her justice!”

Her face was holy in its pure purpose, but the listener shuddered.

“Will nothing dissuade you from this Quixotic purpose?” he cried
imploringly.

“No,” she answered, with upraised hand and gleaming eyes, “I have sworn
to unmask the fiend who murdered my father, and whose malignity has
hounded my mother through the world all these wretched years. They are
one and the same person, I am sure, and no entreaties can turn me from
my purpose. Although I am groping blindly in the dark now, I feel a
presentiment that Heaven will send light at last to guide me.”

“You are mad, you are blind!” cried Lawyer Gardner impressively; and he
added:

“If your mother were alive she would be the first person to forbid your
raking open the ashes of the past, for the smoldering coals when blown
into flame would only throw light upon that which has been hidden in
darkness--the motive for her sin!”

“How dare you? How dare you?” she cried, in a white heat of passionate
resentment.

“I beg your pardon for wounding you, Miss Vale, but I am only trying to
prove my friendship to you in all that I say. Leave the past alone, I
implore you.”

“I will not,” she flashed angrily.

And with deepest pain and pity he replied:

“Then I must do you the cruel kindness of telling you the truth. That
verdict of the jury is the greatest blessing her child could have.
Beneath its merciful veil she finds her surest refuge; for, alas! Italy
Vale, your mother was a--_guilty woman_!”

“It is false!” quavered over her ashy lips.

“It is true; and should that old case be reopened the truth might
accidentally come to light, and blast you with its horror.”

His voice was full of unspeakable pain and pity.

“I do not credit your assertion yet--I demand to know all the truth,”
came in a low, imperious voice from her white lips.

“It is not fit for the pure ears of a young girl,” Mr. Gardner answered
sadly; and, looking up at her angry face, he quoted: “‘Where ignorance
is bliss ’tis folly to be wise.’”

“I covet no such poor bliss as ignorance,” she cried, with a curling
lip. “Speak! I demand it in the name of my injured mother! Let me know
the worst that the infamous slanderer has done, then I shall know
better how to strike a blow in her defense. Tell me all. I am waiting.”

It seemed to him that she was blind and mad as he had called her, but
there was no retreat from betraying all that he knew. It was cruel, but
perhaps it would deter her from her insane purpose of vindicating her
mother’s name. It would rankle like a thorn in her heart, but perhaps
it would teach her the worldly wisdom of saving the Vale name from
further obloquy. With a heart-wrung sigh of the most honest sympathy,
he bent forward and whispered low and rapidly in her ear for several
minutes.

She sat and listened, her slight form rigid, her face pallid, her
somber eyes gleaming strangely, and heard the saddest story ever
breathed in a young girl’s ears against an idolized mother. And yet one
with which the world is too sadly familiar!

It was that old story of a girl’s ambition, and then a woman’s frailty
and sin. And this was what he said:

“Although Ronald Vale was a prince among men, and worthy of all honor
and love, your mother gave him the hand without the heart. She was
young and beautiful, the last descendant of a famous old Puritan
family, but, alas! poor in everything but her own charms, and for
ambition’s sake she married Ronald Vale.

“She became a social queen in New England society, and her husband
worshiped her and believed in her love and purity as he believed in
the angels. When your baby eyes first opened to the light your advent
was hailed like that of a little princess. The father and mother both
idolized you. A few years passed with seemingly fair skies, then the
bolt of lightning fell--your father was found dead in his library,
and the servants proved that your mother had been seen to leave the
room stealthily just five minutes before he was found by the butler,
murdered.”

“Yes, yes, I know all that,” Italy breathed eagerly. “My mother told
me, and then I read it in the papers she had kept for me. Papa was
sitting up late that night to look over some papers his lawyer had sent
him that day. Mama had been compelled to attend a reception without
him. She remained but a short time, and went, on returning, to the
library to bid papa good night before retiring. He told her not to
sit up for him, as he would be detained an hour yet, and had ordered
the butler to bring him some warm coffee presently. As she kissed him
an affectionate good night she noticed his diary lying close to his
elbow on the desk, as though he had been writing in it. Then she went
out softly and came to the nursery to me, where, five minutes later,
she was startled by the outcries of the butler, who, on taking in the
coffee to his master, had found him lying dead, stabbed to the heart.”

“Those are the precise acts that were submitted to the jury,” Mr.
Gardner answered. “But though circumstantial evidence pointed to your
mother as the guilty party, still the absence of a motive so influenced
the jury that they leaned strongly to a theory of suicide, and
acquitted Mrs. Vale on that doubt.”

He paused and looked at her gravely, but she looked back at him fixedly
without reply, and he added sadly enough:

“Alas! the motive was known to one who loved your mother--her secret
lover, the partner in her frailty--but who, though doubting not her
guilt, because she had hinted to him a desire for her husband’s death,
was too loyal to betray her, and so by his silence saved her life and
her honor. For no one had suspected the secret liaison that prompted
her to the commission of murder.”

He paused, expecting and dreading a terrible outburst, but for a moment
she did not speak, only stared before her like one in a trance of
horror, her face dead-white, her eyes wild.

“Miss Vale!” he cried out, in alarm at her strange looks.

She started, shivered, and looked at him, gasping out:

“Oh, this is infamous! infamous!”

“I am grieved that I had to reveal it to you and destroy your loyal
faith in your mother’s goodness,” he replied very sadly.

Instantly her eyes flashed with keen displeasure.

“Do not think that you have destroyed my faith in her; no, no, you
could never do that,” she exclaimed proudly. “No, Mr. Gardner, you
have but added another score to the long list of wrongs I have to
avenge in my mother’s sacred name. But this man who pretended to be her
lover--his name?”

“I cannot tell you, Miss Vale.”

“Do you know it?”

“I do not.”

“Then who can tell the traitor’s name?”

“No living person, Miss Vale, for the only man who knew the name and
the story is believed to be dead.”

“Francis Murray?”

“Yes.”

There came back to her mind the hints Francis Murray had dropped that
day in the garden when they had talked of this subject. This was what
he had meant. A sudden flush rose over her face, bathing it in a
burning tide of shame.

So _he_ had believed this horrible slander of her angel mother? She
buried her face in her hands for a moment, and he thought it was a mute
acknowledgement of her terrible defeat. He began to murmur some words
of heartfelt sympathy. She dropped her hands and looked up at him.

“You think I have pulled down my colors, that I own myself defeated,”
she said curtly. “No, you are mistaken. Mr. Murray believed what he
told you, of course, but--where is that man whose silence saved my
mother? Why has he never been near her all these years?”

“Her crime inspired him with such horror that he refused her plea that
he would marry her, and left her to her fate.”

Oh, the exquisite scorn of those curled lips, those flashing eyes!

“The dastard!” she hissed bitterly, and cried:

“He lied, basely lied, and I will yet bring home to him all the
infamous slanders that have tracked my mother’s pathway since the hour
my father died. Why, it is he, and no other, who murdered my father and
followed my mother’s life with such hellish malignity. Oh, God! but to
stand at the foot of the gallows-tree and see him swing!”

She choked with emotion, and hot tears sprang from her eyes, blinding
their fierce glitter.

“Calm yourself, Miss Vale,” implored the lawyer.

She clashed the tears from her eyes, looked at him half-defiantly, and
answered, in a steely voice:

“Nothing in what you have told me shows any cause for me to give up the
search for new evidence to prove my mother’s innocence of all that with
which she is charged.”

“You will only bring down irretrievable ruin upon your head,” he
protested, growing alarmed at what seemed to him her stubborn hardihood.

“No,” she answered; “I shall triumph by the help of God, and then you
will applaud me for my courage and my loyalty. Ah! I understand you,
Mr. Gardner; you believe that might is right. You believe my mother
was guilty because she could not defend herself, because she could not
ward off the blows struck at her in the dark by a cowardly dastard. But
wait, wait, and you shall yet see me avenge the wrongs of my parents.
All is not lost while there is courage in one brave heart.

“You see how I feel. I cannot take your advice not to reopen the case.
I shall bend every energy to the purpose I am sworn to. As for you, you
shall help me or not, as you choose. I give you two days, Mr. Gardner,
to decide what you will do. No, do not refuse without consideration.
Think of it, weigh it well, and remember that a young girl’s prayers go
up every hour to Heaven for your consent.”

He was about to speak, but she silenced him again with a queenly
gesture.

“I will not take your answer for two days, sir. Come to me then with
the words of consent on your lips. If you refuse me, I shall only go to
another lawyer; I have money to push the investigation, and I shall not
falter in my purpose, believe me.”

“So I have told you that dark story all in vain!” he exclaimed
unhappily.

“No, not in vain, sir, for it has given me another important clue
to work on. Oh, that Francis Murray were alive to-day that I might
wrest from his unwilling lips the name of my mother’s traducer, whom I
believe to be my father’s murderer!”

With a deep sigh, he took her hand to say good-by.

“God help you and bless you, you brave, noble girl!” he exclaimed,
with irrepressible admiration of her courage in the face of such black
despair, and he went away with a keen pain in his heart at the thought
of her ultimate failure.




CHAPTER XVI.

ITALY’S RESOLUTION.


The lawyer had scarcely taken his departure before Italy had another
visitor. It was that dainty, blonde beauty--Alexie Audenreid. She
looked lovely in a handsome carriage-suit of dark-blue cloth and
velvet that formed so pleasing a contrast with her curly, golden hair
and peachy complexion. Her dazzling, dark-blue eyes were radiant with
happiness.

“Are you ready to go for your sitting this morning? My coupé is
waiting,” she said, then started in surprise at Italy’s agitated looks.

Ralph Allen was painting their portraits, and they went together each
morning for alternate sittings.

“Oh, my dear! what is the matter? You are so pale, and you look like
you had been crying?” exclaimed sweet Alexie anxiously.

“I--I--have a headache,” Italy faltered evasively. “Dear Alexie, I
_cannot_ sit to Ralph this morning. You must take my place, please.”

“But, Italy, come with me to the studio, won’t you? The morning is so
bright and crisp that it will cure your head to get out in the fresh
air, and you can rest on the sofa there, you know.”

Italy could not resist the sweet pleading of her friend, and she knew
it would be better to get away from her own torturing thoughts for
the present, so she hastily made a fresh toilet, and, joining Alexie,
they were driven in the natty coupé to Ralph Allen’s studio on Tremont
Street.

“You are late,” the young artist said, greeting them with his bright
smile and a sweet, stolen glance at his adored one.

“It was all my fault. I was not feeling well and forgot my sitting
until Alexie called for me. Then she had to wait for me to dress.
And--I cannot sit to you this morning. Alexie must have my turn,”
explained Italy, who was still looking ghastly pale and distrait with
the memory of all that Mr. Gardner had told her that morning.

“You shall lie on the sofa and rest,” said the artist kindly. “And here
is Mr. Seabright to amuse you.”

Percy Seabright came forward with his cheerful air and greeted both
girls warmly.

“I heard that Ralph was painting you two on canvas together as ‘Night’
and ‘Morning,’ and rushed off to see it,” he explained. “It is going
to be beautiful--beautiful! How arch and smiling Alexie looks as
‘Morning,’ ‘in her eyes the blue of the sea, on her hair the gold of
the sun,’ and Italy, with that pensive, moonlight smile and her dusky
hair and eyes, makes an ideal ‘Night.’”

They stood a few moments contemplating the canvas on which the two girl
faces were growing in exquisite likeness to the originals, then Alexie
exclaimed:

“Come, Italy, take off your hat and lie down on the sofa in this
little alcove. I know Mr. Seabright will amuse you until Ralph finishes
my sitting.”

She lay down and closed her eyes wearily, but knowing too well that she
should not rest, but go on thinking, thinking, until her brain seemed
to burn with its torturing burdens.

Suddenly a soft, cool hand fell on her hot forehead.

“Do you know that there is magic in my touch? Just a few light little
passes, if you will permit me, and the poor head will be well,” said
Percy Seabright’s voice, low and tenderly.

She did not answer, and he continued to stroke her brow and hair with
light, caressing touches that did indeed seem to charm away the heated
throbbing in her temples. Then she opened her eyes with a faint,
grateful little smile.

“It is so much better--thank you!” she said, drawing back her head
gently from the hand whose pressure was so tender she found it
embarrassing.

“I knew you would be better,” he said smilingly. “Now close your eyes
and you will sleep.”

“Oh, that I could sleep and forget,” she sighed, and let the
dark-fringed lids droop wearily again.

Surely he possessed some magnetic power, or else the narcotic influence
of pain overpowered her. She sank quickly into a deep, restful sleep,
and the man by her side sat very still, watching the lovely, sleeping
face and the closed lids, still delicately roseate from the tears she
had shed a while ago.

“She has been weeping--over what, I wonder?” he thought curiously.

The studio grew very still as Italy slept and Ralph painted, though
not very industriously, he exchanged so many sweet whispers with his
beautiful model; but the sitting was almost over when Italy sighed
softly and opened her eyes.

She saw Mr. Seabright still by her side, watching her with an air of
tender devotion.

“I have really slept,” she said gently, forcing a smile for him.

“And your dreams were sad, for you sighed often in your sleep,” he
said. “Forgive me for watching you so closely, dear little friend, but
my heart ached for you. I saw that you had been weeping before you came
here. Ah, Italy, how can I help you?”

His voice was divinely sympathetic, his bright, dark eyes softened with
tender regard. It won upon her insensibly, this unobtrusive tenderness.

“You are so good to me,” she sighed gratefully, and whispered: “I had a
very unhappy interview with Mr. Gardner this morning. I wanted him to
search for new evidence against my father’s murderer, and he wished to
refuse, but I would not permit him to say no.”

“He accepted the case?” Percy Seabright’s voice trembled over the
question, and his face paled to an ashy tint.

“No, he did not accept. I gave him two days to consider the
proposition, and I told him if he refused I would place the case in
the hands of some other good lawyer. I think I shall employ some clever
detective to follow up the clues in my possession.”

“And so you will follow up the clues and blacken Francis Murray’s
memory and break his mother’s heart? Miss Vale, you surprise me,” he
breathed reproachfully.

“And why?” she murmured defiantly. “My mother’s name was blackened, and
her heart broken. If there are any who should stand in her stead and
bear all that she bore let the blow fall upon them. There is no pity in
my heart for the criminal. And yet--yet I do not believe that Francis
Murray was guilty; no, no, no!”

A sullen light gleamed in Percy Seabright’s eyes as he said:

“I hoped you would be willing to forego this matter, but since you
persist in pushing the search, remember that I can prove my assertion
that Mr. Murray was at The Lodge secretly the night of the murder.”

“I will remember it,” she answered; then her eyes grew soft as she
added: “But I believe in his innocence as I do in my angel mother’s.”

She glanced at him gravely as she spoke, and was startled to see his
lips curl and his brows lift at the corners in that diabolical sneer of
his that had frightened her once before, and that transformed him all
in a moment from a Doctor Jekyll to a Mr. Hyde.

“Oh, don’t,” she cried, in a voice of pain, and the ugly scowl faded
into sullen gravity.

He said quickly:

“I am glad of your absolute faith in Francis Murray, and I will help
you in your researches all that I can, if you will keep me advised of
your progress, and tell me what to do.”

“Thank you,” she answered gratefully, and just then Ralph released his
pretty model for that day, and the conversation became general.

A little later they all took leave of the artist, Percy Seabright
claiming that he had to go out to his country house that day on
business. His smile was very bright as he said adieu, but when he
turned away the malignant scowls returned and lingered.

       *       *       *       *       *

At Winthrop, in the beautiful villa by the sea, the days and weeks
dragged by, leaden-footed in their torturing anxiety and deadly
suspense.

The lonely mistress of The Lodge had at length given up all hope, and
wore mourning for the son she believed to be dead. She had aged years
and years in those weeks of anguish. Her iron-gray locks had whitened
to snow, her eyes were dim with weeping, her face and form were thin
and wasted. Grief had wrought a deadly work. But if there was one
emotion stronger in her heart than sorrow for the dead it was hatred
for the living--resentful hatred of Italy Vale.

All the loss and sorrow that was weighing her down she dated from the
hour when that dark-eyed beauty had crossed the threshold of this
peaceful home and bewitched her proud, handsome son--led him like a
will-o’-the-wisp on to his dread fate.

“Why did I ever counsel him to receive her into this peaceful home? He
was reluctant enough at first, but I told him it was our duty to our
kinsman’s daughter. Alas! how miserably I am punished for my kindness!
I might have known that her mother’s child would bring woe and
desolation under any roof where she dwelt. Those great dark eyes, that
flowerlike face, how soon they wiled Francis from his first shuddering
dislike, until, in spite of himself, he grew to love her! If he had
lived he would have married her, I know. Perhaps it is better he died
than to have wedded one with that dark brand of a mother’s sin upon her
head! But, ah! I must go down to my grave a lonely old woman, and never
fondle my son’s children upon my knees.”

She wept hot, scalding tears, for she had a true, womanly heart, and
the dream of her life had been to see her grave, intellectual son
wedded to a fair and loving wife, and hear his little children’s voices
making music in the quiet, aristocratic halls of the stately home.

But all was ended now, the hopes, the plans, the longings. All those
future lives, the beloved daughter-in-law, the children that were
to call her grandmother, were buried with Francis in his vast and
wandering grave in old ocean’s deeps. The winds and the waves as they
sounded ceaselessly in her ears seemed to moan their requiem.

Then one day there came shambling up the steps at The Lodge a
rollicking-looking fellow in sailor garb, not too clean or tidy, and
with a rough, hairy face, not too frank or honest in expression. He put
out a grimy paw and rang the door-bell as loudly as though he were the
bearer of good news instead of a vulture of fate.

It was the same day on which Italy Vale sat waiting impatiently for her
answer from Mr. Gardner. The early autumn twilight was hurrying on,
and the sea was veiled in rising white mists. Lights already glimmered
through the windows of The Lodge, for the desolate mistress could not
bear the darkness and her own sad thoughts.

The loud bell-pull resounded through the quiet house, and presently
there appeared before Mrs. Murray a respectful servant announcing that
a sailor-man was waiting in the little reception-room to see her on
important business.

A sailor-man! Who could it be? Perhaps--oh, could it be? he might
bring--_news_? Her heart throbbed almost to suffocation. She staggered
in her wild haste to reach the man’s presence. He rose up before the
stately pale-faced lady, and bowed awkwardly.

“You--you--bring me news--perhaps?” she faltered tremulously.

“Yes, of your son, lady. On the night of the twenty-fourth of August
I was on board a sailing craft hereabouts, and in a fog we ran into a
little dory and cut it in half. Directly afterward we picked up a man
in the water with his head cut very bad. Oh, lady, I’m sorry to pain
you, but he died in a few hours later.”

“My son!” she cried in a voice of mortal agony, and seemed to collapse
in her chair, a white senseless heap.

The sailor went closer, and shook her rudely.

“Please, lady, don’t go off like that till I’m done my story. I’m in a
hurry to go.”

Her eyes opened and stared at him blankly, as he continued:

“The man said as how his name was Francis Murray, and he offered us big
money to put him ashore here, but we was bound for Buenos Ayres with a
cargo, and didn’t want to put back; besides we didn’t know as he could
pay us like he said or not. So we told him no, and our surgeon told him
he had to die, so if he wanted to leave any message for his friends
he’d better. Then he got the surgeon to write a letter to his mother,
and he signed it. He was too far gone to do much, but then he wrote
the address, and I promised that when we came back from the voyage I’d
bring you the letter, that’s all, and we buried him the same night at
sea.”

He pushed the letter hurriedly into her trembling hand, and before she
could speak hurried from the room, leaving her alone to read the last
dying message of her son--the message and the confession that was to
deal the most crushing blow that ever fell with the suddenness of a
lightning bolt on a loving mother’s heart.




CHAPTER XVII.

MRS. MURRAY’S ANGUISH.


Italy Vale waited with burning impatience for Mr. Gardner’s decision.

The day waned to its close, the purple shades of early twilight
darkened, and the silver sickle of a new moon rose in the opal sky,
still no word, no answer. She had been pacing the floor of her room for
hours with a pale face and a wildly throbbing heart.

“Why does he delay like this when he knows how impatient I am? Is it
possible he can have forgotten?” she cried resentfully, pushing back
the dark curls from her brow that burned with a feverish heat.

At that moment Mrs. Mays tapped lightly on the door.

“He is come,” she thought gladly, and sprang to open it.

“Miss Vale,” said the kindly landlady, “there is a messenger-boy below
from a law-office wishing to see you.”

With a low cry of something like terror, Italy started back, her face
paling to a ghastly hue.

She thought of what Isabel Severn had told her about the office-boy at
Mr. Gardner’s, who was watching for her face and would know it anywhere
again.

“I must not let him see me,” she told herself wildly.

“Why, what is the matter, my dear young lady? You seem to be
frightened!” exclaimed Mrs. Mays, in a tone of surprise that put Italy
quickly upon her guard. She exclaimed with a groan:

“Oh, no, Mrs. Mays, I am not frightened, but I have a severe attack of
facial neuralgia, and am suffering too much to see any one, or at least
a stranger. Will you not do me the kindness to go down and tell the boy
that if he has a letter or message for me he must deliver it to you?”

“Certainly, my dear,” and she bustled away, while Italy murmured
bitterly:

“Mr. Gardner refuses my prayer. That is why he sends a message instead
of coming himself. He cannot meet my reproaches.”

She was right, for presently Mrs. Mays returned with a letter, saying:

“The boy went away without waiting for an answer.”

Then, seeing that the young girl preferred to be alone, she withdrew,
after saying kindly:

“If there is anything I can do for your dreadful neuralgia, ring
your bell, and I will come at once.” Italy thanked her, with a blush
stealing over her face at the falsehood she had uttered.

“To what depths I have fallen in this cruel necessity for caution,” she
thought sadly, and tore open her note. She read:

 “MY DEAR MISS VALE: After a careful review in my mind of all that I
 know and all that you said to me yesterday morning, my opinion of the
 case remains unchanged.

 “I believe that the wisest plan for you is to remain satisfied
 with the jury’s verdict given long ago in your mother’s case. That
 verdict declared her innocent, or, at least, gave her the benefit
 of a doubt. But should you investigate too closely it might result
 in her conviction. She is dead, so it cannot harm her, only to
 blacken her memory still deeper. All the obloquy would fall on you,
 her helpless orphan child. Knowing this to be true, and feeling the
 sincerest friendship for you, I must refuse to assist you in your own
 destruction.

 “I advise you earnestly to let the whole matter drop, and devote your
 mind to other things more suitable and natural to a young girl than
 this morbid state of feeling.

 “I have spoken to my wife about you. She is deeply interested, and
 will call upon you to-morrow to request you to become our guest for a
 while. I hope that you will consent to do so. We will do all in our
 power to further your comfort and your pleasure.

                   “Cordially your friend,       MARK L. GARDNER.”

A moan of the cruelest disappointment came from Italy’s pale lips, and
she tore the lawyer’s letter into fragments and trampled it beneath her
feet.

“Thus do I scorn his advice,” she thought bitterly, and she resolved
that on the morrow she would seek a good lawyer and employ his services.

She scorned the idea that investigation would fix the crime either upon
her mother or Francis Murray. Her heart spoke loudly for the man who
had been so kind to her, and whose thrilling words rang in her memory
night and day:

“Italy, love, darling!”

“He loved me--loved me in spite of my suspicions of him. He was grand
and noble--he could love me in spite of all my wilfulness and my scorn
of him! Ah, but I must forget all that! My heart owned him for its
master. Oh, God, send him back to me that I may tell him how I wronged
him, and that I love him now and pray for his pardon!” sobbed Italy, in
an abandonment of bitter grief.

Ah, how cruel it is to love with all one’s heart some dear object that
is removed from us by all the breadth of earth and heaven, how cruel
when the heart swells with love that can never be uttered, when the
yearning arms fall listless, empty of caresses.

Italy wept bitterly that Francis Murray was dead, for now she knew that
she loved him with her whole heart, that to him had been given the
devotion Emmett Harlow had prayed for in vain.

Alas! she would almost have been willing to die rather than face the
hour that was hastening on so fast with its agony of keen despair. But
even as she wept in her desolation there was coming up the steps a
woman warmly wrapped from the cold of the autumn night in heavy furs
and shawls. She rang the bell, and asked for Miss Vale.

“Miss Vale is very sick with a neuralgic attack. I do not believe she
will be willing to see you, so if you have any message send it by me,”
replied Mrs. Mays, mindful of the fate of the office-boy.

The woman, who had the air and bearing of a clever lady’s-maid, handed
her a letter.

“I will wait for the answer, please, ma’am,” she said, sitting down in
the hall.

And again Mrs. Mays tapped at the door of her boarder and handed in a
letter.

“The woman that brought it is waiting for an answer,” she said, a
little curiously, for two letters in one evening both coming by
messenger, seemed rather mysterious.

“Come in, Mrs. Mays, and wait a moment. I dare say it is Miss
Audenreid’s maid with a note from her mistress. Perhaps she wants me
to go with her to the theater to-night, but I am not well enough,”
answered Italy calmly.

She broke the seal of the letter and read the contents with startled
eyes. It was from Mrs. Murray, but the writing was so blurred and
blotted as to be almost illegible, being evidently written under the
stress of strong excitement. It began abruptly:

 “Italy Vale, if you have any forgiveness in your heart for the
 heartless treatment of a woman who was half-crazed with grief, come to
 me to-night. I have sent my maid to bring you, and she will take care
 of you. Come quickly, for I have startling news for you, and I must
 tell it soon, for I feel death hastening on, and when I have told it I
 must lie down and die!”

The letter fell from Italy’s shaking hand, and she turned a face of
wild despair upon the kindly landlady.

“I have--bad news--Mrs. Mays,” she faltered, and the kind soul took her
in her arms and held the dark head tenderly on her breast.

“Poor dear--poor dear,” she murmured, and caressed her as if she had
been her own dark-haired Isabel.

Italy lay quiescent several moments, her heart beating wildly against
Mrs. Mays’ supporting arm. She knew quite well from that grief-stricken
message that Mrs. Murray must have news of her son’s death. There was
no longer any hope.

“Perhaps you would like to see the woman, my dear?” suggested Mrs. Mays
kindly.

“Yes, oh, yes, send her to me, please. She is sent to take me to the
death-bed of my friend, her mistress,” faltered Italy, weakly, and
the kind soul placed her on a sofa, picked up the fallen letter, and
putting it in the owner’s hand, went down-stairs again.

Italy, with her hand over her eyes, sobbed bitterly.

“Dead, dead, dead, my noble friend! Ah! no wonder that his mother’s
heart is broken.”

“Don’t take it so hard, dear Miss Vale,” murmured a kind, sympathetic
voice, and dropping her hand, she saw the face of Mrs. Murray’s maid,
an intelligent middle-aged woman, who had shown her much kindness while
she was at The Lodge.

This woman now continued:

“It is dreadful, isn’t it, her getting reliable news of her son’s
death! and all of us hoping and praying that he would turn up alive
and well some day. But that hope is over now, and she took to her bed
the minute she got the news. But she wants you. She says she’s dying,
but she can’t die till she’s seen your face again. I had to go to Mrs.
Dunn’s to find out your address, and it’s getting late, so if you
please, I’ll help you dress, so we can get back to Winthrop as soon as
possible to my poor, dear, suffering mistress.”

Mrs. Murray did indeed look like a dying woman as she lay there panting
on her bed when Italy entered softly, having removed her hat and wraps
in her own room, where the maid had first conducted her.

Ordinarily the meeting must have been an embarrassing one to both women.

They had never looked on each other’s faces since the day when Mrs.
Murray had forbidden Italy to go to the moonlight party. A few days
later she had left The Lodge by Mrs. Murray’s desire, and their
life-paths had run in separate ways.

But now the sympathy of a common sorrow had drawn the two hearts
together so closely that it was almost like a meeting of mother and
daughter.

Mrs. Murray’s awfully pale and changed face turned in mute agony to the
girl, and she half-extended her arms. Italy with a heart-breaking sob
rushed to the bed, and, falling on her knees, clung to the stricken
mother, pressing on her corpselike cheek a mute caress.

The sympathetic maid withdrew, leaving them alone together to mingle
their bitter sobs, and for a few minutes nothing was heard but those
low and mournful sounds of a mother weeping for her son, and a young
girl for her lover.

It was sad enough to move heaven and earth to pity.

At length Italy sobbed in a choking voice:

“Oh, can you forgive me for my share in his death? Oh, if only I had
not gone with him that night--if only----” her voice broke with the
convulsive heaving of her breast.

But all at once Mrs. Murray writhed herself out of the loving arms that
held her, and groaned in an agonized voice:

“You would not speak like that if you _knew_! You would not kiss me as
you did just now. You would hate me--hate me for my son’s sake!”

Her blue eyes, so dim already with bitter tears, overflowed in streams
that ran in rivers down her pallid checks. She raised herself up in bed
and clasped her pale hands together as she repeated:

“You would hate us both, Italy Vale--hate us for the wrecking of your
young life, for your father’s death, and your mother’s long agony.
Alas! alas! alas! that I have lived to see this hour!”

Her agony was piteous, and Italy stared at her in dismay. What could
she mean?

“Do you see how ill I look, Italy?” continued the half-frenzied woman.
“Well, I am dying, surely dying. My heart broke when I read that letter
from my son, and I seemed only living longer just to send for you and
to tell you, as he bade me--oh, my God!--that terrible story.”

“You have a letter from _him_--oh, then he lives, he lives!” Italy
exclaimed joyfully.

“No, child, my son is dead. And it is better so--better had he died
in his helpless infancy than lived to work such irredeemable woe!”
answered Mrs. Murray distractedly.

Then as she saw the wonder in the young girl’s beautiful, pale face,
she tried to calm herself.

“Ah, you think me mad!” she sighed. “You have no thought of the horror
that has come to me, and that is coming to you. But no, no, to you
it will be joy. The shadow of sin will be lifted from your mother’s
memory; the world will revere her as a martyr, while they execrate my
son as a demon! Ah, God! if only I might die with this story untold.
But, no, no, it is my duty to speak, though the words blast my lips--to
speak, and then die of the deadly dart that is rankling in my heart!”

It was terrible to witness the agitation of this formerly cold, proud
woman, who bore herself usually with the calm hauteur of a duchess. It
mystified Italy more and more. She began to think that Francis Murray’s
death had driven his mother insane.

“Dear Mrs. Murray, calm yourself,” she faltered. “Be brave, be
courageous. You do not know what hard and cruel things you have been
saying of your noble son!”

“My noble son! Oh, Heaven!”

And the rising wind that began to shriek dismally around the house
answered with a moan like a lost soul in pain.

A storm was rising. Old Neptune was abroad on the waves. The hoarse
murmur of the ocean as it broke in loud, sharp reports upon the beach
came in regular beats to their ears, with that subtile sense of trouble
always inspired by an angry sea.

“Come and sit in this chair close by the bed, Italy, and I will tell
you of my son’s death,” said Mrs. Murray, making a fierce effort to
control her overmastering agitation.

Italy obeyed her, but she said tenderly:

“Dear Mrs. Murray, do not speak of it to-night; you are too ill. I can
wait until to-morrow.”

“To-morrow I shall be dead. I must tell you now and quickly, for I must
not die like a coward and leave that secret untold. I must obey the
dying command of my son and reveal it all to you--it is your due, my
dear girl--only--only you must not exult in my presence, Italy, because
I could not bear it!”

And while the wind roared and the sea moaned outside, and Italy gazed
at her with somber, wondering dark eyes, she began:

“At sunset to-day there came to me a rough sailor with a letter and
a story. That night when the little dory was cut in twain by a large
vessel, my son was picked up by the crew with a dreadful wound upon
his head. He lived but a few hours, but before he died he dictated a
letter to the surgeon for me, and made them promise to deliver it on
their return from Buenos Ayres. To-day the sailor brought me the letter
signed by my son’s dying hand, and addressed by him. Oh, Italy, can you
guess what he wrote?”




CHAPTER XVIII.

A LOYAL HEART.


The dying woman’s voice was shrill with agony.

Italy shook her head, but she thought thrillingly:

“He must have told his mother of his love for me, he must have left me
word to cherish his memory until we meet in heaven.”

Mrs. Murray thrust her hand beneath the pillow and dragged out a
letter. She flung it with a groan into the girl’s lap, then buried her
convulsed face in the pillows, her form heaving with long, shuddering
sighs.

The letter rustled in Italy’s trembling white hand, the wind outside
gathered itself for a stupendous effort, and roared and shrieked around
the gables like a company of demons, the hollow waves boomed on the
shore like ghostly voices of the drowned, but Italy heard and saw
nothing else but the letter in her hand, the white page with the black
words on its whiteness, each individual letter seeming like a little
black fiend setting an awful seal of shame on the whiteness of Francis
Murray’s life. For the letter was a confession of crime.

At last Mrs. Vale was vindicated, at last the world that had wronged
her by its hideous judgments would behold her life truly as that of a
martyr. That tender white hand had never driven home the dagger in the
breast of the husband she loved. No, it was a man’s strong hand--the
hand of his impecunious kinsman, Francis Murray.

Maddened by a refusal of a monetary favor, and envious of the rich
man’s wealth, he had struck an impulsive blow that stretched Ronald
Vale dead at his feet. Then the poor young man on whom the sun had set
in sullen, desperate poverty found himself at day-dawn a millionaire
with his hideous crime unsuspected and the finger of suspicion pointing
at his victim’s beautiful young wife.

It was a story to make the angels weep, the story of that young wife’s
martyrdom, and briefly told as it was by the dying criminal, it moved
the heart to alternate horror and pity--horror for the man, pity for
the woman robbed at one fell stroke of all life’s joys except her
dark-eyed child. And at the end of this dark confession of sin ran the
closing sentence:

 “Mother, I send this to you because I know not if Italy Vale was saved
 or not from the wreck that caused my death. If she be alive send for
 her and let her read this letter and clear her mother’s memory from
 all stain. If she be dead this duty falls on you. Fail not to perform
 it under penalty of the solemn curse of your erring son, now passing
 to his last dread account with Heaven.

                                                  FRANCIS MURRAY.”

She sat like one turned to stone with her staring eyes fixed on that
name--that name written with a trembling, dying hand, yet unmistakably
the chirography of Francis Murray.

Oh, fiend, fiend! And there lay his proud mother dying of horror at the
revelation of his monstrous crime!

The war of the elements outside increased in demoniac fury. The
lightning flashed, the thunder pealed, the rain drove in torrents
against the walls, but blind and deaf to it all the one woman lay
shuddering with her face in the pillows, the other sat in her chair,
her eyes agleam with somber light, her face pallid, her lips curled
with some strange, overmastering emotion.

Suddenly she leaned forward, and almost rudely shook the woman among
the pillows. Fire flashed from her splendid Oriental eyes, burning
words leaped to her lips:

“Mrs. Murray, I am ashamed of you!” she cried angrily. “You are his
mother, yet you can believe this cruel thing of your noble son! Then
you never loved him, never! But I--I loved him, and I denounce this
letter as a forgery, a black and cruel falsehood!”

Those passionate reproaches broke upon the elder woman’s senses with
the force of an electric shock. Wildly she sprang upright, wildly she
looked at the beautiful young creature who had torn in a hundred pieces
that fatal letter, and flung them in a fury of scorn upon the velvet
carpet.

Italy had sprung from her chair and was standing over her, her lips
quivering with feeling, her eyes flashing.

“I had not believed this of you, Mrs. Murray,” she repeated
reproachfully. “Did you not know him as the soul of kindliness, truth,
and honor? Was he not your boy, your Frank, whose sunny curls lay on
your breast in infancy, your son, whose strong arms supported your
declining years so gently? Tell me--did you ever know Francis Murray to
be guilty of one unworthy or ignoble action?”

“No, oh, no, no!” cried out the startled woman eagerly.

“You did not? In all his thirty-three years of life? Yet you could
listen to the slanderer’s tale; you could credit this cruel forgery!
Oh, Mrs. Murray! I am ashamed of your credulity!” flashed out Italy,
with stormy emotion.

The elder woman caught her breath pantingly, and a gleam of light
flashed into her sunken, hopeless eyes.

“Get up from that bed, Mrs. Murray, for you must not die yet; you must
live! live to hunt down the black-hearted schemer who plotted this
vile deed! live to welcome your son back when he returns to brand this
falsehood as a device of Satan!”

Oh! the light of hope that flashed into the hopeless eyes, the color
that flushed the frozen cheek of the woman who had been dying one
moment before of sheer despair and shame! She rose from the bed
unaided--she who just now felt too weak to raise her hands--she fell on
her knees and clasped Italy Vale with adoring arms, lifting to her a
face radiant with joy. She cried eagerly:

“You _believe_ in him? you take his part! _you_, whom I expected
to denounce him, and to rejoice that he was proved guilty that your
mother’s memory might be cleared! Girl, girl! you are an angel!”

And Italy, stooping, pressed a reverent kiss on the gray hair of the
woman kneeling in humble gratitude at her feet.

“No, madam; not an angel, but a very faulty human being,” she answered
gently. “And one of my faults, if fault it be, is never to believe harm
of one I love. And I--I loved Mr. Murray, although I did not realize it
until he was dead, as I feared. Oh, do not think me bold for confessing
this secret to you, his mother.”

“God bless you!” sobbed the woman who had once hated her so bitterly;
and as Italy placed her gently in a chair, she added:

“Your faith in him makes me live again, drags me away from the dark
shores of death, and the star of hope shines again for me. Oh, my
noble, true-hearted girl, teach me some of your faith and confidence!
That man--that sailor--how could he come to me with that story and that
letter, signed by my son, if it was all a falsehood?”

Italy had drawn forward a low ottoman, and was sitting like a child at
the lady’s feet. She answered with a question:

“Mrs. Murray, what were the names of the sailor and his vessel?”

“He did not tell me either.”

“Nor where to find him when you wanted his evidence to prove his
story?”

“No, he simply gabbled over the tale like one reciting a lesson, and as
I sank back, half-fainting, at the news of my son’s death, he thrust
the letter rudely into my hand and hastened away.”

“And that letter, Mrs. Murray, did not contain the name of the
vessel, nor of her captain, nor of the surgeon who wrote at your
son’s dictation, nor of the sailor who was to bring it to you? Do you
remember all these omissions?”

“Perfectly, now that you recall them to me, Italy, although I was so
agitated by it all at first that I believed it blindly, and took no
note of the suspicious omissions you have recalled to me. Dear child!
how bright and clever you are! But, alas! how can you account for my
son’s signature to the confession, and his hand again in the address
upon the back?”

“Clever forgeries, dear madam, and perhaps we may some day unmask the
wicked schemer who plotted this dastardly thing.”

“Oh, my darling girl, how good and noble you are! Can you ever forgive
me for my cruelty and unkindness? Although it would never have happened
but for the evil counsels of selfish friends,” sighed the lady
remorsefully.

“Dear madam, I can well understand that, and there is no resentment in
my heart. I wish only to be your friend!”

“My daughter!” cried Mrs. Murray tenderly, and pressed an impulsive
kiss on the upraised white brow of the girl, casting aside forever all
her unjust prejudices in her overflowing gratitude for her noble faith
in Francis.

“Oh, my child, I should surely have died of this horror if you had not
put new hope into my heart!” she cried. “Oh, Heaven, send me back my
son that he may be happy with his mother and his wife! For he loved
you, dear--he loved you well. I read his secret plainly.”

A flash of happy light gleamed in the girl’s eyes, but she said simply:

“I have the greatest faith that he will return to us some time. He may
indeed have been saved by some outward-bound vessel, and in course of
time may come back to us. Let us try to believe this, and never give up
hope.”

“Then you must stay here with me, Italy, and keep the spark of hope
alive in my despondent breast.”

“I will stay gladly if you wish me, for your friendship will be very
precious to me, dear Mrs. Murray. And as for that forged confession,
let us never speak of it to any one. Then the villain will know that
his scheme has failed.”

“But, Italy, who could have hated my Frank so badly as to wish to
blacken his memory with the foul stain of that awful crime?”




CHAPTER XIX.

FRANCIS MURRAY FOUND.


She looked anxiously into the beautiful, excited face, and Italy
answered solemnly:

“Before I answer your question, Mrs. Murray, will you let me tell you
the story of my mother’s life since my father’s death? I know you
believed her guilty, but let us waive that now, and deal with the
probabilities of her innocence. Will you listen while I take her part?”

“Dear child, you are always taking some one’s part. It seems to be a
divine attribute of your sweet nature, and who could blame a loving
child for believing in her mother? Go on, Italy, and I will listen
patiently as long as you wish.”

“Thank you, bless you!” cried the grateful girl.

And while the storm raged on outside with equinoctial fury, Italy,
sitting humbly at the elder lady’s feet, poured forth the pathetic
story of her mother’s sad and blameless life, and dwelt strongly on
the mysterious foe who had pursued her with relentless hate, sending
anonymous letters about her to every town where she took refuge, and
inspiring even strangers with such horror of the murderess that they
regarded her with hatred and fear combined, and so made of her a
lonely, wandering exile with no friend on earth but her little child.

Mrs. Murray was startled, surprised. She had never heard before of this
mysterious persecution of Ronald Vale’s widow.

“Mrs. Murray,” said the girl resolutely, “I have a theory of my own. It
was not mama who killed her husband, it was not your son who killed his
kinsman. The murderer was the man who has pursued my mother with such
fiendish malignity.”

“It must be true--it must be true!” Mrs. Murray cried eagerly.

“It is true,” Italy answered solemnly. “Oh, Mrs. Murray, look at the
facts. This hidden foe, not content with his poisonous anonymous
letters, whispered to Francis Murray and Mr. Gardner a slanderous story
involving mama’s honor and making her guilt plausible. At length I
grew up, and learning all the bitter truth, vowed to give my life to
the vindication of my mother’s name. And he, this hidden assassin, who
struck in the dark at my father’s life and my mother’s honor, finding
out, no doubt, that the avenger was on his track, and frightened lest
he be found--this assassin, this fiend--plots cunningly to lay the
crime on a man believed to be dead, and thus incapable of striking
back. So there is my answer to your question.”

“And before Heaven, I believe that your theory is correct all through.
We will join hands, Italy, and hunt the villain down.”

“You sympathize with my hopes and aims?” cried Italy, in wonder.

“Yes, dear, and will aid you all that I can. I would give much to have
your mother’s innocence proved, and the dark shadow lifted from her
name.”

“Bless you, bless you,” wept Italy, in boundless gratitude. “You are
the first one to give me a word of hope and encouragement. They have
all said:

“‘Leave the case alone, she was guilty, she was guilty!’”

“She was innocent! I firmly believe it now,” cried Mrs. Murray warmly,
and her tears flowed at the thought of Mrs. Vale lying in her lonely
foreign grave, dead of a broken heart.

They talked a long time together, and when they parted tenderly to
retire for the night, Italy said:

“Perhaps that sailor was the murderer himself in disguise. He has
gone away triumphant, believing that I will seize eagerly on that
confession, blazon it to the eager world, and give up the search for
the real criminal. But we will thwart him there. The forged letter lies
there on the floor in a hundred fragments. Let us keep silent over that
stupendous falsehood. He will know then that we did not believe it, and
our silence will be a menace to his safety.”

“But, oh, Italy, who can the guilty one be?”

“The white light of Heaven will show us some time, Mrs. Murray. Now,
good night,” and they parted, each solemnly vowed to keep the secret of
the forged confession, and little dreaming of the awful blow that would
fall on both to-morrow.

Leaving Mrs. Murray and our sweet Italy at Winthrop, we will go back
to that August night upon the sea when, in the windless fog, the small
dory had been cleft asunder by the prow of a steamer that, unable to
rescue them in the dense mist that prevailed, had gone on her majestic
way, leaving them to their threatening fate.

We have seen how Italy, clinging to a fragment of the boat, had drifted
in to the shore; we must now follow the fortunes of our noble Francis
Murray for a little space.

The shock of the accident had thrust him apart from Italy, and also
given him a smart blow upon the head that made his senses reel. When he
came to himself he was lying on his back in a portion of the wreck, his
face upturned to the moonlit sky, and his only sensation one of burning
pain in the head. The fog had passed away, so he must have been a long
time adrift, but thought and memory were gone. The blow on his head had
destroyed all sentient consciousness save the animal one of pain.

In this condition he was rescued by a smart sailing-vessel bound for
the south of France. The vessel had a most humane captain and crew.
They vied with each other in kindly attentions to the handsome stranger
they had saved from a watery grave. But it soon became evident that
he was suffering so much that he was conscious of nothing but his own
pain. There was nothing on his person to indicate who he was, and when
interrogated as to his own identity, he answered feebly that his head
pained him so he could not remember.

There was not a woman on board, but there was a very kindly disposed
young physician who had undertaken this sea-voyage for the benefit
of his weak lungs. From the young doctor and the kindly crew Francis
Murray received the best care. His beautiful, manly face was a
passport to their hearts. They felt very sure that he was a person
of importance, and did all that they could to arouse his slumbering
intellect.

But all in vain, for, though after a while he improved and ceased
to complain of the pain in his head, his memory remained a complete
blank. Life dated for him from the moment he had come to himself like
a new-born babe out there on the illimitable sea with the August moon
shining in his pallid, wondering face, and only a few frail planks
between him and eternity.

They could guess with almost certainty from the wreck of the accident
that had befallen him, and Doctor Loring talked of a probable pressure
on the brain of some small bit of bone, no doubt fractured by a blow.

“If we can only get him to France it will be a beautiful operation
for one of those clever French surgeons to remove the little bone and
restore to him his memory. Why, it will come back like a flash!” cried
the doctor enthusiastically, and he took the most wonderful interest in
his handsome patient.

Captain McVey was quite anxious for Doctor Loring to perform the
operation himself, but he declined.

“I have not the proper instruments for the surgical operation
required--no, nor the steady nerve. We must trust our patient to one of
those skilful French fellows!” he replied, and looked forward ardently
to the day.

But in the necessarily slow progress of a sailing-vessel many weeks
must go by before they landed, and in the long, long silence the hearts
at home were breaking in the belief that he was dead, while fiendish
malice was plotting to lay upon the memory of the supposed-to-be-dead
man the burden of a black and bitter crime.

       *       *       *       *       *

We must not forget, either, another favorite of ours--Emmett Harlow.

Emmett had a cultured, intelligent mind, and, being very well read, was
exceedingly fond of travel. He was enjoying his tour as much as any one
could do with a sore and aching heart. But there is a wonderful balm
for grief in change of scene, and he was, unconsciously to himself as
yet, proving this truth.

At times, when brooding over Italy’s wondrous beauty and charm, he was
bitterly unhappy, and it seemed to him that he could not bear his life
without the hope of some day calling her his own. Again he would feel
more cheerful and try to throw off the spell of his hapless love.

While journeying on the storied Rhine he met up with some American
friends, a gay party, from whom he gleaned all the news from Boston,
and heard for the first time of the supposed death of Francis Murray.
It was a severe shock to Emmett, for he had been cordially attached to
this noble friend.

“_She_ will miss him, too, for he stood toward her in the light of a
guardian, and he watched over her so kindly and carefully,” he thought,
then his mind reverted to Alys Audenreid.

“Alys has lost him, after all--that is, I never thought she had the
least chance at him, anyway, but she and that scheming aunt of hers
were doing all in their power to slip the matrimonial knot over
his neck,” thought the astute young man, who was a keen student of
character and had long ago seen through the shallow motives of the
woman who had uttered that cruel falsehood against him on the yacht.

He wrote immediately to Mrs. Murray a long letter of sympathy and
condolence on the death of her son, and sent a message of regard to
Italy, whom he supposed to be still at The Lodge.

But for a while his thoughts clung to her more persistently than ever.
He thought of her sad and sorrowful over the death of her guardian, and
it touched his heart.

There were several beautiful young girls in the American party, but
even their blandishments had no power over his fancy.

It returned always to the lovely girl whom he had both admired and
pitied at Winthrop; she was so beautiful, yet she had seemed so
friendless among all those alien hearts.

He hoped she was happier now, and that she had won her way to Mrs.
Murray’s proud heart.

“For she must be very lonely now that Francis is dead, and it ought
to make her heart warmer to that poor, friendless orphan girl,” he
thought, little dreaming how cruelly Mrs. Murray had visited her son’s
death on Italy’s head.

“Poor girl! if she could but have loved me I would have lavished gold
in the effort to make her happy,” he sighed over and over.

And it seemed to him that all his wealth availed nothing since he could
not spend it for Italy. He spent long hours dreaming over her beauty,
and longing for even one glimpse of her, although he knew that it was
best that he should not see her until he had conquered his heart’s
longing.

It was in August that he went abroad. In October he found himself in a
quaint little French town on the coast, and something quite startling
happened. He was still with the American party, drifting idly whither
they went, and one day the papa of one of the charming girls came in
from a stroll, and said:

“I met up with a friend from Boston to-day, young Doctor Loring.
Perhaps you know him?”

“Heard of him at home--but not acquainted,” Emmett Harlow answered
carelessly.

“Doctor Loring--oh, my! That charming fellow! Papa, I hope you invited
him to call,” chirped his vivacious daughter.

“Of course, and he said he would come this evening, Maud,” replied
paterfamilias, whereat all the pretty girls applauded, openly, for two
reasons:

One was that they all knew the young physician and liked him very much,
and the other was that they wished to pique Emmett, who was so placidly
indifferent to all their charms.

They would not have felt so much slighted had they known that he was
the suffering victim of a hopeless love, that must have time to wear
off the keen edge of its despair, but Emmett was too proud to confess
his trouble when they rallied him on his dejection. He courted no
sympathy, he knew that silence was best. No true man can tamely bear
pity.

Doctor Loring came promptly that evening, glad of an opportunity
to meet American friends on this foreign shore. He was bright and
vivacious, and soon told the story of his trip on the sailing-vessel
that the balmy air of the sea might heal his ailing lungs.

With the story of the trip came also the story of the mysterious
patient picked up at sea and now waiting in a French hospital for the
operation that was to restore his memory. As he finished the recital
his eye chanced to fall on Emmett Harlow. He was startled at the
eagerness of the young man’s look.

“What is it, Mr. Harlow? You seem agitated!” exclaimed the doctor.

“I am deeply interested in your story, deeply anxious to see your
mysterious patient. If you will permit me, Doctor Loring, I will return
with you to the hospital this evening,” replied Emmett earnestly; and
the physician protested that he would be very glad of his company.

In a little while he saw in the young man such signs of veiled
impatience that he made his visit shorter than he had intended; and
soon led the eager Emmett into the French hospital, and to the presence
of the man he had half-expected to find--Francis Murray; Francis
Murray, the man from whom he had parted in Winthrop with a friendly
handclasp, but who now met him with the careless glance of the stranger.

For the familiar face of the youth he had known and loved for years
made no impression on the dulled mind. Friend or stranger, it was all
one to Francis Murray. He knew no voice nor face. It was a dreary,
hopeless blank, the past.

If Emmett Harlow had known that Italy Vale’s whole heart was given
to this man, would he have rejoiced in finding him like this--mind
seemingly wrecked, memory gone, nothing remaining of all his splendid
gifts except his manly beauty; would he have exulted in the mental
overthrow of his successful rival?

No! for Emmett Harlow had a heart of gold, and was incapable of an
ignoble thought or deed.

In a voice husky with emotion he revealed to Doctor Loring the identity
of the stranger for whom he was so kindly caring, and the young man’s
eyes beamed with delight.

“Francis Murray! The author, whose few but splendid scientific works I
have read with keen delight--is it possible?” he cried eagerly, and
his anxiety for the stranger’s restoration grew more keen than ever.

“But the surgeon is very busy; he cannot operate on his head for a week
yet,” he said regretfully.

“If a handsome fee would be any inducement,” began Emmett; but Doctor
Loring answered quickly:

“It would not move Doctor Chastain if you offered him a fortune. His
engagements are many, and he cannot come to the hospital until the day
of his regular appointment here.”

“And, in the meantime, I ought to write to his poor mother and tell her
that her son is alive,” exclaimed Emmett.

“I would advise you not to do so yet,” the physician replied, with
sudden gravity.

“But why?”

“Because, my friend,” said Doctor Loring impressively, “all surgical
operations are attended with some degree of risk. I hope this one will
be successful, and I believe it will be, but as I said just now, it
will be better to wait a little while that you may know definitely what
news you have to write to Mrs. Murray.”

“I will wait,” Emmett answered, with a heavy sigh, and his blue eyes
grew dim as he looked at Francis Murray’s unconscious face. “I will
stay by him whatever happens!” he vowed generously, and so the bright
October days slipped into bleak November.




CHAPTER XX.

MR. GARDNER PROMISES HELP.


It was the day succeeding the night of Mrs. Murray’s complete
reconciliation with Italy Vale. The storm of the previous night had
died down into the gloom of a raw, sunless day. The sky was leaden, the
air was cold and frosty, with now and then some hurrying flecks of hail
or snow; the sea, still rough and angry, boomed sullenly upon the shore.

After breakfast the two ladies were sitting alone in a warm, bright
little parlor, Mrs. Murray’s favorite retreat in chilly weather. It
opened by a glass door into the conservatory with its wealth of bloom
and fragrance, and was always cozy and cheerful.

A servant entered quietly, placed the morning’s mail on a table by Mrs.
Murray, and withdrew.

Mrs. Murray began to open her letters and Italy took up one of the
morning papers, a leading daily.

Each began to read, and for some little time unbroken silence reigned.
Suddenly a sharp, gasping cry came from Italy’s lips, the paper rustled
in her hands and slipped down upon the floor, her head fell back
inertly against the chair, her face looking like ivory against the
rich-hued silken draperies.

Mrs. Murray sprang toward her with a cry of alarm, thinking from the
inert pose and closed eyes that she had fainted. But as she touched the
cold little hand she perceived that it was trembling, and then Italy
moaned almost inaudibly:

“Oh, this is terrible! terrible!”

“What is it, my dear? Speak! You frighten me!” cried Mrs. Murray,
pressing her hand eagerly. “Are you ill?”

“No, no,” and the heavy eyes unclosed, and Italy feebly lifted her head.

Her glance fell on the paper, and she murmured:

“It is there!”

“Something that you read, my child?” and Mrs. Murray picked up the
paper and ran her eyes over the columns.

She did not have to seek long. There it was in black headlines and
blasting words:

  “At Last!--The Mystery of Ronald Vale’s Murder Solved at Last!--A
  Well-remembered Criminal Case Recalled to the Public Mind--Mrs.
  Vale Nobly Vindicated After a Martyrdom of Almost Fifteen
  Years--Confession of the Murderer, a Man Whose Life was Believed
  to be Spotless--He Lived Among us Fifteen Years, and Enjoyed the
  Confidence and Esteem of All.

 “This paper is the first, as always, to print the first statement
 regarding the new developments in a case that had in it all the
 elements of mystery, tragedy, and crime. One of our clever reporters,
 while strolling through the great, wicked city last night, gathered
 from the lips of a half-intoxicated sailor in a low saloon a startling
 story, whose truth he vouched for in the strongest terms.”

There followed substantially the same story the sailor had told Mrs.
Murray, with the addition that the sailor knew the contents of the
letter, having heard it dictated to the surgeon by the dying lips of
the murderer. Francis Murray was here held up to the execration of all,
and the highly colored, sensational article expatiated glibly on the
whole affair, and closed by tendering its sincerest sympathies to the
shade of the departed Mrs. Vale, who was believed to have died abroad
of a broken heart, leaving her young daughter to the guardianship of
the wicked kinsman, in whom she had placed the most implicit faith.

Oh, the agony of the mother’s heart as she read those words and
realized that her beloved son, her idol, was thus held up to the
execration of the whole world!

“Let us bear it together!” moaned Italy, creeping into her arms with a
desolate sob, and their tears mingled.

The first passion of grief exhausted, Italy lifted her head, her eyes
gleaming through tears like purple-dark pansies wet with rain, and
cried indignantly:

“Let us go at once to the editor of that paper--let us make him deny it
all to-morrow!”

The two fond, foolish creatures went at once into Boston on this
mission. But if there is one thing under heaven that the editor of a
great daily paper abhors, it is to own himself in the wrong--to publish
one day a startling, sensational story, and to announce on the next
that it was all a mistake, that he had been victimized.

And to do this special editor justice, it could not be said that he
was mistaken, for Mrs. Murray, on his rigid cross-examination, could
deny nothing, the sailor’s visit, nor the written confession, signed
in Francis Murray’s hand. She could only assert, with passionate
vehemence, her disbelief of the whole story, declaring it a plot to
ruin her son.

The editor blandly promised to give publicity to her opinion to-morrow,
and expressed himself as sorry that the sailor’s story had gotten into
print, since there were grave doubts as to its credibility. Since Miss
Vale herself, and here he bowed admiringly to the beautiful, dark-eyed
girl, took Mr. Murray’s part, of course the sailor’s statements could
not be reliable.

They returned sadly enough to Winthrop, and waited eagerly for the next
day’s paper with its promised vindication of their beloved one. But it
was very disappointing.

The wary editor was not going to spoil his sensation or weaken its
effect by casting doubts on the sailor’s credibility. It was quite in
the light of another sensation that it chronicled interviews with the
mother and ward of Francis Murray. Naturally, it said, Mrs. Murray was
unwilling to believe in her son’s guilt, and Miss Vale, who had been,
it was said, his affianced, also believed he was innocent. It was quite
true that the blameless life of the accused went a long way toward
proving him guiltless, yet Mrs. Vale’s life had been fair, too--so
fair that the jury had pronounced her not guilty, although the world
had held quite a different opinion.

Well, both were dead now--Ronald Vale’s wife and kinsman--and the world
would have to decide which was guilty, the woman who had denied it,
or--the man who had confessed it with his dying lips.

And so the clever editor, pretending to keep his promise to the two
women, only got in another sensational article, and managed to leave on
the public mind his own conviction that Mrs. Murray and Italy were very
weak and silly, and that there could not be any reasonable doubt of
Francis Murray’s guilt.

The morning’s mail brought to Mrs. Murray letters from Ralph Allen and
his sweetheart, Alexie, both breathing profoundest sympathy and undying
belief in her son’s innocence.

“And I wanted to come to you yesterday as soon as I read that dreadful
piece in the paper,” went on Alexie. “But Aunt Ione would not let me.
Oh, I am dreadfully afraid she believes that sailor, she and Alys both,
but I am going to steal away soon and get Ralph to bring me over to
Winthrop to see you and Italy. Keep up heart, my dear friend, for I
believe Mr. Murray may be yet alive, and that he will return to you
some day and prove all those charges false.”

While they were yet lingering over those kindly letters a card was
brought in for Italy. It bore Mr. Gardner’s name.

She went to him at once where he was waiting in the library, and he
rose with a face full of sympathy.

“I read the papers yesterday and to-day,” he said. “Ah, Italy, it is
noble in you, this loyal faith in Francis Murray.”

She looked him keenly in the face.

“And you?”--she asked. “Is your confidence unchanged?”

“My God, yes, my trust is shaken,” he answered, with an agitated face.
“Look, Italy, what if it be true? Remember he was the man that told me
the story defaming your mother! What if he invented it himself to throw
suspicion on her? What if he was the sole author of the slander?”

He was wildly agitated, his nerves shaken, his suspicions awakened
against the man he had once believed so noble. But her eyes flashed
indignantly at his words.

“You are wrong, all wrong! You shall not lay that sin on Francis
Murray! He is not here to defend himself, so I must speak for him! And
listen, Mr. Gardner; I hurl back in your teeth the suspicion of his
guilt! How dare you be so untrue to him?” she panted angrily.

He gazed at her with kindling admiration, and answered earnestly:

“I thought you would be glad to have your mother proved innocent!”

“Glad! Why, I would give my life!” she answered in a voice of
heart-piercing eagerness, and again he thought, admiringly, that her
loyal faith in Francis Murray was admirable. Before he could reply she
spoke again, impulsively:

“I tell you now, Mr. Gardner, as I told you before, that there is
a hidden foe behind all this. The sailor was a hired agent, the
confession was a forgery. Come, you have pretended to be Francis
Murray’s friend. Lend yourself to the task of clearing his name. You
know the best detectives in the city. Employ the best one. Set him on
the track of this unknown sailor, and, perhaps, we may at last unearth
the most cunning and deep-dyed criminal the world ever knew! Ah, help
me, help me,” and she held out her white, helpless little hands to him
with an imploring sob.

He could not resist her prayer. He took the outstretched hands and
clasped them with fatherly tenderness.

“I will do what I can, Italy,” he answered, and she thanked him with a
burst of grateful tears.

“Heaven has begun to take pity on me at last!” she cried, and implored
him not to lose faith in Francis Murray.

“Above all, do not let his mother know that you have had your faith
shaken for an instant,” she added, and he promised that he would not.

He left her and she returned to Mrs. Murray with the glad tidings that
the most eminent lawyer in Boston was going to help them to unearth the
cunning criminal who had broken so many hearts.

The slow days freighted with sorrow came and went drearily until ten
days had passed, but nothing else happened to disturb the dreary tenor
of life at The Lodge. Alexie Audenreid came with Ralph for the promised
visit, and made a flitting gleam of brightness in the gloom, but Ralph
gave Italy the sad news that little Mabel Severn, the baby she had
named, had died the day before, fading out of life like the frailest
summer flower. The young mother, he said, was almost frantic with grief.

Italy’s heart ached for the mother’s grief, yet she could feel no
regret for the little one removed so early from life’s troublous scene.

“For what if little Mabel had lived like me to pledge her life to
tracking down her father’s murderer? what heartache and sorrow must
have been hers!” she thought.

She longed to go to the unhappy young widow and condole with her in her
sorrow, but there was an awful barrier between her and Isabel Severn
that held her back. The sight of that pale, suffering face always
brought back that night of horror when the false husband had met his
doom, and she shuddered at the thought of how she had fallen fainting
in that pool of the traitor’s blood.




CHAPTER XXI.

FRANCIS MURRAY RECOVERS.


Alone in her room at night Italy Vale wrote long, long letters that
were always blotted by her tears. And when she had sealed and addressed
them to a certain sister of charity in a French convent she would kiss
the picture in her pocket and whisper thrillingly:

“My dearest one, my heart’s darling--oh, will you understand? Will you
believe as I do? Can you be patient and wait a little longer?”

When she had written one of those letters to the sister of charity,
Italy always tossed a long time on her pillow before she could go to
sleep. Then her lashes would glitter with the dew of tears, and her
bosom heave even in its sleep with sobs.

Once when she first came to The Lodge she had seen Mrs. Murray glance
curiously at her letter as it lay with the other mail, and had
explained carelessly:

“It is Sister Mary at the convent where I went to school, you know.”

Many long letters came to her, too, from the French convent. She always
took them to her room to read alone, always kissed them and carried
them in her bosom until another one came.

If any one had seen her it would have been thought that the letters
came from a lover. Girls did not kiss letters from any but a
sweetheart. But the solution of the mystery was close at hand.

One day there came to Italy a cablegram from France. When she had
read it her face flushed, then grew deadly pale; she trembled like a
wind-blown leaf.

Mrs. Murray was regarding her intently. She asked anxiously:

“Have you bad news, my dear?”

Italy crushed the cablegram into her pocket, and answered unsteadily:

“Come with me to my room. I have to tell you something.”

“You have news of Francis!” cried the mother wildly.

“Not of him,” Italy answered, and spoke no more until they were alone,
out of hearing of the servants.

Then she placed a chair for the lady, and knelt humbly at her feet.

“Mrs. Murray, I have to make a confession to you, and to crave your
pardon. I have deceived you,” she faltered.

“My child!”

“I have deceived you,” repeated the girl sadly. “When I came to
Winthrop I told you I had lost my mother. It was not true.”

“Italy!”

“My mother _lives_!” said the girl. She waited a moment, but there was
no reply, and she continued:

“You will hate me for deceiving you, I know, but I must tell you all
the truth. When I heard my mother’s sad story my suspicions fell on
your son. We talked it over, and she agreed with me that the suspicion
was plausible. I conceived the plan of coming here, gaining the shelter
of this roof, and trying to bring home his crime to your son. You
shrink from me. Ah, I do not blame you, for when I knew him well I
grew ashamed of my suspicions. But then I hated him, and I persuaded
mother against her will to let me come. She went into a convent to
stay--Sister Mary to whom I write, you know--and I came here as you
know, with my poor little story and my hidden scheme for finding my
father’s murderer. You know how I have failed, and--she has grown
impatient, missing me so much--she has been begging me to come home;”
she paused and looked at Mrs. Murray’s face, so white and rigid as if
carved from marble.

“Oh, Mrs. Murray, can you not guess?” she wailed, “I wrote to her of
this horrible thing that has happened, but I told her our suspicions
were all wrong, that it could not be true. But my letter--she has never
received it, for--this cablegram from her, from my dear mother--tells
me she has seen it in the papers, that awful story, and believing it
all, glad of her vindication, impatient to see me again, and yearning
for her native land, she sailed for America to-day!”

Italy gazed almost imploringly into Mrs. Murray’s face, for she feared
that her deception would never be forgiven.

Mrs. Murray’s face had indeed grown almost as rigid as marble. She
realized, as Italy did, the terrible embarrassment that must ensue
from Mrs. Vale’s return to her native land.

It would not be easy to convince the wronged woman of Francis Murray’s
innocence. The world would side with her and declare that his dying
confession must be true. There would be no one but his mother and Italy
to take his part. They looked into each other’s eyes a moment in blank
despair, those two who loved Francis Murray so devotedly, and his
mother answered through raining tears:

“How can I help but forgive you, dear? You were wrong at first, but you
have nobly atoned for your girlish folly.”

Sorrow had softened her heart, or she would have been bitterly
indignant at learning why Italy had come to Winthrop; but the young
girl’s noble defense of her son had made her heart very tender.

They both knew that they must bear whatever was coming to them as
bravely as possible, for there yet remained one hope. Mr. Gardner, now
that he had taken up the case, might find out the truth that had been
hidden so long, might vindicate Mrs. Vale and Francis Murray both.

The slow days slipped away, and while they waited in weary
suspense, hope was dawning again for Francis Murray in the foreign
hospital across the sea. The operation had been performed--was
successful--memory had returned at the very moment that the pressure
was removed from the brain, and, looking up into the faces around him,
he had exclaimed wonderingly:

“Emmett Harlow!”

Tears of joy sprang into the young man’s eyes as he found himself so
quickly recognized. Earnestly he pressed his friend’s hand, vowing to
himself that he would soon restore him to home and friends.

He found himself glad of an excuse for returning home, glad that he
should see _her_ face again. He made arrangements to sail at once with
his friend for America.

Mr. Murray decided that it was best to go without first writing to
apprise his mother. But on the very day before they sailed some
American papers fell into their hands. And to the last day of life they
would never forget the shock of that moment.

In those columns was sensationally told the romantic story that had
already startled Boston, with the additional news of the return of Mrs.
Vale to the city where she had been so cruelly ill-judged.

The fickle public that once had hated her had given her a perfect
ovation, but repentance and atonement came too late, for on the still
beautiful face of the martyred woman was written the record of a
sorrow too deep to be consoled. Glad as she must be that the shadow of
disgrace and crime was lifted from her life, there could never be any
more happiness for her widowed heart.

Francis Murray and Emmett Harlow looked at each other with pale faces
and startled eyes.

“Who has done this thing?” they cried in wonder.

And there came suddenly to the older man a remembrance of what Italy
Vale had told him of the hidden enemy whose venom had poisoned her
mother’s life.

“Can it be the trail of the same hidden serpent?” he pondered.

But suddenly Emmett said thoughtfully:

“It must be some person who is friendly to Mrs. Vale who has done this
thing, for she alone reaps the advantage of it.”

“That is true,” said his friend.

And there came to him a suspicion so dark that he would not breathe it
aloud. What if Mrs. Vale herself had concocted this scheme to clear
herself from obloquy?

“Well, you will soon be at home to deny the confession and confound the
schemer,” cried Emmett exultantly.

There was a moment’s silence, then Francis Murray said:

“No, they believe me dead. Let them still think so.”

“What! you will blot yourself out of existence and let your enemies
triumph?”

“Yes.”

“But think what you are doing. The world execrates your memory and your
mother’s heart is breaking. How can you bear this?”

“My poor mother!” groaned Francis. “But, Emmett, if I go home now, I
shall be arrested for Ronald Vale’s murder on the strength of that
forged confession.”

“You have nothing to do but deny it.”

“True! but what if the world refuses to believe me? They might say I
made the confession while I believed myself dying, but on recovering am
trying to skulk out of it.”

“They would have to prove that you made the confession, and the paper
says that the sailor cannot be found, although detectives have been
placed on his track.”

Francis Murray remained gravely thoughtful for some time, then said,
with a deep sigh:

“Things look very black against me now, and the mystery of Ronald
Vale’s murder is enveloped in a network more puzzling than ever.
I begin to see dimly that Italy was right in believing her mother
innocent, although I, too--Heaven pardon me!--scarcely doubted her
guilt. But I was wrong, all wrong, and I must undo the past by the
future. Yes, I will track down the villain and forger who has laid this
guilt upon me, and while working to clear myself, I will strike a blow
in Mrs. Vale’s defense, too. I have a plan, Emmett, and I know you will
help me to carry it out.”




CHAPTER XXII.

MRS. VALE SHOCKS HER DAUGHTER.


December snows lay deep and white all over Boston, but the sky was
deeply blue, the sun was shining bright, and the merry jingle of the
Christmas sleigh-bells filled the air with music.

In the small but dainty drawing-room of a pretty house on one
of Boston’s principal avenues, a mother and daughter sat at the
lace-draped window watching the gay vehicles flashing past.

Mrs. Vale had coldly declined Mrs. Murray’s invitation to Winthrop, and
had made a home for herself and Italy in an aristocratic neighborhood
in Boston. Here they had become the recipients of social attentions
from the élite of the city. Friends of old flocked around the returned
exile, trying to atone for the cruelty of the past. And on this
beautiful Christmas morn the drawing-room was littered with elegant
gifts and fragrant flowers, kindly tokens from loving hearts of friends.

Mrs. Vale was not yet forty, and looked much younger in spite of
the trials she had borne. Her rich, golden hair showed no trace of
silver, and there were few lines of age on her delicate face, only an
expression that somehow showed that, for her, the fulness of life was
over.

The settled sadness of her pale, clear face was in deep contrast to the
subtile unrest of her daughter’s, with its deep, passionate eyes and
proud, red lips.

Between the mother and daughter there was one tabooed subject. It was
Francis Murray.

Italy firmly believed in his innocence, and her mother just as firmly
believed in his guilt. Who could blame her? for had not Francis Murray
and his mother turned the cold shoulder to her with the rest of the
world?

“And all the while he was guilty, the dastard!” she cried loathingly,
and shrank with abhorrence from meeting his mother.

It was cruelly hard for Italy. She loved them both, these two saddened
women, and she would fain have brought them together. But Mrs. Murray,
as well as Mrs. Vale, realized the impossibility of this union.

“No, she believes my son guilty, I should suffocate in her presence,”
cried Mrs. Murray.

“Her son killed my husband. I could not breathe the same air with that
woman!” cried Mrs. Vale.

So they had never met, and it was but rarely Italy could gain her
mother’s consent to go to Winthrop.

Mrs. Murray’s life at The Lodge was now inexpressibly lonely, and worn
with keen suspense, for the clever detectives had failed entirely to
trace the mysterious sailor. It was believed that he must have shipped
the same night upon another vessel, for he had never been seen again
after he staggered out of the low saloon where, in a half-maudlin
condition, he had related to a reporter and a score of other
listeners, the thrilling story of Francis Murray’s confession of Ronald
Vale’s murder.

In addition to the search that was going on privately, there were
advertisements inserted in all the leading newspapers offering
inducements to the sailor to return.

Mr. Gardner was secretly much discouraged at all these failures. He
began to dread that there was nothing more to discover.

“And yet poor Francis Murray was my true friend. How can I believe him
guilty?” he would ask himself reproachfully.

As Mrs. Vale and Italy sat together at the window this Christmas
morning, an obsequious servant entered and presented a card to the
former.

Mrs. Vale’s pale, beautiful face became, if possible, paler, and her
voice was imperious, as she said:

“Tell the gentleman we are not at home.”

The trim, becapped maid glided out, and Italy somewhat curiously took
up the card that her mother had thrown carelessly down upon the floor.
She read on the bit of cardboard the name:

“Percy Seabright.”

Italy had not seen Mr. Seabright since that day in October at Ralph
Allen’s studio, but knowing his wandering, Bohemian habits, she had
felt no surprise.

Alexie Audenreid had told her only a week previous that he was in
New York, and that Aunt Ione was furious because one of her friends
there had written her he was dancing attendance on an actress there, a
married woman at that, and that a divorce would very likely come of the
flirtation.

“Aunt Ione will make him walk straight once they are married,” added
Alexie, “but he is a sad flirt, and she is jealous of everybody he
looks at now--married women and widows especially. She says they are
all designing creatures, and just as anxious for beaus as the single
girls. She says I am a fool to let Ralph get so interested in his
landlady’s daughter, the pretty Widow Severn, and that she will rival
me if I don’t look out. But I pity that sweet sad young thing just as
much as dear Ralph does, and I know he will never love any one but me.”

All this rushed over Italy’s mind now, and she exclaimed:

“Why, mama, how strange that you refused to see Percy Seabright--dear
papa’s dearest friend!”

She saw a quiver pass over the pale, beautiful face.

“Do you know him, Italy?”

“Why, of course, mama. We met often before you came. I must have
written you about it.”

“Not one word, my child!”

“How very strange that I forgot to mention him, my dear mama. And I
like him so very much, too, mama!”

“You like him--why?”

“Oh, mama, what a question! He is very kind and pleasant--and if he
were not I should still have to like him for papa’s sake! They loved
each other, you know, and were very intimate friends.”

“That is no reason you should love him, Italy, for--I--I--hate Percy
Seabright!” cried Mrs. Vale, in a voice of loathing.

As Mrs. Vale uttered those strange words she started up from her seat,
her eyes flashing with a steely glitter, her cheeks flushing warmly.

“I--hate--Percy--Seabright!” she repeated chokingly.

“Mama!”

Italy’s eyes were wide with wonder, but Mrs. Vale began to pace
restlessly up and down the room, her long black velvet dress with its
rich fur trimming trailing far behind her on the thick carpet. She was
excited to the verge of hysteria, and seemed to almost forget Italy’s
presence.

“Oh, how that man’s name brings back the past!” she cried, wringing her
slender white hands in anguish. “Oh, Ronald, Ronald, it was of him we
spoke that last, last night when I came to you in the library, and you
promised, promised----” her voice broke in a long, wailing sob.

Italy was shocked. It was but seldom that her sad, quiet mother ever
gave way like this. She hurried to her side, and slipped her arm about
the slight waist.

“Oh, my dearest one, what is it? Were you not willing for papa to be
his friend?” she cried.

“Ah, my child, I have betrayed myself! I did not care that you should
ever know this! But come, sit beside me on the sofa and I will tell you
all.”

Italy sat beside her, looking in wonder into the agitated face, and
waiting curiously for the explanation. It seemed strange to her that
any one should dislike bright, debonair Percy Seabright, who was always
so kind.

Then she suddenly remembered that Emmett Harlow had frankly avowed an
aversion to him, and she herself had seen faults in him, although he
had laughed them off with his winning air, and she had generously tried
to excuse them.

“It is something like this that has vexed mama, no doubt,” she thought,
and her mother’s first words confirmed her belief.

“After all,” she said, “perhaps I feel too strongly on the subject;
perhaps I ought to forgive him, but do not think, my darling, that I
was jealous of your father’s love for his friend. No, no; it was Percy
Seabright that hated me!”

Then Italy remembered suddenly that she had never heard Percy Seabright
express one kindly feeling toward her mother.

“Oh, mama!” she cried, aghast.

“Percy Seabright disliked me before I was married, he hated me
afterward,” went on Mrs. Vale, with that crimson spot still burning on
her pale cheek, and her eyes agleam with blue fire.

“But, mama, _why_?”

“I was poor then, you know, Italy, and no one knew that my uncle, who
so kindly cared for me, intended to make me his heiress. He was a
bachelor, but still quite young enough to marry. But when you were only
two years old Uncle Leonard died and his fortune came to me. But Percy
Seabright, before I was married, tried to persuade your father that I
did not love him, that I was marrying him for his money.”

“Shameful!” cried Italy, with flashing eyes.

“Was it not?” cried Mrs. Vale warmly. “But Ronald would not believe
him. We were married, and he continued to hate me. I believe he was
foolishly jealous of my husband’s love for me. Anyhow, we never became
friends, and I found out at last that he was always plotting to turn my
Ronald’s heart against me. The knowledge made me very bitter against
him, and that night when I went to Ronald in the library my heart was
very sore with something I had heard at the reception, some slighting
words Percy Seabright had said about me. I told everything to my dear
husband, and begged him to break off with Percy because he was mean and
deceitful, and not worthy to be my darling’s friend.”

“Oh,” breathed Italy, intensely interested, and Mrs. Vale continued:

“Ronald was very angry, and threatened to call Percy out the next day,
but I told him no, I did not wish it. I only wished he should withdraw
his friendship from the traitor. He promised, with a caress, that he
would do so, and added that he had long been losing faith in his once
friend, and would not be sorry to give him up!”

“Oh, mama, what if, what if----” Italy cried wildly.

“My dear?”

“What if--it has been--this man who followed you with his hatred all
these years? It must be, because it is so plain!” the girl panted.

“No, dear.”

“But, mama, it must be. He might even have----Oh, could he have
caused--could he have killed papa?”

“Dearest, you talk wildly. Percy Seabright loved your father too well
to harm him! Yet, I confess these suspicions came to me. But they were
baseless. He was in New York that night, and--he reached home--only
in time for the funeral. He fainted over the coffin, and was ill
afterward for days. But he behaved generously after that. He combatted
the world’s verdict that I was guilty. He advanced and clung to the
theory that Ronald committed suicide. He rejoiced when I was cleared,
and offered me his friendship in that winning way so few can resist.
I think he was sorry for me, sympathized with me in our common sorrow
over a loved one’s death. But--my nature is not a forgiving one--I
could not forget nor forgive his former enmity. I turned my back on
him, coldly declined his friendship, and--have never seen him since.”

“And you do not believe that he is your enemy still?”

“No, dear, not in the face of his proffered friendship and his
seemingly sincere repentance. Doubtless he believed all that he charged
against me, but why should he war with me further--a woman whose heart
was broken!”

“And you cannot learn to tolerate him, mama?”

“No, Italy, every instinct of my nature is in revolt against this man
despite his repentance. I hope never to gaze on his false, smiling face
again.”

Italy kissed her tenderly, without replying. She was thinking of that
Mephistophelian smile she had sometimes caught on Percy Seabright’s
lips. It had always revolted her, and suddenly it came to her that a
man with so evil a smile might be capable of any wickedness. She went
to the window again and looked out at the snowy street and the passing
sleighs with her head in a whirl.

“I wish I had known all this before,” she thought. “It puts a new
face on everything. What if--what if this man is a fiend in disguise!
Oh, how my head whirls! Francis Murray, I remember he tried to lay
the crime on you! Let me think, let me think! Oh, what a flood of
suspicions crowd upon me! Is this man, this Percy Seabright, who loved
my father so dearly, a saint or a fiend? I _must_ know; I will watch
him, I will try to trap him. Dear Heaven, help me, I implore!”

She heard her mother’s passionate sobs from the sofa, where she
crouched in an agony of reawakened recollection, and her heart grew
hard as stone toward Percy Seabright.

“Liar!” she breathed hoarsely. “Perhaps it was from you that
Francis Murray heard that dark and blighting story of my mother’s
dishonor--that falsehood that should have seared the lips that breathed
it. Ah, at last I have a clue! I must follow it warily, and perhaps
it may lead to the awful truth! If only Francis Murray were here, I
believe he would help me now! Shall I tell Mr. Gardner what is in my
mind? No, not yet, for he is as blind as my mother, who believes in
Percy Seabright’s honesty of purpose in spite of her dislike of him.
The path is dark, dark, but I must venture on it a little way alone.
Oh, for a guiding hand in this black darkness!”

The burning tears rolled down her cheeks and blinded her to everything.
On that fair Christmas morn, Italy Vale felt herself the most desolate
girl beneath the heavens.




CHAPTER XXIII.

A MEMORABLE SLEIGH-RIDE.


But fate had another surprise in store for Italy ere the sun set that
day. In the early afternoon a double sleigh stopped before the door,
and from it descended three persons--Alexie Audenreid, Ralph Allen, and
Emmett Harlow.

Emmett had returned three weeks previous, and had made his first call
ten days ago, so Italy was not surprised to see him.

The young man was boarding in the same house with Ralph Allen, as also
the friend that had come with him from Europe, a big, handsome German
professor, with a fine curly blond beard, and long hair as curly as
his beard and almost as fair. His dark-blue eyes were so weak that he
used glasses habitually, and had a lazy, slouching manner peculiar to
profound students. But for this, and his slovenly style of dressing,
Professor Doepkin would have appeared a remarkably attractive personage.

Italy had not met the German yet, but she had heard of him from her
other three friends and knew that he and Emmett were inseparable
friends, although the professor was so absorbed in his books that he
had no time for general society.

“But he has made friends with Mrs. Severn and admires her immensely,”
said Ralph, and then Emmett added:

“Do you know, Miss Vale, I think there is quite a likeness between you
and Mrs. Severn? Of course she is a little older and the sadness of her
manner spoils the charm of her beauty to some extent, but yet she is
very lovely.”

“I admire Mrs. Severn very much,” Italy answered cordially.

So now here were the three friends clamoring for Italy’s company on
their sleigh-ride.

“We will take no denial,” cried Alexie.

“You cannot refuse a bride anything, you know,” chimed in Ralph,
laughing. The wedding, in fact, was but ten days off, and cards were
already out.

“Go, dear,” said Mrs. Vale persuasively, and then Italy hesitated
no longer. She felt that the fresh, cold air would cool her burning
temples.

How delightful it was under the warm fur robes. Her color rose and the
light came back to her eyes. Emmett looked at the glowing beauty so
fitly framed in sealskin cap and cloak, and sighed to himself:

“She has many lovers, they tell me, but no one will ever worship her
more faithfully than I do.”

He loved to watch every line of that young and charming face, and
unconsciously to himself he had grown fond of watching Isabel Severn’s
face as they met daily at table, just for the likeness he fancied in
its dusky beauty to that of Italy. It lacked brightness and color, for
tears had washed away its girlish bloom, or the haunting resemblance
would have been even more striking.

How brightly the sun shone on the dazzling crust of snow, how pure was
the keen, cold air, how joyously the sleigh-bells rang! Italy’s spirits
began to rise a little from the leaden weight that had pressed them
down all day.

They were miles out into the country now; the houses were few and far
between, the open fields, the tree-branches, the roofs, the fences all
lay white and dazzling under that royal mantle of spotless, new-fallen
snow.

“Look, there is Mr. Seabright’s house! How beautiful the place is under
all that snow!” suddenly cried out Alexie.

Italy turned her head, and then she received a shock that she never
forgot to her dying day.

The red brick house setting back among the thick evergreen shrubberies,
now bending down under the weight of the snow, was the same house to
which Craig Severn had carried her that never-to-be-forgotten night
when he was murdered--the house from which she had escaped, she knew
not how, to be found at midnight wandering the streets of Boston in her
night-robe.

With these rushing thoughts came the memory of the portrait of Percy
Seabright that she had seen on the wall.

“It is _his_ house. Why did I never suspect it before?” she wondered;
then she heard Emmett Harlow saying, in a voice of disgust:

“That old house ought to be razed to the ground. Percy Seabright has
made it a sort of club-house for a fast lot of men, and the most
reckless gambling goes on inside its walls. There are dark hints of
several suicides committed there by men stripped of everything in
reckless play.”

“Oh, I don’t think it can be as bad as that!” cried generous Alexie.
“Mr. Seabright keeps up the house all the time, though, he says, and
gives card-parties now and then to his young friends; but Aunt Ione
detests the place as much as you do, Emmett, and she says as soon as
she is back from her wedding-tour she means to have it torn down.”

“It strikes me that Mrs. Dunn is preparing to rule her husband with
a heavy hand. I hope you are not inoculated with her propensity to
rule or ruin,” Ralph cried, a little testily, and the girl laughed
good-naturedly. She was as sweet and gentle a soul as ever lived, and
would always yield to Love’s gentle guidance.

They had left the red-brick house in the distance now, and perhaps no
one thought of it again but Italy--Italy who had such cause to remember
it.

“I wish,” she said to herself, “I wish I could get into that old house
and search--for my father’s missing diary that my mother believes holds
the clue to my father’s fate. Perhaps--perhaps--Percy Seabright has it!
My mother’s revelations to-day have roused in me suspicions that can
never be dispelled until I know the truth. Oh, what shall I do, what
shall I do?”

Alexie’s voice broke in suddenly on the girl’s troubled thoughts:

“Speaking of Aunt Ione, reminds me that she has refused to chaperon our
theater-party to-night. Going with Mr. Seabright to a grand ball, you
know--and grandmama seldom goes out in public. Italy, will you come
with us--you and Mrs. Vale?”

“We can ask her when we go back. She admires Bernhardt very much.”

“So does Professor Doepkin. He has actually promised to make one of our
box-party to-night,” said Emmett, and that decided Italy to go.

She had heard so much of the big blond German she felt quite curious
over him. But when the second act of the play was over and he had not
come, she began to think she was going to be disappointed.

“He has forgotten his engagement,” said Alexie.

“No, he could not find his dress-coat,” laughed Ralph.

“It is neither, for I saw him just now down there near the orchestra
watching us. I beckoned him, and he dodged. The fact is, he is as
bashful as a school-boy, and too timid, I suppose, to join us,” said
Emmett.

A minute later he said to Italy:

“Look, I will point him out to you. You see that big man with the shock
of blond curls and whiskers, and the broad shoulders?--Ralph, you’re
right, he didn’t find his dress-coat--well, that is he. He’s looking at
us now through those glasses.”

Italy looked, and saw the German looking at her through his
opera-glasses.

A strange, unaccountable thrill shook her from head to foot.

“Oh, I feel so strangely!”--she half-shuddered and tried to laugh. “Oh,
Mr. Harlow, your German hasn’t got the evil eye, I hope.”

“No, indeed; the prettiest blue-gray eyes in the world, only so
near-sighted. Perhaps he will get ashamed of his shyness and come to us
presently.”

From that moment Italy could see no one in the vast, fashionable
throng except the broad shoulders and leonine hair and beard of the
near-sighted German.

She kept watching him, and always with a strange and subtile thrill of
blended pain and pleasure. Even when the curtain rose, and the peerless
Bernhardt came on the stage again, her glance would wander to him.

“You seem to admire my German,” whispered Emmett, and Italy blushed
vividly.

“I--oh, no--that is----” she began incoherently, then paused and said,
with lovely frankness:

“I _am_ interested in him, and I have just found out why. There is
something about him that makes me think of--Francis Murray!”

The last word came with a sort of gasp.

“His broad shoulders, yes, and he is blond, too, like Mr. Murray,”
returned Emmett. “And, do you know, I think if Doepkin would make the
most of himself, he would make as rarely a handsome man as Francis
Murray was. I say _was_; for, poor fellow, I begin to fear there can’t
be any mistake in the report of his death.”

“Oh, don’t!” she half-sobbed. “I--I can’t bear to believe him dead, for
I was with him, you know, and I feel--I feel as though I had killed
him.”

He caught a repressed note of anguish in the clear young voice, and
looked at her keenly.

A light broke in on his mind, a pang like a dagger-thrust stabbed his
heart. By the light of his own love he read her guarded secret. No
wonder he had wooed her in vain. Her heart belonged to noble, handsome
Francis Murray.

The German professor was watching them both. As he saw them gazing into
each other’s eyes he started violently:

“What! has she learned to love him, after all? Must I lose her--my
love, my love?” he thought in sudden agony; and, rising impulsively,
made his way to the box.




CHAPTER XXIV.

PROFESSOR DOEPKIN’S HEROISM.


Professor Doepkin opened the door of the box, and paused, his heart
throbbing in a fashion quite strange for a staid German devoted to
scientific researches.

Emmett Harlow looked around, and, quickly advancing, drew him forward,
presenting him to each of the ladies in turn, making Italy the last one.

And he watched, with a keen, almost breathless, anxiety, the meeting
between his German friend and his dark-eyed love. He was close enough
to see that the man caught his breath, with a stifled gasp of emotion,
before the beauty of the young girl.

She stood before him, a slender, stately creature, graceful as a young
palm-tree, her dark head lifted with a staglike motion, her eyes
beaming with a subtile fire. Her gown was of white, very soft and fine
and clinging, with white chrysanthemums for the corsage-bouquet. On
her bare throat and arms were strings of lustrous pearls clasped with
diamonds, and a Grecian fillet, of the same pure jewels, bound the
dark, curly locks to the proud young head. The pure white costume was a
trying one, but the brilliancy of her coloring, the gleaming eyes, the
coral lips, the sea-shell glow of her cheeks made an exquisite contrast.

The German’s blue-gray eyes gleamed beneath their disfiguring glasses
with keen admiration, and he bowed low before the exquisite creature,
who was murmuring, in a voice of flutelike melody:

“I have been wishing to know you ever since I first heard of you from
Mr. Harlow.”

“I thank you,” he replied huskily, and in another moment found himself
seated by her side in the chair that generous Emmett had vacated for
his benefit.

But the curtain was rising, and Bernhardt, that incarnation of genius,
was advancing across the stage. They gave her all their attention now,
or at least they pretended to do so, but this newly introduced pair
never lost for one moment the thrilling consciousness of each other’s
presence.

At the meeting of their eyes an electric shock had seemed to thrill
from heart to heart.

Italy could remember nothing like it except her first meeting with
Francis Murray, when her heart had seemed for a moment to suspend
its beating before the magnetic force of the man’s personality. She
felt her face burning and her heart beating wildly at the German’s
proximity, but the long lashes drooped to her cheeks, and she gazed
steadily at the stage.

The German stole furtive glances at her while he seemed to be observing
Madam Bernhardt’s grand conception of her part. Now and then he looked
from her rather curiously at Mrs. Vale.

The marble pallor of the exquisite blonde face, with its frame of
golden locks and its tragic, deep-blue eyes, had a sort of fascination
for him.

“It is the face of a suffering angel,” he thought. “How could any one
ever have believed her a murderess?”

He was deeply interested in all that had been told him of this woman,
and when the curtain fell on the third act he addressed some trifling
remark to her about the play, just to hear her speak.

She turned her dark-blue eyes on him and replied to him very
pleasantly, for somehow she had been favorably impressed at first sight
with Professor Doepkin.

Italy drew back a little and listened in silent pleasure to the sound
of his low and well-trained voice whose cadences thrilled her heart
with strange delight.

But suddenly he became aware that the others were listening to him with
interest, and that moment he abruptly withdrew into himself as though
overcome with shyness. Ralph and Emmett smiled at each other, and threw
themselves into the breach, and the professor was extremely quiet all
the rest of the time, but he kept his place at Italy’s side, and at the
close of the play escorted her to the carriage and handed her in, even
standing still a moment on the curbstone with a tender air to watch it
roll away.

“The old chap is coming out finely. He will not forget his dress-coat
the next time he is to join a theater-party with Miss Vale,” laughed
Ralph Allen.

But the smitten German’s romance went even farther that night.

Long after the midnight hour had struck, and the streets of Boston
were almost deserted, he paced the snowy street across the way from
Italy’s home, and gazed with yearning eyes up at the darkened windows,
wondering which curtained casement belonged to her, his peerless
goddess.

Decidedly the professor was far gone, very far gone, on that road that
every man travels once at least before he dies. All at once he seemed
to realize it himself, and hurried abruptly away.

“Ach, I was really making a fool of myself,” he grunted. “What if any
one had seen me? At my age, too!”

And he walked resolutely several blocks toward his boarding-house. All
at once he stopped short and listened to the rising wind intently.

“Am I dreaming, or am I crazed?” he muttered. “Perhaps my head is
wrong, for I fancied _she_ was calling to me, praying me to return. It
is the wind, I know, only the wind, but yet--I will go back!”

And, impatient at his own folly, he yet resolutely retraced his steps.

As he turned the corner nearest the house a man almost rushed past
him, hurrying by in a sort of frenzied haste that made Professor
Doepkin start and give him a keen look. The pedestrian dashed past
and disappeared round the corner, and the German recoiled with an
exclamation of amazement, as though in recognition.

The stranger was tall and slight, his figure muffled in a long
fur-lined overcoat. A dark derby hat was drawn low over his brows,
but the professor caught a glimpse of a pale, dark face with wild,
gleaming dark eyes and mustached lips curved in a demoniac expression
of terrible cruelty. Then he flashed past, and Doepkin hurried on,
exclaiming:

“Percy Seabright! But what an expression! It was that of a madman!”

He turned the corner toward Mrs. Vale’s house, then suddenly he saw
that the whole neighborhood was illuminated by a glare of light as
bright as noonday. In another moment he saw fiery flames and smoke
bursting out of the windows of Italy’s home, wrapping the whole house
in a winding-sheet of flame.

A loud and prolonged shriek divided the shuddering midnight air.

“Fire! Fire! Fire!”

In an incredibly short space of time the street began to fill up with
a shouting, gesticulating throng of human beings. The fire-bells rang,
and soon the fire-engines came clattering upon the scene.

But the fire had gained such rapid headway that it was feared the
inmates could not escape.

In the meantime Professor Doepkin had rushed to the rear of the house,
trying to make an entrance. In vain, for the back of the building was a
more solid mass of flame than the front.

People said afterward that there had never been the equal of Professor
Doepkin’s splendid daring. He helped the firemen to batter in the front
doors, and then, with a blanket over his head, rushed into the house
and disappeared in the black smoke that filled the broad hallway.

“The fellow must be crazy! He will never come out alive!” declared the
firemen unanimously.

But they were mistaken. After about ten minutes of keen suspense, while
the engines played rapidly on the doomed building, he reappeared,
staggering down the marble steps with a white, senseless figure in his
arms.

Eager hearts went to his assistance, and the woman he had rescued was
tenderly cared for; but when he had looked once on the fair face and
streaming, golden hair he cried out wildly:

“My God!”

And before any one could prevent him, he rushed back into that
holocaust of smoke and flame.

“Poor fellow! there is some one that he loves inside that house. He
must have rescued the wrong one,” cried one compassionate person.

“He is a hero!” cried another.

“But he has lost his senses, or he would never have gone back. The roof
will fall in before he gets out. When the experienced firemen will
not enter a burning building, you may always know that there is great
danger,” cried out another croaker.

And indeed no one could blame them. The house was wrapped in vivid
flame, and the efforts of the firemen began to be directed to saving
the adjacent buildings.

Suddenly a prolonged cheer from a thousand throats rent the midnight
air.

The hero had emerged from the building again with another drooping
white form clasped to his breast. And the eager crowd saw that this one
was a very young girl, with dark, flowing curls and of wonderful beauty.

In a few more minutes the roof fell in on the doomed house.

The papers next day chronicled the distressing facts that three
servants had perished in the fire. It was added that Mrs. Vale and her
daughter had only been saved by unexampled heroism.




CHAPTER XXV.

ITALY’S CLUE.


The next day found Mrs. Vale and Italy tenderly cared for at the home
of good Mrs. Mays.

Professor Doepkin had called a carriage and taken them there the night
before, commending them to the care of the good landlady and beautiful
Mrs. Severn, the sad-faced young widow.

Mrs. Vale was confined to her bed from the effects of severe nervous
shock. Italy was up and about, although very pale and grave-looking,
with the memory of last night. It seemed like a dream to her, the way
she had awakened last night in the blinding smoke and glare, with the
crackling of the flames in her ears, and the loud shouts of the excited
throng outside blending with the pandemonium of noise.

She would never forget those few moments of awful anguish when she had
realized the horror of her position, and, knowing herself caught like a
rat in a trap, felt that escape was impossible, that she must die this
awful death by fire. Then suddenly the door had been wrenched apart,
and through the stifling smoke rang a familiar voice:

“Italy! Italy! Are you here? Speak!”

With a cry of joy, she moved toward the welcome voice, and through
the awful heat and blinding smoke reached his arms that clutched her
eagerly.

“Be brave. Fear nothing, for I will save you,” he cried, as he clasped
her close, and a mighty flood of joy rolled over her even in the horror
of the position. Then a sudden terror drove the blood coldly back upon
her heart.

“Mama!” she shrieked.

“Is safe. I carried her out to the street ten minutes ago,” replied her
rescuer, as he toiled through the corridor, and, reaching the stairway,
began the descent, holding the blanket carefully over her head that
not one hair of those dark, shining tresses should be scorched by the
leaping flames that put out tongues of fire at them as they passed.

At last--after an eternity it seemed--he bore her into the street, and
the fresh, cold air blew into her face like a breath from heaven.

She was safe, and not one hair of her head was harmed--safe, and there
was her mother, too. Both owed their lives to this noble hero.

He with his face and hands almost blistered by the heat he had defied,
his fair, curly beard and hair singed by the fire, had disappeared from
sight as soon as he had put them in the care of Mrs. Mays, and the
afternoon of another day had come, still he was missing.

Italy left her mother asleep and stole down to the parlor. It was just
after luncheon.

Ralph Allen and Emmett Harlow were there reading. Mrs. Severn was
at the window with a bit of sewing--a melancholy black figure with
smileless lips and pallid cheeks, yet beautiful in a strange, haunting
fashion that had tempted the young artist to ask her to set to him as
“Niobe.”

She had refused gently but firmly, and their plan for winning her into
the outside world had failed. She never crossed the threshold of her
home. She was breaking her heart in silent grief for the dead.

“Where is Professor Doepkin? I wish to thank him for his bravery last
night,” Italy said abruptly, and Emmett answered lightly:

“Pray do not attempt anything so rash. The professor is a very modest
man--really bashful, I think--and he would be overwhelmed with
confusion if you applauded his conduct last night.”

“I think you are jesting with me,” said the girl. “It would seem most
ungrateful in me not to express my gratitude to this hero,” and her
dark eyes kindled so fervently that Emmett sighed to himself:

“I wish I stood in the hero’s shoes. But never mind, my boy, you have
done something to deserve her gratitude, after all, and some day she
will know it and appreciate it, although it can never win for you that
treasure--her love.”

“I wish very much to see him!” cried Italy almost yearningly.

“He is asleep, Italy, exhausted by his efforts last night,” said Ralph;
and Emmett chimed in:

“If you are in a hurry to thank him, you may write a little note, for,
really, I do not believe he will be willing to present himself before
you for a week or so, as his personal appearance was seriously injured
by getting his hair and whiskers singed last night. The handsome
professor is very proud of his whiskers, and very likely he will not be
visible until they grow again.”

“I fancy that he would be quite as handsome without his whiskers as
with them,” Italy replied, with so significant a tone and glance that
Emmett started, colored, and exclaimed:

“What do you mean?”

“Oh--nothing,” she answered, sitting down and taking up a newspaper;
while Mrs. Severn said to her softly:

“The professor did sustain some painful burns on his hands, and his
face is somewhat blistered, too. So he is keeping his room very quietly
to-day--I think he quite understands all your gratitude without your
expressing it.”

Italy thanked her with a smile, and just then Ralph Allen spoke:

“I am reading one of the most terrible tragedies ever printed or
enacted.”

“The world is full of tragedies,” said Emmett Harlow. “What is this
one, Ralph?”

“It is a story of love and insanity,” replied Ralph, and every one
shuddered, while Mrs. Severn cried out eagerly:

“Read it, Mr. Allen.”

“It is too long--several columns of the New York _World_--so I will
tell it to you in my own words. But it will sound very shocking to you
ladies, for it is the story of one girl who murdered another one that
she loved.”

“One that she loved--how could that be?” cried Emmett.

And Ralph answered:

“She was insane. But let me tell you the story:

“They were two beautiful young girls down South--let me see--yes,
Memphis, Tennessee--and they loved each other devotedly and with
such excess that Alice, the elder girl, declared she meant to marry
the beautiful Freda that she loved so well. They wrote each other
impassioned love-letters, and Alice was jealous of every one that
admired her schoolmate, pretty Freda. The affair went on until Freda’s
friends began to disapprove of it, and tried to break off the romantic,
girlish intimacy. They parted them, and Alice almost went mad with
despair. When she heard that Freda’s friends were going to remove her
from the city she could not bear it. One day Alice was riding out in a
buggy with Lillie, another friend of hers, and they saw Freda on the
street with her sister and some friends.

“‘Let me get out one moment. I wish to bid Freda farewell,’ said Alice
coolly.

“It all happened in a minute. Alice ran after Freda, threw her arms
around her neck, drew back the lovely head, and in an instant had cut
her friend’s throat. Freda fell dead on the pavement, and Alice flew
back to the buggy and sprang in as coolly as if nothing had happened.”

“Horrible!” shuddered Emmett.

But the girls sat still, pallid, and with dilated eyes.

“Only think of it, she murdered her dearest friend, the girl she loved
to madness!” cried Ralph. “But she was insane. At the trial she was
proved insane, and the _World_ tells here that she has been placed in
a lunatic asylum for life. But how pale you ladies look! I ought not
to have told you this awful story, especially after Italy’s shock last
night. It is too much for her nerves----Italy!”

He ran to her assistance, for her face had whitened to the hue of
death, and she was slipping inertly from her chair down to the floor.

Italy had indeed fainted, but it was not so much from the shock of
hearing of that strange tragedy as from the awful and startling
suspicion it had put into her mind.

Mrs. Severn quickly brought restoratives, and presently the young girl
sat up, looking about with dazed, wondering eyes, while Ralph murmured
contritely:

“Forgive me for telling that tragic story. I had forgotten that you
were nervous from last night.”

A light of remembrance leaped into her eyes, and she faltered:

“You were very kind--that is, it was very interesting. I should like to
read it in the papers, please.”

In some surprise, he placed it in her hand.

“I must return to mama now, I think,” she murmured, and hurried from
the room.

Mrs. Vale was still sleeping calmly and sweetly, and Italy turned from
the bed with wild excitement.

“We have all been blind--blind!” she ejaculated. “Only to think how
that man has fooled us all! What was that gleam I saw sometimes in
those strange, glittering eyes of his? It was madness, I feel sure of
it now. It is he--my father’s dearest friend, as they called him--who
murdered my father. I must send for Mr. Gardner. I must tell him all my
suspicions.”

She went out and sent the message for the lawyer, then returned to the
room and read and reread the revolting story, of that crime far away in
the sunny southland where one beautiful young girl had murdered another
one through insane love and jealousy.

“It is the clue I needed, the key to the mystery of my father’s murder,
but, oh, can I prove it? How cunningly the fiend has drawn the network
of safety around himself, while he blackened my mother’s fame and
then threw his crime on the innocent shoulders of Francis Murray. Oh,
could my father have loved this wretch? Did he ever suspect aught of
his treachery? What was written in that missing diary that my father
guarded so jealously from every eye? Where is it now? Oh, I would give
the world to know!”

Mr. Gardner’s presence was announced at that moment, and she hurried
down, to find him awaiting her in the little parlor quite alone.

“Read this. Do not ask me why, but read it,” she cried, thrusting the
_World_ into his hand.

The lawyer adjusted his glasses and read, while she paced impatiently
up and down like some beautiful caged creature.

“Well?” he asked, laying the paper down.

She paused in front of him, the incarnation of wild emotion, trembling,
her eyes glowing like stars.

“You have no clue yet?” she demanded hoarsely.

“None. I have never chanced upon a more baffling mystery.”

“You hold the key to it all in your hand,” she replied, with a gesture
toward the paper.

“Explain,” he cried eagerly.

“Look you,” she said, “that girl was murdered by her dearest
friend--mark you, her dearest friend! And my father, my poor father,
met his death in the same fashion. The murderer is Percy Seabright!”

“Impossible! He could prove an alibi. He was in New York.”

“I do not believe it. Investigation might prove the falsity of the
assertion. Let me tell you everything,” and she poured forth rapidly
the facts her mother had told her on Christmas day.

“Mrs. Vale did not tell me any of these facts,” he said, with a sudden
frown.

“She did not deem them of the least importance. It was merely by
accident that she told me,” explained Italy.

“And yet they are really of the gravest importance. You did right to
send for me. I am almost convinced that your theory is correct. I have
thought Mr. Seabright strange at times. His manners, alternating from
reckless gaiety to the deepest gloom, were not those of a well-balanced
person. And his eyes, so dark, so glittering, I have sometimes thought
there was something uncanny in them. You know he was a student of
hypnotism, and I have seen him try to influence people with a cold,
hard stare that made me nervous. Yes, now that you have thrown so much
light on my darkness, I begin to suspect him. That diary you place so
much stress on may be concealed in his country home. It will be quite
easy for me to introduce some person into the house to search for it.”

“Pray do so. I place all my hopes on the contents of that diary.”

“You are sanguine. It will never be found, I fear. But we will try to
trap our game without it. But be wary, Italy. Keep your suspicions to
yourself, lest he escape us. He must be watched every step now. Ah! I
have just thought of his marriage. You know it takes place in January,
and he sails for Europe on his bridal-tour. He will outwit us.”

There was dismay in his voice and face.

“You have a week to work in!” she exclaimed.

“Too short, my child. Ah, if only it could be postponed! Indeed, it
ought to be, for, although I don’t admire his fiancée, we ought not to
let her wed such a monster as we may prove him to be.”

“Mrs. Dunn is no saint, sir,” Italy replied, with a curling lip of
utter scorn.

She hesitated a moment, then said:

“Mr. Gardner, I believe I know a way to prevent the marriage at the
eleventh hour, and, if necessary to the success of our plans, I will
not hesitate to use my power. But I will not do so yet. If all else
fails, send me a note the last day, and I think I can prevent the
bridal-tour and keep him here.”

He looked at her a little curiously, but she shook her head, and said:

“It would not be right for me to explain, for it would involve the
betrayal of another’s secret. I wish to avoid that, if possible, and
nothing would tempt me to reveal it unless in the event of peril to
myself from keeping it!”

He left her; but one week later, on the very day of the bridal, there
came to her a little note that said simply:

 “Get that marriage postponed, if you can. I have discovered too much
 to permit him to escape.”




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE DESERTED BRIDE.


Ralph and Alexie had, some time before the wedding-day, entirely
changed their plans for the bridal-trip.

They had decided that they did not care to cross the ocean in January,
and a Southern town was decided on instead. Then they would return to
occupy the beautiful home that was being built for them in Winthrop,
and in the spring they would go abroad where Ralph’s parents were still
sojourning.

But Mrs. Dunn adhered rigidly to the original plan. The great ambition
of her life was to take rank as a society woman, and she believed
that a European tour would confer upon her an enviable éclat. Nothing
would have induced her to forego this great dream of her life, and
the prospective bridegroom grimly resigned himself to the inevitable,
although chafing in secret against his doom. But there was no retreat
he knew. Mrs. Dunn held over his head like the sword of Damocles his
guilty secret. He could not afford to risk its betrayal, so he was
preparing to go like a lamb to the nuptial altar.

And now the final hour was at hand, and the bridal-train was entering
the aisle of one of the most beautiful churches in Boston to the gay
strains of the wedding-march.

Ralph Allen was as handsome as a picture, and Alexie was dazzling in
satin and pearls and misty veil, all of lustrous white. In her train
of bridemaids Italy came second to Alys--poor Alys, who was signally
disappointed in her plan of making the third bride on this occasion.

Mrs. Dunn, in her character of a widow, did not wear pure white, but
was elegantly robed in brocaded lavender silk and diamonds, with a
point-lace veil obscuring her plump charms. She carried a bouquet
of heliotrope and white japonica instead of orange flowers. Her
bridegroom, dressed in the height of style, wore a bored expression, as
if he wished the affair well over.

Every one was looking at the bridal-party, of course, or many would
have seen that beautiful Italy was trembling as though under the stress
of deep anxiety. They would have thought it but natural excitement over
a wedding, but the cause lay deeper yet. She was in a fever of unrest
and anxiety, and as she looked at the bared, handsome face of Percy
Seabright, she thought to herself:

“He must surely have received the anonymous note. Is it possible that
he calmly disregards it? Steeped to the lips in crime himself, he
coolly disregards Mrs. Dunn’s sin, and will marry her just the same.
Yet I have heard it said that the vilest men preferred good women!”

She could think of nothing but that in a few more hours Percy Seabright
would be on the broad ocean, secure for months and months from the
punishment for his guilt that she hoped to soon bring home to him. Over
and over she asked herself:

“Did he receive the anonymous note? Can it be he has missed it by some
strange fatality?”

Ralph had turned from the altar with blushing Alexie on his arm, the
happiest young husband in the world.

The marriage-service was being solemnized now for Percy Seabright and
Ione Dunn.

“Foiled!” Italy murmured to herself, and she could have fallen down in
the midst of that perfumed throng of fashionables and cried out aloud
in her despair. But she had to wear a mask of smiles over her keen
defeat and congratulate the bridal couples. Yes, even Percy Seabright
and his triumphant bride, although her lips were so stiff they could
scarcely speak the words, and her little hand, even through her glove,
was icy cold.

The bridal-party returned to Mrs. Dunn’s house for a short reception,
and then traveling-dresses were donned and the carriages were driven
away amid a shower of rice and good wishes. Percy Seabright and his
bride drove rapidly to the great ocean steamer on which their passage
had been taken.

Mrs. Seabright was all smiles and joy despite the moody cloud that
lowered on Percy’s brow. She did not know that during the wedding
reception a messenger-boy had brought him a letter marked “Important.”
He led her into a saloon, then said quickly:

“Ione, dear, I must leave you here a moment while I go back on shore
to speak to some one. You see, I have forgotten----” the rest of the
words were inaudible in the babel of voices and noises that signalize a
great steamer’s leaving her mooring to cross the broad Atlantic, but he
left her side.

They were afloat, and a great cheer rose up from the shore. Mrs.
Seabright looked anxiously around for her husband. In the great crowd
of passengers she could not distinguish his form.

“My husband--oh, they have left him on shore!” she shrieked, in the
wildest dismay.

Was there ever a more awkward contretemps? A bride starting on her
wedding-journey alone far across the wide Atlantic! The passengers
crowded around and offered their sympathy, assuring her that her
husband would be certain to follow on the next steamer.

Somewhat propitiated by the attention she was receiving, the bride
dried her tears and dwelt hopefully on the prospect of greeting her
Percy on the other side within a few hours of her own landing. The
captain even told her that if her husband sailed on the next steamer
he had the probability of reaching there first, as it was celebrated
for its speed. But when they had been only three days out the captain
approached her with a letter in his hand, saying:

“A gentleman on shore gave me this letter for you just before we
sailed, and asked me not to deliver it until to-day.”

“A letter for me!” and Mrs. Seabright’s heart gave an excited thump
against her side as she took it from the captain’s hand and sank
nervously into a steamer-chair before she opened it.

It was a little odd receiving a letter in this fashion. It startled her
for a moment, then she took courage and tore it open. And the contents
startled her still more.

The beautiful chirography was that of her new-made husband, and ran
this way:

 “MADAM: I fear it seems discourteous to leave you to pursue your
 wedding-journey alone, but it would do the greatest violence to my
 feelings to accompany you.

 “Although I am not a model man myself, I have a prejudice in favor of
 good women that makes it impossible I should live with you. You forced
 me into this marriage, so I consider myself entirely justifiable in
 deserting you.

 “Your boasted power over me is at an end, as I am informed of a crime
 _you_ have committed that quite equals, if not transcends, mine, since
 mine was unsuccessful, and yours did not fail.

 “Briefly, then, while I was absent last August, a friend of mine was
 murdered in my country house by a shot fired through the window, as he
 was about to embrace a young girl. His name was Harold Severn, and the
 mystery of his fate has never been solved, as his body was afterward
 placed in the river by persons, no doubt, who wished it out of the
 house.

 “But there is one person who knows how Harold Severn was killed.
 The murderess was seen at the window as she dropped the pistol,
 and--recognized as Mrs. Dunn! The witness of your crime has mercifully
 spared you, but felt impelled to inform me, in order to save me from
 marrying you. Unfortunately the letter came too late, but in time at
 least to give me this signal triumph over you.

 “I confess I am filled with wonder over your reasons for killing
 Harold Severn. Can it be he was secretly your lover, and you were
 jealous of his fair companion? And who on earth was the girl, anyway?
 I mean to trace her out.

 “Fair Ione, we are quits. You hold a dangerous secret of mine and I
 hold a yet more fatal one of yours. You understand that we will have
 to mutually respect these secrets.

 “Adieu, madam, and bon voyage.

                                                “PERCY SEABRIGHT.”

She sat there on the cold, wind-swept deck, reading that letter as if
turned to stone, her face dead-white, her peculiar eyes a-glitter with
greenish fire. The blue and sunny sky, the blue and rippling sea all
seemed to blend into a broad, dark canvas, on which was painted in
great black letters that all the world was reading:

“Deserted!--deserted in the first hour of your marriage!”

And she had loved this man--loved him as wildly as was possible to one
of her cruel and selfish nature. In that love lay the deepest sting of
her shame.

Her first husband she had never loved. She had married him for his
money and played him false. A divorce had followed, and she had left
her far-off home to escape the odium that settled on her name.

In Boston she called herself a widow, and here she after a while became
acquainted with Percy Seabright. The man was a miserable flirt and a
born actor. He could assume any rôle.

So Mrs. Dunn had fallen under the spell of the traitor, and put forth
all her powers to win him. He was rich, or she believed so, at least,
but she thought more of him, for a wonder, than of his supposed wealth.
From the first hour of their meeting she had thrown herself at his
head, and she hated with a jealous, murderous hatred every other woman
of his acquaintance. She pursued them with all the animosity of an
unscrupulous and vindictive nature, telling falsehoods on them, and
placing them in the worst light before his eyes. At length she rejoiced
in becoming his betrothed, little dreaming that a score of other women
were holding the same position toward him, and that the arch-villain
was laughing at them all, and secretly holding them up to the derision
of his friends.

But later on, when she discovered all this, it did not cool the fever
of her passion. She determined that he should be her husband, and for
the sake of this heartless fiend even committed murder, staining her
already guilty soul with a sin that would doom it to perdition. And
what had all this devotion availed?

Nothing! He had had no mercy on her, deserting her as coolly as he
would have thrown aside a soiled glove. A sudden glare leaped into her
eyes, and she thought:

“I will spring into the ocean, and thus forever bury my torturing
humiliation.”

She started forward, then recoiled as her hand touched the
steamer-rail. The glitter of her eyes, the expression of her face were
terrible.

“No, I will live--live for revenge!” she hissed, in an undertone of
savage fury.




CHAPTER XXVII.

IN ITALY’S POWER.


Mrs. Vale was still too ill to attend Alexie’s marriage, so she had
entrusted Italy to Emmett Harlow’s care. When the carriage turned back
from the station where they had been to see the bridal pair off on
their wedding-tour, the young girl said:

“Let us drive to Mr. Gardner’s house. I must see him at once on
business of great importance.”

“Willingly,” replied Emmett, who knew much more than she supposed of
the affair which was taking her to the lawyer.

The Vales and the Gardners were on a very friendly footing now. Mrs.
Gardner was a charming woman, and had assiduously cultivated the
friendship of the Vales. No arguments would have made her believe
Italy’s mother a guilty woman. And she admired, above all things, the
beautiful, brave girl who had undertaken what her husband believed to
be such a Quixotic quest.

So when Italy and Mr. Harlow were announced, Mrs. Gardner rose to greet
them with beaming smiles of welcome.

Italy glided in, a vision of beauty in her snowy bridemaid’s gown, her
long wrap of rich golden-hued brocade bordered with fur, falling back
from her shoulders, giving a glimpse of rosy-white throat and arms
escaping from “lace like the hoar-frost, fine and thin.”

“You beauty!” cried Mrs. Gardner, embracing her fondly and holding her
so long in a close clasp that Mr. Gardner cried out humorously:

“Aren’t you going to let me speak to Italy?”

While he was shaking her cold little hand she saw over his shoulder
another form, tall, broad-shouldered, blond; her heart gave a
strangling leap of keen emotion. It was Professor Doepkin, whom she had
never met since the night he had saved her life. He had been absent
from his boarding-house ever since--on business, Emmett said.

When the German saw that beautiful vision in the center of the room he
rose up with a decidedly sheepish air and stood back of the lawyer,
waiting his turn to greet beauteous Italy. In a minute she had dropped
Mr. Gardner’s hand and pushed resolutely past him.

“Professor Doepkin--oh, what a delightful surprise! You are the person
I have been dying to see for a whole week!” she cried out eagerly,
earnestly, and with just a soupçon of raillery in her tone.

Both of her beautiful hands were outstretched to him so frankly that
he was compelled to take them in his and mutter something, he was not
conscious what, in his surprise, and she went on softly in that voice
like sweetest music.

“Oh, how can I thank you for that night? We are so grateful to you,
mama and I! We owe you our lives. People have told me how brave you
were, what a terrible risk you ran! And we were strangers to you, too.
Oh, sir, you are a hero!”

“It was a trifling risk, and it was well repaid by my pleasure in
saving two precious lives. Please say no more about it, Miss Vale,”
returned the German, in perfect English, although a trifle huskily, and
dropping her hands, for she had left them in his, while her glorious
eyes beamed on his with a look that made him long to gather her to
his heart and crush all that beauty and sweetness passionately in his
yearning arms. But he fought the temptation, and drew back a little
stiffly to hand her a chair.

“Pray have this seat, Miss Vale.”

She flashed him a look of deep reproach and turned her back on him with
sudden scorn.

“Mr. Gardner, I wished to see you--alone,” she said, a little bruskly.

“Certainly, my dear; we will go to the library. You will excuse us,
friends.”

In the library, her face lost the brightness that had flashed into it
at sight of the German, and grew pale and troubled.

“Oh, sir, my scheme failed utterly. Percy Seabright married Mrs. Dunn,
and sailed for Europe with her afterward.”

His face reflected the chagrin of her own.

“Could he have received your note?”

“I cannot tell. The messenger was well paid to deliver it promptly,
and to return and inform me how he received it, but he never came back.”

“He deceived you, probably, although there is a possibility that
Seabright might have gone on, and married her after--all. There are
some men, you know, who actually admire a woman with a soupçon of the
devil in her. I think _he_ did, and thus we are foiled. But take heart,
child. He will return, and, after all, it may be easier to work on our
clues in his absence, for as yet we have nothing to serve as a basis
for an arrest.”

She paced up and down the room, chafing with impatience.

“And what of the spy you placed in his house to search for the diary?
Was there no success?”

“None. Yet he searched carefully every room in the house but one.”

“And why not that one?”

“He could not gain access to it. The housekeeper had it locked always,
by her master’s orders, and it was further guarded by being situated
so peculiarly that it could only be entered by going through the
housekeeper’s room. She said it was nothing but a closet with some
old trunks in it, but her close watch over it proved that there was
something more important.”

Her eyes flashed with eagerness.

“Oh, if only I could get into that house!” she cried.

“Impossible, Italy. It is no place for a young girl. There would be
danger in the very air.”

He saw her face whiten, but he dreamed not at what terrible
recollection, and continued:

“No really respectable woman would even enter Percy Seabright’s
bachelor home. It is a sort of club-house for his intimate friends, and
I think they sometimes take women there--second-rate dancers, singers,
and actresses who are reckless of their reputations. To these they give
suppers and wine-parties. You see how it is, Italy.”

“Yes, Mr. Gardner, and it makes me frantic. I am so sure that a woman
would succeed where a man would fail.”

“But, my child, I sent a female detective when my man failed. Even she
was no match for the caution of Mrs. Smith, the wary housekeeper, who
guards the hidden room.”

She made a gesture of despair, and tore up and down the room like some
wild caged thing, her long white silk train sweeping behind her on the
thick carpet, her jewels flashing, and the old lawyer watched her with
yearning sympathy. He longed to help her, but fate seemed to baffle him
at every turn.

Suddenly she paused before him with a queenly air, and cried out
impetuously:

“Mr. Gardner, I swear to you I believe that if I could stand in the
presence of that woman, that housekeeper, I could force her to deliver
me the key of the room she guards so jealously.”

“Are you mad, child?”

“No, Mr. Gardner, only desperate with baffled energy. Oh, come, you
and your wife, with me to that house, and let me try. Surely there
would be no danger for me then! Oh, come, come! My carriage waits. We
can leave Mr. Harlow here till our return.”

Something in her face and voice compelled him to accede.

“Wait here, and I will bring my wife,” he said, hastening away, and, on
returning, he had his wife’s consent.

Directly the three entered the carriage and were driven rapidly to
Percy Seabright’s secluded home.

Mrs. Gardner had taken the precaution to wrap Italy and herself in
long, dark-hooded cloaks, with veils, so that there was no chance of
recognition. Thus equipped, they entered the house when the door was
opened to them at Mr. Gardner’s summons with the bell. They were shown
to the parlor that Italy remembered so well, with the portrait of Percy
Seabright smiling from the wall.

A deadly sickness seized Italy the moment that she entered the room
that had been the scene of such a fateful tragedy.

“You are trembling, Italy. You should not have come here,” cried Mrs.
Gardner, fearing she would faint. But the girl answered huskily:

“Do not fear for me; I am excited, that is all.”

They had sent for Mrs. Smith, and at this moment she entered
elaborately dressed, and gazing in surprise at her elderly visitor and
his two veiled companions.

Mr. Gardner rose and said stiffly:

“Mrs. Smith, this young lady wishes to see you alone a few minutes. Can
you take her to any room close by?”

“Certainly, sir.”

But the woman looked her vast surprise as Italy’s veiled figure rose up
to follow. She opened a door to the right.

“We can go into the library,” she said.

Italy went with her, and the door closed. Then the girl threw back her
veil, disclosing her beautiful, pallid face.

“Do you remember me?” she asked nervously.

The woman started wildly.

“So you are alive?” she cried, in a voice of keen relief. “Oh, how
often I have wondered over your fate since that night when you
disappeared so strangely from this house!”

“Oh, tell me of that night!” cried Italy tremulously. “It is all a
blank to me from the minute I fell down senseless after witnessing the
murder of Harold Severn, until I was rudely awakened by a policeman at
dead of night, wandering about the streets of Boston clad only in a
thin night-dress.”

“Oh, then you must have got up and gone away in your sleep. I always
thought that must have been the way of it. It did not look like any one
would have carried you off like that!”

And while Italy listened eagerly she continued:

“You were unconscious so long that I carried you to my own room,
undressed you, and put you to bed. Presently you roused up in a dazed
sort of way, and I gave you a very light sedative and you fell asleep
like a tired child. So I left you and went back down-stairs, for, of
course, I was frightened to death at what had happened, and did not
want a sensation in the house over a murder. With the help of a trusty
servant, I got the body safely out of the house, and we took it to
the river and threw it in. Then, returning, we took up the parlor
carpet, and hurriedly removed all traces of the crime. Then I went
up-stairs again to see after you. To my horror, you were gone in your
night-dress, leaving your clothing all there.”

“I am at times a somnambulist. I must have gone away in my sleep and
walked the long distance to Boston without waking,” explained Italy.

“Yes, that must have been the way. I often wandered what became of you,
and, oh, I was so thankful you did not betray what had happened and
send the police here!” cried Mrs. Smith.

“I ought to have done so,” answered Italy sternly. Then her voice grew
tremulous as she asked:

“You did not think I committed the murder, did you?”

“Laws, no, miss, for to tell you the truth, I saw it done myself.”

“You?” cried Italy, in wonder; and the housekeeper replied:

“Yes, miss; to tell the truth, I was peeping through that keyhole there
into the very room where you were, and I saw a woman’s face at the
window, saw her raise a pistol and fire. I rushed into the room. There
lay Mr. Severn dead, and you in a faint.”

“Did you know the woman?”

“No, miss; she was a perfect stranger to me, although I would be sure
to know her face if I ever saw it again.”

“What if I tell you that your master, Mr. Seabright, married that
murderess to-night?”

“Oh, miss, I could not believe you!”

“But it is true. I recognized her face, and it was Mrs. Dunn. But
I kept silence, because I thought she did it to save me from that
villain.”

“Oh, I wish my master had known it. He never would have married that
wicked woman.”

“Your master is very wicked himself. It is because of some suspected
villainy of his that I am here to-night,” answered Italy, coming
suddenly to the point, and before Mrs. Smith could remonstrate, she
continued:

“You are in my power, Mrs. Smith, for the widow of Harold Severn has
offered a large reward for information that would lead to the discovery
of her husband’s murderer. If I should tell her what I know, it would
bring you and your doings into terrible notoriety. Remember, you
acted a very dishonorable part, claiming to be Mrs. Gardner, a very
well-known Boston lady.”

“Oh, miss, I did wrong. For God’s sake don’t expose me!” whined the
housekeeper, falling abjectly on her knees before her accuser.

“Upon only one condition will I spare you,” Italy answered sternly.

“Oh, miss, if there is anything I can do for you?”

“There is one very simple thing,” Italy told her; adding:

“In this house Percy Seabright has one locked room of which you keep
the key. Give me admission to that room, let me search for something
that is hidden there, and whether I find it or not, your secret shall
be safe with me!”




CHAPTER XXVIII.

MRS. VALE IS VINDICATED.


The housekeeper’s face grew lividly pale at these words.

“Oh, miss, you don’t know what you’re asking. Mr. Seabright would kill
me!”

“Your master is on the sea now, and will not return for many months. He
need never know.”

“But indeed, miss, there’s nothing of interest in the room--only
rubbish. Please ask me something else to do for you.”

“It is this, or nothing. And if you refuse, this house will be reported
to the police as a gambling-den. It will be raided and searched!”

Mrs. Smith read deadly earnest in the pale, stern young face. She rose
up, shuddering:

“Will you promise me one thing if I let you have the key?” she asked
wildly. “You will go in alone, and never tell what you saw in there?
Oh, heavens, it would ruin my poor master! And I promised his mother
on her dying bed to look after her son, to shield his secret from the
world!”

The woman wrung her hands in a sort of impotent despair. Her terror
only made Italy more anxious.

“Yes, I will go in alone, and I will promise not to reveal anything you
don’t wish me to,” she cried. “I will tell you the truth, Mrs. Smith.
I simply want to find a little book that I believe Mr. Seabright has
hidden away. It belongs to my mother, and she wants it very much.”

“Oh, if that is all,” began the woman, “perhaps I can find it for you.
What is the title?”

“I must search for it myself,” the girl answered resolutely, and, with
a long-drawn sigh, the woman yielded the point.

“Come, then,” she said abruptly, and, after returning a moment to her
friends in the parlor, Italy followed her up-stairs to her own room.
She was trembling with excitement. She felt herself on the eve of a
terrible discovery of some sort.

Mrs. Smith went to a secrétaire in her room, pushed back what seemed to
be a hidden or secret drawer, and took out a brass key. With this she
unlocked a door across the room and left Italy a moment, saying:

“Wait till I light the gas.”

She carried in a step-ladder and lighted a gas-jet near up to the
ceiling, then came back and said with sullen acquiescence:

“You may come in now.”

And with a wildly throbbing heart Italy stepped over the threshold of
the mysterious chamber.

Mrs. Smith quickly closed the door, and they were alone together.

Italy raised her eyes and gazed curiously around her. The next moment a
cry of startled comprehension escaped her lips:

“I was right. Percy Seabright is a maniac!”

The room in which she stood was one of those small padded chambers
used to imprison the violently insane to prevent them from injuring
themselves in their paroxysms of madness. It was devoid of furniture
with the exception of a large cushioned chair that stood before a small
secrétaire similar to the one in Mrs. Smith’s room. This was piled with
a quantity of dilapidated-looking books, from all of which the backs
had been stripped.

“Percy Seabright is a maniac!” repeated Italy, and Mrs. Smith cried out
remonstratingly:

“Oh, no, Miss Vale, you’re quite mistaken. The room was like this when
he bought the house. The former owner had an insane wife that he kept
in here.”

Italy did not take the trouble to tell the woman that she was speaking
falsely. She was eagerly turning over the books, and pulling open the
little drawers in search of the diary. She looked around at the woman.

“There must be a secret drawer in this secrétaire, the same as in
yours. Open it,” she commanded.

Mrs. Smith touched a hidden spring, and a little drawer shot out
instantly. Lying in it was a small book bound in dark velvet, clasped
in gold, and lettered in gilt: “Diary.”

At that moment the peal of the door-bell resounded loudly through the
house. Mrs. Smith gave a violent start.

“Heavens, what does that mean? I must go instantly. Miss Vale, you
cannot leave for a moment or two until I return. Will you have the
goodness to lock yourself into this room until I return?”

“I warn you not to attempt any treachery toward me, madam. My friends
are here, remember,” Italy said warningly.

“I swear I mean you no harm. I am frightened for your safety, that is
all. But I must go and see about that new arrival,” and she darted out,
leaving the girl alone. Italy sprang to follow, but Mrs. Smith was too
quick. The door slammed, the key clicked in the lock on the other side.
She was a prisoner. For a moment her heart stood still with terror.
Then reason came to her aid.

“She will have to release me presently. My friends will not leave the
house without me.”

She flew back to the open drawer of the secrétaire, snatched up the
diary, and sank tremblingly into the cushioned chair. Alas! the golden
clasp of the book was locked, and the key missing.

She remembered with a thrill of horror that she had seen among the
trinkets on Percy Seabright’s watch-chain a tiny golden key. He had
laughingly told Alys Audenreid, when she asked about it, that it was
the key to a mystery.

“It is the key to Aunt Ione’s locked bracelet, I think,” returned Alys,
and though he had denied it no one believed it.

But now Italy guessed at the fatal truth. It was the key to the diary,
and he had carried it away with him across the ocean. Desperate with
impatience, she tugged at the lock, pulling with all the strength of
her little hands. The rivets on one side of the clasp yielded, the side
of it flew loose, the book opened its closely written pages to her
eager eyes.

On the flyleaf she read, in her father’s writing, his name, Ronald
Vale. And then a low groan of horror came from her livid lips.

She had identified the missing diary not only by her father’s name, but
by gruesome spots here and there on the pages--spots that looked like
red rust, but that she guessed too truly were her father’s blood.

“The diary was lying by your father’s elbow when I parted from him. It
must have been there when he was murdered,” her mother had said to her
more than once.

She shuddered all over and looked at her white fingers as though she
expected to see stains of blood on their fairness, then she opened the
book and began to read at random the paragraphs that caught her eyes.

Among the first entries, mention was made of Ronald Vale’s first
meeting with, and growing friendship for, the man who had proved his
fate.

“We are congenial souls--brothers,” wrote Ronald Vale. “I did
not believe it was possible to love a man as fondly as I love
Percy Seabright. He is a most charming companion, bright, witty,
intellectual. He has been everywhere, although still so very young; he
has read everything; he is a poet in feeling, and a gifted amateur
actor. But I own he has one fault: He is continually boasting of his
conquests over women, and to listen to Percy, one might believe that
every woman of his acquaintance, married and single, is in love with
him.

“He is fascinating, I know, but I think his vanity misleads him. He
mistakes kindness for love. In fact, a very beautiful young girl told
me recently that she detested Mr. Seabright from the first minute she
saw him, and that he made her think of a serpent. I would not tell him
this for anything, for I can fancy how those bright, dark eyes would
flash with anger at the thought that any woman did not admire him.

“We are planning a tour of Europe together, and sail next week. I am
quite sure that my dear brother, as Percy makes me call him, will be a
very charming traveling-companion.”

Italy was trembling so violently that the pages slipped from under the
little finger that held them down and she lost the place where she was
reading.

She opened it again farther on, and at the very top of the page this
entry stared her in the face:

 “London, Eng., Aug. 25th, 18--. I have made a shocking discovery that
 has almost prostrated me. My dear friend Percy is mentally unbalanced.”

A cry of wonder came from Italy’s lips:

“So papa really knew it, then! Yet all this time the world has been in
ignorance of this secret!”

She read on with eager eyes the continuation of the diary:

 “It is dreadful, dreadful! Percy is possessed of a suicidal mania.
 Three times since we came abroad he has attempted to end his own life,
 and but for my vigilance would now be dead. I am miserable over him.
 The story of this trip abroad is as weird and strange as a romance.
 The doctors tell me I must take him home, and----”

“Oh,” cried Italy, looking up, with a start, from her reading, for the
key had clicked in the lock, and the door opened.

She looked up, expecting to see Mrs. Smith, but the next moment she
sprang from her seat with an uncontrollable shriek of fear. It was
not the housekeeper, it was her master, Percy Seabright, and when he
saw Italy Vale sitting there reading her father’s diary, a shriek of
maniacal fury burst from his lips, and he sprang forward, clutching her
throat in a grasp of steel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Italy had no suspicion as to the cause of the wild alarm that had made
Mrs. Smith leave her so suddenly and lock her into the padded chamber.
But the woman was trembling with terror as she hurried down the stairs
to the front door. That clamorous peal of the door-bell had told her
more than Italy dreamed.

Mrs. Smith knew by the very sound that only the hand of her master,
Percy Seabright, had set that bell in motion. She had supposed him
safe upon the ocean, but here he was returning--why? Wild with alarm,
anxious for the safety of the girl up-stairs, the housekeeper presented
herself at the door and admitted her master.

“Oh, sir, why is this? I thought you had started on your
wedding-journey!” she cried.

“The steamer sailed without me, Elizabeth. I came on shore to speak
to a friend, and she started off without me. Ha, ha! isn’t it amusing
to think of my bride going off on her wedding-tour alone?” he laughed
wildly.

“Oh, it is dreadful! But you will follow on the next steamer, of
course?”

“No!” cried Percy Seabright, with a strange, hoarse laugh that almost
curdled her blood. “No, I came straight home again, for----Elizabeth,
my good old soul, I feel I’m going to be sick--to have one of my horrid
spells. And then no one could care for me but you.”

His dark eyes, that could be so soft and tender in expression, were
wild and glaring, his lips were twitching nervously, the whole
expression of his face filled her with dim alarm. She put out a hand to
stay him, but he pushed past her, exclaiming:

“I must go at once to my room.”

He rushed past her, pushing back her feeble, detaining hands, and
mounted the stairs, the woman following at his heels, wild with terror
at his furious mood.

“Oh, sir, wait--wait! You must not go into my room yet!” she cried
hoarsely, and plucked at the skirt of his coat to draw him back.

It was a fatal move on her part. He kicked back at her with furious
impatience. The blow struck her full in the breast. Never before had
he been unkind to the woman who was so devoted to his interests. A
frenzy must have possessed him. There was a moan of pain and terror,
then the woman reeled backward, throwing out her arms in a vain
attempt to clutch the balustrade, and fell headlong down the stairway,
striking the polished oaken floor with awful force. Then she lay there
motionless as a log.

The noise penetrated the parlor. There rushed out the lawyer and his
wife followed by two others--Professor Doepkin and Emmett Harlow. They
had followed the others by secret arrangement with Mr. Gardner, and
were impatiently awaiting the return of Italy.

They rushed out at sound of the heavy fall, and found the housekeeper
lying there like one dead. At the same moment the female servants
rushed into the hall.

“She has fallen down the stairs and killed herself!” shrieked both in
concert.

But when they turned her over she groaned heavily.

“No, she was only stunned. Bring water quickly,” cried Mr. Gardner.

They laved her face and hands, and presently her closed eyes opened,
and she moaned wildly:

“To my room, my own room!”

“She wants to be carried to her room. I’ll lead the way,” cried one of
the maids.

Professor Doepkin and Emmett Harlow carried the heavy woman up the
stairway to her room. As they laid her on her bed, she pointed, with
upraised hands, to the door across the room.

“In there! in there! Save--the--girl!” she gurgled, with a terrible
effort; then her head fell back, blood gushed from her mouth.

Professor Doepkin was the first to reach the closed door. He flung it
open, for Percy Seabright, in his surprise and fury, had forgotten to
lock it.

What a sight met his appalled gaze!

The padded cell of a dangerous lunatic, and upon the floor struggling
in the grasp of a murderous demon whose talonlike fingers clutched her
throat so that she could not utter a sound, lay Italy Vale!

With his knee on her breast and his hands on her throat, the demon’s
face was horrible in its savage fury. Low, hissing sounds of hate came
from his foam-flecked lips.

With a cry of horror, the German flung himself upon the maniac. Emmett
Harlow and Mr. Gardner also flew to the rescue, while the maids left
their task of wiping the blood from Mrs. Smith’s lips to shriek aloud
in consternation.

Percy Seabright, in his paroxysm of madness, seemed endowed with
the strength of a dozen men. But after a violent struggle he was
overpowered and bound securely, for his ungovernable fury could be
restrained in no other way. Then Italy was lifted up and carried
tenderly into the next room.

“She is dead! That devil has killed her!” shrieked Mrs. Gardner, as she
beheld Italy’s face and throat all crimson and purple from the pressure
of Percy Seabright’s cruel hands.

The girl lay without breath or motion, and a horrible fear seized upon
all that she was indeed dead. Mrs. Gardner’s sobs filled the room.

A physician was hastily summoned; then Mrs. Smith, who looked like one
dying, moaned feebly:

“My master’s dread secret is known to the world at last! Oh, my poor
boy, let me go to him! Those cruel ropes are cutting his flesh.”

Through the open door she could see him lying on the floor bound hand
and foot and raving wildly. Though he had injured her so cruelly, her
heart yearned over him, and she held out her arms.

“Oh, let me go to him, poor boy, for he has never been so bad as this
before. He pushed me down the stairs when I tried to hold him back,
but it is the first time he ever was cruel to me! He did not know what
he was doing, my poor Percy! Oh, gentlemen, don’t be hard on him. I
was his mother’s servant, and I’ve known him since he was a little
boy. He was a sweet child, little Percy, only when those dreadful
temper-fits came on. And they grew worse and worse as he grew older.
Then, in his bright youth, when the girl he loved jilted him, he went
melancholy-mad and tried to kill himself.

“That was the beginning of those awful spells, and they thought it was
from the drugs. And we tended him so carefully that no one ever knew
anything. His mother bought this house and had that room prepared. He
could always tell when these strange fits were coming on. His head
would hurt and he would have fainting spells. Then he would come to us
and we would fasten him in there and keep him from suicide until he got
well again. For he always wanted to kill himself, though the doctor
said his mood might change, and it would be some one else he wanted to
kill. Oh, his dying mother left him to me. I promised--promised----”

She choked again with blood, and fell back, struggling for breath.

“Elizabeth!” came faintly from the other room. Her voice had penetrated
his heart. It was a maniacal moan, infinitely pathetic.

They wiped the blood from her mouth, and she raised herself up in bed.

“I’m better,” she moaned, slipping out to the floor. “He wants me to
put his strait-jacket on, and lock him in there alone. Then he will get
over it in a day or two. He always does.”

They were surprised, but they let her have her way. All their thoughts
were for Italy, lying there like one dead, with the edge of the fatal
diary peeping from her corsage, where she had hastily thrust it when
confronted by Percy Seabright.

Professor Doepkin and the others hung over her in yearning devotion,
laving her face and hands with cooling waters, and at last a faint
heave of her breast betrayed the joyful fact that life was returning.
They knew that consciousness was returning when she moved one weak
little hand and pressed it on her breast, where the diary lay under her
corsage.

“She remembers it first, and no wonder. She has almost lost her life to
secure it,” sobbed Mrs. Gardner.

The physician came presently, and soon afterward Italy was removed to
her home. He said it was best for her to be taken away from the scene.
Mrs. Gardner and her husband went with her, and Emmett Harlow and the
German remained to guard as a prisoner the man who was at that moment
raving with maniacal fury in his bonds. He would never go free again to
menace humanity with his dangerous liberty. He was detected now, and
when Italy grew better in the next few days she resumed the reading
of the diary that was destined to throw such clear light on the awful
tragedy of her father’s death. And when she had finished the reading
she flung herself, in a burst of anguish, at her mother’s feet.

“Oh, mama, mama, that fiend, that demon killed my father for a jealous
fancy--a slighted love! Oh, how horrible it is! how horrible! But you
are cleared, my dearest one, my martyred angel!”




CHAPTER XXIX.

LOVE TURNED TO HATE.


Three weeks had passed away, and the day of Percy Seabright’s trial
had arrived. It had been postponed that long on account of the serious
illness of Mrs. Smith, who was expected to be one of the principal
witnesses for the defense, as they had decided to set up insanity as
their plea.

Percy Seabright had entirely recovered from his paroxysm, and seemed
quite sane again, but he was kept a close prisoner in the padded room,
the authorities having detailed special guards to prevent his escape.

Mrs. Smith, in spite of a fictitious energy, was very low. She had
sustained severe injuries in her breast, and coughed up blood daily.
She would never be strong again, and her physician foreboded her sudden
death by severe hemorrhage.

It almost broke the faithful old creature’s heart when she learned that
her master was to be tried on a charge of murder--murdering his dearest
friend, Ronald Vale. She declared that it could not be true.

When they told her that the confession of the crime had been written
down in the stolen diary of the murdered man by Percy Seabright’s own
hand, she was still obstinate. She could not credit the statement, she
said, unless they let her read it with her own eyes.

They were afraid to trust her with it, fearing that devotion to her
master would lead her to attempt the destruction of the book.

She was informed that portions of the diary would be read at the trial.
And so the fateful day had arrived, and within the next hour throngs
would be wending their way to the court-room to listen to one of the
most sensational trials ever heard in Boston--a trial that was to
dissipate the dark shadow of crime and disgrace from innocent lives,
and fix it indelibly upon the real criminal.

Popular interest ran high, and the beautiful Mrs. Vale was regarded
as a suffering angel. As for her daughter, brave Italy, she was the
heroine of the hour. Had she not believed in her mother and done
valiant battle with public opinion until she had unearthed the cunning,
hidden criminal? Why, it was a deed worthy of all praise, all honor. At
last she had made good her proud boast to the lawyer.

A few more hours or days and the hideous crime would be brought home
to the criminal, and the world would be ringing with the story of the
traitor’s deeds--the vile wretch whose murderous hand had struck down
the friend he loved--and punishment would be meted out to him--such
punishment as may dwell in a maniac’s horror-haunted cell.

Italy was thinking of all this as she sat alone in Mrs. Mays’ bright
little parlor that morning just an hour before the trial--thinking of
what she had accomplished by the force of an unbending will. There
was a sad vein blending with the thoughts of her victory. Deep in her
brave, true heart lay a love as strong and enduring as life itself, and
this love was cruelly wounded and pained.

“Does he think that I am blind? Oh, why does he not speak?” she thought
bitterly. “Ah, once I thought he loved me, but it was the maddest
mistake of my whole life. Dear Heaven, how shall I bear it, this
torturing pain of hopeless love?”

Burning tears sparkled into the beautiful, sad, dark eyes, and she
murmured:

“I will call pride to my aid, and he shall never know the pain I suffer
from his cold indifference!”

At that moment the door opened softly, and Emmett Harlow entered the
parlor. His handsome boyish face was eager and agitated, and in his
hand he carried a letter with a foreign postmark.

“Oh, Italy, such news!” he cried, and he was so excited he did not see
her wipe the tears hastily away.

“I have a letter from Paris--from Percy Seabright’s bride--is not that
a surprise?”

“Why should she write to you?” cried the girl, in wonder.

“She has just read in a paper the news about her husband’s arrest for
murder, and far from being sorry over it, she seems to find in it a
cause for exultation. She adds another item to the list of his crimes.”

“Another! Oh, Emmett!”

“Yes, Italy; you remember that day last summer when some one pushed
you over the side of the yacht into the sea?”

“And Mrs. Dunn falsely declared that you had done it. Ah, yes, I can
guess it all; Percy Seabright was the wretch!”

“Yes, she saw him do it, and would not betray him because she loved
him. But her love seems to be turned into hate now, and she confesses
all and implores my pardon for that false charge. But you may read it
for yourself.”

When she had finished and handed the letter back to him, she saw a
glad, loving light in his bonny blue eyes, and started nervously when
he cried:

“Ah! Italy, I am so glad to be cleared at last of that cruel charge.”

“No one ever believed that falsehood, _no one_!” she asserted
vehemently, and he thanked her with the greatest fervor.

“Ah! Italy, how this letter brings back last summer! I loved you so
dearly, so dearly, and my heart is still the same. Can you give me no
hope, dear one?”

She drew back in surprise and pain.

“Oh, Emmett, I thought you had forgotten. I quite believed----” she
cried, then paused.

“Believed what?” he asked anxiously, and she faltered:

“I thought you were learning to love sweet Isabel Severn.”

“And did you care, Italy?”

“No, Emmett, I was glad, for I can never love you except as a friend,
and I thought she would make you a charming wife, she is so sweet and
good and lovely.”

“But she worships the memory of her dead husband; she will never love
any one else!” he exclaimed, and Italy answered with a scorn he could
not understand:

“Perhaps she will find out some day that he was not worthy such
devotion, then her heart will turn to some better man.”

“And you can never, never love me as I wish, dear one?”

“Never, Emmett, although you are worthy any girl’s devotion. But love
goes where it is sent, you know. Forgive me for paining you, and let
us always be true friends,” she cried, holding out her hand to his
responsive clasp.

So it was evident that it was not for Emmett Harlow’s love fair Italy
was breaking her proud heart in secret.




CHAPTER XXX.

PERCY SEABRIGHT’S TRIAL.


There was silence in the thronged court-room--silence so deep it was
almost preternatural.

The lawyer was reading aloud some paragraphs here and there from Ronald
Vale’s diary.

No one seemed more interested than the handsome prisoner. Faultlessly
dressed, cool, nonchalant, even smiling, he leaned back in his chair,
the cynosure of curious eyes, seeming rather to enjoy his notoriety.
And certainly if there was any éclat in villainy, he was entitled to
the palm.

To be accused of murder and arson, and conspiracy against the good
name of the innocent, made very sensational reading in the newspapers,
and drew the attention of the world upon the criminal. Whatever might
be the outcome of it all, Percy Seabright seemed to enjoy the present
stage of the proceedings, and deported himself like a hero.

The lawyer read on from the diary in clear, bell-like tones:

 “It seems strange that I have married the beautiful girl that always
 detested my friend Percy. Naturally he is furious, but then he was
 always jealous of every woman I spoke to, and he did not wish me to
 marry at all. How strange he is at times! I wish most sincerely I
 had never met him. He is not what my fancy painted him in our first
 acquaintance. How dearly I loved him then, and how much I was deceived
 in him. He is a consummate actor.

 “My wife dislikes and dreads him. What if she knew that in a wild
 spasm of jealous rage he once threatened to end my life and then his
 own. Decidedly he is insane. I must write to his brother, I must
 tell him it would be well to place poor Percy in confinement where
 he cannot injure himself nor any one else. This morning we had a
 stormy interview. I told him of certain malicious falsehoods he had
 promulgated against my wife, and that only because he was mentally
 unbalanced had I spared him the punishment that was his due. I told
 him he was forgiven for the sake of our past dear friendship, but that
 our further intimacy was obnoxious to my wife, and must come to an end.

 “At first he was furious, and vowed revenge on us both. I soothed him
 all I could, and he grew calmer, took an affecting leave of me, and
 vowed he was going at once to New York, never to see me again. I am
 more unnerved than I had thought possible by this affair. Poor boy, it
 is a sudden ending to what once promised to be a beautiful, life-long
 friendship. Only for that weak mind he would have been so noble. I am
 in no mood to attend the reception to-night. If my darling will excuse
 me I will remain at home. My thoughts follow poor Percy in his exile.
 But surely he will soon forget and make new friends.”

The lawyer paused with his finger on the page, looked solemnly around
at the sea of eager, upturned faces, and said impressively:

“That is the last entry made in the diary of Ronald Vale, and it bears
date the day of the murder. But here, following, are pages written in
a different hand which we shall presently prove to be that of Percy
Seabright.”

The prisoner actually smiled complacently at this point, but ere Mr.
Gardner could go on, a low groan of anguish rose upon the air. The next
moment, Mrs. Vale sank fainting in her daughter’s arms.

Never before for years had Mrs. Vale looked on the face of the man who
had, with deadly malice, wrecked her whole life, and the sight of his
cool, complacent face was more than she could bear. Mrs. Mays and the
German professor kindly took her home, left her in Mrs. Severn’s care,
and went back to the trial.

When Mrs. Vale had gone, another lady took her place at Italy’s side.
It was Mrs. Murray, deeply veiled and very undemonstrative, but taking
an eager interest in the proceedings.

Under cover of the momentary confusion attending the exit of Mrs. Vale,
she found time to whisper nervously to Italy:

“Who is this man, this Professor Doepkin? The first sight of him
startled me, he is so like my son. Surely you have noticed it.”

“Yes, I saw it from the first. He is a German who came over with Emmett
Harlow.”

“I must know that man. Why, it gives me pleasure only to look at him.
The likeness is very striking.” Her voice sank in a smothered sob:

“Oh, Frank, Frank!”

Italy pressed her hand and answered huskily:

“Be patient, dear. He will surely return to you.”

But the sigh that breathed over her lips as she said it was torturing.
She could offer comfort, but she could take none herself.

“He will never come back to me--that was all a blind mistake of mine,”
she thought. “Perhaps it will be Alys who will win him after all--Alys
Audenreid with her fair, blonde beauty.”

A sudden fear came to her, and she whispered agitatedly to Mrs. Murray:

“If he ever comes back to you, dear heart, mind that you never betray
to him the secret I once thoughtlessly confided to you--that I
thought--that I fancied I loved him!”

“Do you mean that you have changed, that Emmett has won you after all?”
returned Mrs. Murray, in a reproachful undertone.

“Emmett has not won me--we are only friends--but I--I made a mistake,
and--I do not want Mr. Murray ever to know,” the girl faltered, and
turned hastily toward Mr. Gardner, who was about to begin the reading
of Percy Seabright’s entries in the diary of his murdered friend.

The prisoner, who was sitting by the side of Mrs. Smith, gasped
slightly once or twice, turned a shade paler, and leaned forward to
listen to the reading.

The lawyer’s well-trained voice rang out clearly:

“The fatal deed is done. I have known for months that the goading devil
within me would make me kill Ronald Vale!

“Yet I shall be haunted till I die by the look in his eyes as my dagger
pierced his breast, and his dying moan: ‘How could you do it, Percy?’”

       *       *       *       *       *

A groan of execration arose from the listeners, but it was quickly
hushed, and Mr. Gardner read on:

 “It was _her_ fault--hers and that little dark-eyed child’s. They
 stole his love from me. He belonged to me utterly until her blue eyes
 and her golden hair wiled his heart away. For years they made me
 wretched. To-day when he bade me leave his presence forever I swore
 revenge for my slighted love.

 “Ah! how dearly I loved him! I would have given my life for him! Alas!
 he had to give his for me! But now he is mine, all mine--in death he
 belongs to me! I did not plan to kill him--it all came suddenly on me!

 “I started to New York, but I came back that night for one more look
 at his beloved face. And while I hung around the window watching him
 unseen, _she_ came in--his lovely wife that I hated with such jealous
 hate!

 “She had been to a reception and was glittering in diamonds and frosty
 laces. She hung around his neck, and, weeping, told him of the wicked
 falsehoods I had circulated about her. He kissed her tears away, and
 told her I could never be his friend again, that his contempt would
 bitterly punish my treachery.

 “Those words of scorn for me, those caresses for her, drove me mad
 with jealous rage. Once I had begged him to kiss _me_. He refused in
 cold surprise, saying he did not like kisses between men, and he
 should never kiss any one but the one beloved woman who should be his
 wife. Those kisses awoke the sleeping devil in my nature! I had often
 wanted to kill myself, but this was the first time I ever thirsted for
 another’s life.

 “There was a dagger on my person I had bought to kill myself. When
 Mrs. Vale went weeping from the room I sprang through the low library
 window; I flung myself on Ronald Vale like a tiger, and buried my
 dagger in his false heart!”

“Ah-h!” suddenly groaned the prisoner; and for once he quailed before
the glances of hatred that fell on him, and put up his hand before his
face.

“Oh, Percy, my poor boy, you did not do it--tell me you did not do it!”
wailed an anguished voice, and Mrs. Smith, his faithful friend and
nurse, grasped his arm in a convulsive pressure.

A low, gurgling sound came from her white lips, and then a torrent of
blood flowed from them. In a moment she was dead--dead of the shock
and horror of knowing her beloved master a murderer; but happily dead
ere she knew the full extent of his wickedness, ere she heard of the
baseness with which he had persecuted the hapless widow and her only
child, his conspiracy against Francis Murray, and his crowning fiendish
act in trying to burn two sleeping women in their house, to gratify his
sleepless hatred, and in fear lest they should yet bring home to him
his awful crime.

The further hearing of the trial had to be postponed until the morrow.

The prisoner had quite broken down, and was weeping womanish tears over
the dead woman, who had been his friend from his unfortunate childhood.
He was remanded to prison, and the body of Mrs. Smith, after a quiet
inquest, was buried the next day.

Italy returned with Mrs. Mays, the German, and Emmett Harlow to their
boarding-house. She found her mother sitting quietly in the parlor.

A moment later Isabel Severn abruptly entered the room. The young
widow’s beautiful face looked like marble against her sable
mourning-robes and jet-black locks, and her somber dark eyes fastened
themselves on Italy with an expression of keen despair. She went up to
the young girl, extending her slender white hands with a gesture of
pleading.

“Oh, for God’s sake! tell me it is not true!” she cried. “Ah, I have
loved you so, loved and trusted you, believing you an angel. It breaks
my heart to think that you are wicked and deceitful.”

They gathered around her in wonder and amazement. Professor Doepkin
drew close to Italy’s side. He saw that she had turned deadly white,
that she was trembling so that she could hardly falter:

“What is it that you mean, my dear Isabel?”

“Ah, Italy, you know. He has succeeded at last, that boy at Mr.
Gardner’s who has been watching so long for the beautiful face of the
girl who went away with my husband from the office the evening he was
murdered. To-day the boy, Robert, saw her face again in the crowded
court-room. He came here to tell me; he is waiting now to identify
you--_you_--Italy Vale!--as the girl whom I believe to be concerned
in the killing of my husband. Oh, God! how horrible it is to know you
are the woman I have sought so long. How could you keep silence when
I poured my misery into your ears? Are you indeed false and wicked?
Speak! tell me how my poor husband died, and what part you had in the
crime. Speak--ere I fall dead at your feet!” and she knelt before Italy
with streaming eyes and upraised hands in piteous pleading.

Mrs. Mays had looked and listened to her daughter in the wildest
consternation. She believed that Isabel’s sorrows must have driven her
mad. She hurried forward and tried to lead her from the room.

“Come away to your own room, my dear, you must not speak to Miss Vale
in this strange fashion!” she cried distressedly.

But Isabel resisted her efforts and Italy begged her to desist.

“Let her stay and hear the cruel truth, for now I cannot hide it any
longer,” she said firmly.

And to the surprise of every one, she took Isabel’s hands gently in
hers and led her to a chair.

“Sit here and listen to my story,” she continued, “for I _do_ know how
your husband died, and it was to shield another woman that I have kept
the secret so long. But, my dear friend, it is a very sad story for
the ears of a loving wife. I would spare you if I could, but it is now
impossible.”

“Go on,” Isabel answered with burning impatience; and then Italy looked
around, her glance lingering longest on Professor Doepkin, who stood
nearest to her of all.

“I wish you all to stay,” she said. “You have all heard Isabel’s
accusation, you must hear my defense.”

There were Professor Doepkin, Mrs. Vale, Mrs. Mays, Emmett Harlow,
beside herself and Isabel. They all drew near, and then Italy began her
story.

She was pale as death, she trembled, and her dark eyes were heavy with
unshed tears. It was a cruel ordeal for any young girl--to tell the
story of a man’s wickedness to the wife who loved him and believed him
true!

She did not know how she would ever hold out to do it, but she did,
and with a dramatic force and fire that held her hearers spell-bound.
They hardly drew breath while she talked, and there were tears on every
cheek, it was so thrilling, the story of that night when she had left
The Lodge to place herself in Mr. Gardner’s protection, and fallen into
a villain’s power.

“Perhaps I have done wrong to keep the secret so long,” she said. “I
did not want to betray Mrs. Dunn; that is why I kept silent.”

“Isabel, I always said that Craig Severn was a bad man. I heard it
before you married him, but you would not listen to me,” cried her
mother almost exultantly.

But the stricken widow turned upon her with such reproachful eyes that
she could say no more.

Then Italy bent before her pleadingly.

“Will you take back your unkind words now?” she begged wistfully.

“Oh, Italy, forgive me, dear, for my heart is broken.”

And Isabel burst into a passion of tears. They led her gently to her
own room, to wrestle with her terrible sorrow, while the others agreed
to keep silent over what had just passed until Mrs. Severn had decided
whether she would prosecute the murderess.

Every one wondered why Mrs. Dunn had wished to kill Craig Severn, until
clever Emmett said:

“I have a plausible theory. Perhaps she saw only his back and believed
it was Percy Seabright. She was madly jealous of him, you all know,
and perhaps her jealousy led her to go to that house to look for him.
Seeing him in company with a beautiful young girl, perhaps drove her to
murderous fury. Yet I hope Mrs. Severn will not make it public for the
sake of her relatives, especially sweet Alexie, whom we all admire and
love. It would be very sad for her to hear this story on returning from
her wedding-tour.”




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE WAGES OF SIN.


On the next day Percy Seabright’s trial was continued. The reading of
the diary was resumed by Mr. Gardner. Surely no one but a madman would
have criminated himself like this, by writing down the details of all
his wicked deeds.

Everything was written there--the murder of Ronald Vale, the hasty
flight to New York, the hurried return, the attendance on Mrs. Vale’s
trial for murder, the dastardly persecution of the hapless widow that
he had begun by telling Francis Murray a slanderous story, pretending
that she was in love with himself.

With ghoulish glee he exulted over the misery of the woman who had come
between himself and Ronald Vale, explaining how his base anonymous
letters had hounded her from place to place and made her life a torture.

Then the coming of Italy Vale to Winthrop was dwelt on. Foiled for
once by the girl’s plans, he believed Mrs. Vale dead at last, and
transferred his hatred to her daughter.

The discovery that Italy was on the track of her father’s murderer
filled him with rage and dismay. He felt certain that unless he could
compass her death she would track him down, for the soul of a heroine
beat in her breast, and he instinctively recognized the force of her
strong character.

Then began his attempts to murder her, beginning with the cunning
plot the day of the yachting-party when he had adroitly pushed her
overboard. Furious was his rage at the failure of this attempt, but
other schemes were tried soon, and Providence defeated his malignity
until it seemed to him as if the girl bore a charmed life.

All the time he was pretending the greatest friendship for her,
although secretly thirsting for her fair young life. It was in vain
that he tried to throw suspicions on Francis Murray; she scorned
them all, and he realized that her life was a constant menace to his
liberty. She would never give up the battle until she had won it, but
if she were only dead the matter would rest, where she had been advised
to leave it--with the long-ago given verdict of the jury and the world.

Suddenly came the tragic happening of the moonlight party, and Percy
Seabright raved with fury because the winds and waves had spared Italy
Vale again, but in the supposed death of Francis Murray he saw his
opportunity.

It was no wonder that the sailor who had carried to Mrs. Murray the
news of her son’s death could never be found. With the preternatural
cunning of insanity, Percy Seabright had prepared the confession and,
disguised as a rough sailor, delivered it himself. He now believed that
Italy would believe Francis Murray guilty, and give up the search.

Following upon these events came the return of Mrs. Vale to Boston,
reawakening all his sleepless hatred. His call on Mrs. Vale when she
had declined to see him was only a blind to hide his wicked intentions.
He had already plotted to burn her house that night and destroy both
herself and daughter.

But for Professor Doepkin’s heroism, he would have succeeded in his
malignant designs.

It was a most revolting record of crime that the man had written in the
stolen diary, little dreaming that it would ever see the light of day
until after his death, when, in his love of sensation, it is probable
he would have left it to the public.

The remaining few paragraphs related to his approaching marriage with
his detested fiancée, and were not of interest to the general public.

It scarcely needed the testimony of the medical experts who had been
summoned in the case to prove Percy Seabright a maniac whose liberty
menaced all. An insane asylum would be his prison, and his career of
crime was over, but the general public declared that his punishment was
too light. They declared that hanging was too good for him, and that he
ought to be burned at the stake.

But the prisoner’s brother, his only living relative, was very glad
to be spared the disgrace of having a brother hanged for murder. He
hurried Percy at once into a lunatic asylum. And none too soon, for the
defeat of all his plans, and the tragic death of Elizabeth, the good
soul who had so tenderly cared for him in his periods of dementia,
so preyed on his mind that he soon became violently insane, and the
paroxysms lasted so long that every remnant of reason left him. A
padded cell became his permanent abode, and in the summer following his
conviction he committed suicide, during a furious spell, by strangling
himself to death with his bedclothes.

And what of his widowed bride, who all this time had been enjoying
herself abroad to the utmost extent that a lacerated heart and very
slim purse would permit?

Her humiliation at the hands of her beloved Percy had turned her
love to hate, so she was rather glad than otherwise to learn of his
disasters at home.

“Had he sailed with me he would have escaped them all. He is well
punished!” she thought maliciously.

But while she lingered abroad a great cholera scare seized upon the
Old World. The cholera broke out, and among the victims that were
chronicled duly in the New York papers was Mrs. Seabright.

       *       *       *       *       *

But in our haste to relate the end of the wicked characters of our
story we have somewhat anticipated events.

We must return therefore to the moment when Mr. Gardner, having
finished the reading of the diary, stood looking around in silence on
the interested throng. He had a dramatic surprise in store for them,
and was preparing to unfold it.

Looking around upon the judge and jury he observed:

“Referring to the fiendish plot to ruin the good name of the
supposed-to-be-dead Francis Murray, I have a very interesting story to
relate.”

And he told in a graphic manner the story of Francis Murray’s rescue
at sea, and the interest taken in him by young Doctor Loring, his
recognition by Emmett Harlow, and the surgical operation that had
raised the patient from a living death to full life and consciousness
again.

How the great crowd hung on his words, how eagerly Mrs. Murray and
Italy Vale bent forward to listen. Emmett Harlow and Professor Doepkin
seemed quite nervous, too. The story sounded like a romance.

Mr. Gardner paused for a few impressive moments, then continued:

“Francis Murray, whose mother and friends mourned him as dead, was
alive and well, and eager to go home. But think of his position!

“By the story of the mysterious sailor he was proved dead and guilty of
a great crime. The public had accepted the story, and cleared Mrs. Vale
of the shadow of suspicion that had rested on her for years. She, too,
believed in his guilt. What if he came back now and denied the sailor’s
story, and proved his own innocence?

“It would--unless the real murderer could be unmasked--again throw
upon Mrs. Vale the blight of that dark suspicion, again darken the
brightness of her life. There might even be people cruel enough to
believe that the woman herself had originated the scheme to blacken
Francis Murray’s memory.

“No, Francis Murray could not risk these disasters even for the sake
of returning to his widowed mother’s arms. He must sacrifice her and
himself to the good of another--to the woman whose life, so long a
martyrdom, had just blossomed into peace and pleasure--Mrs. Vale’s
equanimity must not be disturbed.

“Francis Murray remained abroad several months. He grew a luxuriant
blond beard and long hair. He donned blue glasses, a slouching gait,
and careless costume. He returned with Emmett Harlow to his native
land; but he came as a stranger--a German student, Professor Doepkin.”

It was dramatic--that swelling hum of surprise and delight that
followed his words. Over it all rose a wild cry of joy--the outburst of
a mother’s heart.

Professor Doepkin had been sitting very close to Mrs. Murray--perhaps
by design--and he turned very quietly and took her in his arms. The
proud, stately woman broke down utterly, and sobbed joyfully:

“Frank, Frank, my son!”

It was a touch of nature that went home to every heart.

Women were sobbing all over the house, and men were moved beyond
expression. The prisoner, as much surprised as any one, looked on with
a smile like one at a play. He knew now that everything had failed,
that his clever game was up, the play played out. Yet he could _smile_!
To his bizarre nature, full of paradoxical moods, perhaps it seemed
gratifying to know that he had played so well the villain’s part.

The confusion in the court-room could not be quelled for some moments,
but the old judge, who had tears in his own eyes, was very lenient.

At length Mrs. Murray, suddenly becoming conscious that she was the
cynosure of all eyes, drew back from her son’s clasp and pulled her
veil over her tearful face. Then Francis Murray leaned across her and
held out his hand to Italy, who was very pale and quiet.

“Have you no word of welcome for me?” he whispered pleadingly.

She gave him her hand with a very pensive smile, and said:

“I thank Heaven that you are restored to your mother, but I am not
surprised. I knew you all the while.”

Mrs. Vale interrupted them at this point, and he could not reply. Her
mother’s heart was overflowing with gratitude to the man she had so
cruelly misjudged.

“How can I thank you?” she whispered fervently.

“I will tell you some day,” he replied, with a kindly glance at her
daughter that told her his whole story.

The trial ended the next day, and no one was surprised at the verdict
of insanity. The public had confidently expected it, for the story
of the padded chamber and Mrs. Smith’s confession of her master’s
insanity had been published in all the newspapers.

Percy Seabright received sentence of confinement for life with the
unvarying smile he had worn through the whole trial. He made one single
request. It was that he might be permitted to pay a farewell visit
to the grave of Ronald Vale, whom he had murdered in revenge for his
slighted love.

The wish was granted. By that quiet grave his bright smile faded, his
dazzling dark eyes grew dim, and he wept bitterly for the friend whom
he had loved with that strange, morbid passion. It was the only touch
of feeling he had betrayed.




CHAPTER XXXII.

IN THE SUNSET’S GLOW.


The morning after the end of the famous trial Mrs. Murray came with her
son to call on the Vales.

Francis Murray’s luxuriant beard had been all shaved off and his fair
clustering locks carefully trimmed to his well-shaped head.

The blue glasses had been laid aside with the German professor’s
slouching gait and careless clothes. He was dressed in the extreme of
fashion, and appeared handsomer than ever to Italy’s admiring eyes. But
she greeted him with a very quiet, constrained air.

She was afraid, horribly afraid, that Mrs. Murray had confided to her
son the story of that night when she had owned her love for him.

Mrs. Murray had come to carry off the Vales to The Lodge. They must be
her guests this winter, she declared! Her heart yearned over the pale,
sad, golden-haired woman who had borne such a heavy cross of sorrow.
She longed to make amends to her for all the grievous past.

“Come back to us, my dear, in your own old home, and let us love you as
we want to and try to make you happy,” she said lovingly, as she put
her arms about the graceful drooping form.

If there was one wish in the world that Mrs. Vale cherished it was
to return to the old home where she had been so happy with her lost
Ronald. Tears of joy sparkled in her dark-blue eyes, as she answered:

“We will be glad to come to you until we make arrangements for another
home.”

Whatever Italy felt, she could not gainsay the wishes of that beloved
mother, so she became Mrs. Murray’s guest at The Lodge, exposed to all
the dangerous fascinations of its magnificent master.

And certainly he did not spare any effort to wound that girlish heart
with the shaft of Cupid. He could be dangerously fascinating when he
chose to exert himself, and he chose to do it now. Without the least
obtrusiveness he surrounded her life with the most delicate attentions.

But there are none so blind as those who will not see.

Italy saw in her host’s tenderness only the rites of a courteous
hospitality. A little thorn of jealousy was rankling deep in her heart.
She knew that he had been to call on Alys Audenreid, for he had spoken
of it frankly one day, but she did not know that Alys was in the habit
of writing him tender little notes begging for these visits. The girl
was playing her last desperate card to win him.

But when he spoke of her one day before his mother, she said curtly:

“Only for the sake of our sweet Alexie I could not tolerate Alys and
her aunt. They are both scheming and deceitful creatures for whom I
have neither liking nor respect.”

She could not forget that they had both pretended to believe in her
son’s guilt, and she thought it was now too late for repentance. She
was not uneasy on the score of Alys, however, for she knew well where
her son’s heart was fixed. All that troubled her was Italy’s fixed
coldness. Why had the girl’s heart turned from her son?

She knew that she cared for no one else, although she had so many
admirers. But while she doubted, the pretty little play went on before
her eyes, the devotion of Francis to the shy girl who accepted his
attentions so coyly, sometimes even with studied indifference.

“He is not bold enough. He ought to speak to her and press his suit,”
she thought impatiently, but she did not know that he feared his fate
too much.

He thought himself unworthy of the beautiful, brave girl who was the
heroine of the hour, who had fought such a valiant battle for her
mother’s good name and peace of mind when strong men had tried to
strike down her little, aggressive sword.

       *       *       *       *       *

A month had passed away, and March was coming in. Soon the long and
weary winter would be over.

Ralph Allen and his bride were coming home from their charming Southern
tour. The Breakers, their beautiful new home in Winthrop close to The
Lodge, was all ready for their reception.

Emmett Harlow, too, was building a beautiful home in Winthrop, and
Madam Rumor hinted that it was for a bride. Certainly Emmett began to
wear a happier look, and could meet Italy more cordially than of yore.
She knew that he admired Mrs. Severn very much. He had brought her to
The Lodge twice to see them all, and it was noticed that the young
widow began to wear a brighter, happier look. Perhaps the knowledge of
her husband’s treachery had proved an antidote to her sorrow. Italy
cherished a secret, happy consciousness that dark-eyed Isabel would
soon supplant her in Emmett’s heart.

The Gardners were frequent visitors. They adored Italy, and thought her
the greatest heroine in the world. To Mr. Gardner, Mrs. Vale confided
her desire to purchase a home for herself in Winthrop.

“I love the sea and want my home beside it. Ronald loved it, too,” she
said, in that plaintive voice like saddest music.

“There are plenty of charming sites in Winthrop,” said the lawyer.
“But, my dear madam, why not wait a while before you settle on
anything? Are you not very pleasantly situated here?”

“I love Winthrop and The Lodge, but Italy thinks we ought to be settled
in a home of our own,” she answered gently.

“So then it is you, Italy, who are trying to break up our happy little
party,” cried Mrs. Murray, shaking a reproachful finger at the girl.

“We cannot stay here forever!” Italy answered, a little abruptly, but
there was a curious break in her voice, and presently she slipped away
from them all and went away to walk alone by the wild, March sea.

A lurid, crimson sunset was straining through low-lying snow-clouds
that banked the horizon, and the red glow burned on the dull-gray sea
with its long swelling white breakers.

Soon it would be dull-gray twilight, but now the warm glow bathed the
girl’s figure in rich light, bringing out the brown hue of her sealskin
cap and jacket, the purplish bloom on her waving hair and the golden
light in the pansy-dark eyes.

The nipping wind blew the pink petals from the hothouse roses on her
breast and scattered them as she walked along the level sands, while
the voice of the sea, sullen, hollow, mournful, seemed like the voice
of her heart, lonely, desolate.

Her mind went back to her first coming to Winthrop last summer--so
long ago now it seemed--and all that had followed after. She had come
with a heart full of resentment and suspicion, hating Francis Murray,
determined to drag him down and bring home to him her father’s murder.
That was barely eight months ago. Now she knew that Francis Murray was
her fate.

“And he cares naught for me. Oh, how hard it is to lose him!” she
thought with passionate despair.

There was a step on the sands behind her, and she turned with a start
of fear.

“I have followed you, traced you by the rose-petals on the sands. Are
you angry?” said a musical voice.

It was Francis Murray, handsome as a god in the lurid sunset light. He
smiled as she turned and faced him--that wondrous smile so dangerous to
her peace of mind.

“Are you angry?” he asked again anxiously.

“Why should I be angry?” she faltered. “But--you have taken unnecessary
trouble. It is early yet, and I am not afraid.”

“I came to scold you,” he replied.

“What have I done?” she asked proudly, though her lips quivered.

“You have been spoiling your mother’s peace, trying to drag her from
The Lodge to a new home.”

“Our visit has extended over a month already. We must not trespass too
long on your hospitality.”

“Italy, how coldly you speak to me. Ah! child, will you never forgive
my fault?”

“I do not understand you, Mr. Murray.”

“No? That is very strange, for all my thoughts dwell upon it, and I
can never forgive myself. How you must have hated me when I would not
help you track down the murderer of your father, when I sneered at your
faith in your mother!”

His voice was earnest and intense. It thrilled her with its pathetic
music, and her heart leaped wildly. She cried out impulsively:

“Oh, how could you think me anything but grateful to you? You were
blind then, but so was all the world. It was only my love for my mother
that kept my faith so strong, that made me triumph in the end. But
you--you saved my mother’s life and mine at deadly peril of your own.
We can never be grateful enough to you.”

“If you think you owe me any gratitude, child, it is easy to pay the
debt.”

“How?”

“Give up this fancy of another home for yourself and your mother. Stay
with us. There is room in that great house for us all. And she is so
happy there in the home that used to be hers. And my mother, too, she
will be lonely without the two she loves so well.”

“She will have you, her son,” she answered coldly.

“True; but your mother is a pleasanter companion, and the day may come,
Italy, when--I--shall--marry. Then my time must be given to my bride.”

There was silence for a long, long minute. The meaning waves seemed to
echo loudly in the girl’s ears:

“My bride! my bride!”

The pretty, shallow face of her rival rose before her mind’s eye. She
thought how Alys would queen it at the great house yonder. Then she
crested her head with defiant pride. His keen, earnest eyes should
never read her heart, where that cruel thorn of sorrow hid and ached.

“I congratulate you on your approaching marriage, Mr. Murray, but that
is only another reason why we should go away.”

“Why, Italy?”

“Because there could never be room enough for your wife and us two. Do
you not remember that we were never friendly, Alys Audenreid and I?”

“Alys Audenreid, dear, has nothing to do with the matter. No bride of
mine can ever oust you from The Lodge.”

He took her hand in his and drew her nearer to him. She trembled, but
she did not resist.

The sunset light on his handsome, eager face showed her something in
his eyes that was more than simple friendship.

“Have you been thinking I would marry Alys?” he demanded.

“Ye-es.”

“Was that the reason you have been so cold and cruel to me?”

“No.”

But Francis Murray laughed softly to himself. Light began to break on
his darkness.

“Italy, won’t you look at me one moment?”

But the long lashes swept the glowing cheeks, and the red lips trembled
with intense feeling.

He took the other little hand now and drew her closer still, until his
broad figure seemed to shield her utterly from the nipping east wind.
But neither knew that it was winter then. The summer of love was in
their hearts.

“Little girl, I fear that you have a very bad memory. Have you
forgotten the night we were parted in the water by that terrible
accident?”

“No--oh, no!” she shuddered.

And he leaned over her a little nearer, so near that his breath
caressed her glowing cheek.

“Do you remember the last words I said to you that night, my little
girl?”

“I--I----” faltered Italy, in dire confusion, and paused.

“You _do_ remember them!” cried he triumphantly. “I called you my love
and my darling. How, then, could you think me false to that night? You
have known all the while that I loved you.”

His eager, impetuous voice died away in a thrilling whisper, but no
answer came from the happy girl leaning so near to his heart.

“You have known all the while that I loved you,” repeated Francis
Murray ardently. “Then why have you been so cold to me? Was it because
you could give me no hope? Am I too old at thirty-three to win the
heart of a girl like you, barely eighteen? Oh, Italy, speak to me,
child! Must I leave you?”

The little hand held him back, the low voice sobbed:

“Professor Doepkin was so cold to me it made me distrust your love. I
thought you meant to ignore the past, and it almost broke my heart.”

“I was cruel, dear, but I thought Emmett had won you, after all, and
that I was forgotten--even if you had ever cared for me. I hoped you
would know me, through all disguises, and I almost despaired because
you did not. But Emmett told me lately you had rejected him again, and
he was learning to care for Isabel. So I took heart of hope once more.
Oh, my darling, will you love me? Will you take my heart and my life?”

And the moaning waves echoed tenderly: “My heart and my life?”

Oh, the face that she raised to his, so beautiful, so loving, so happy!
It was like an angel’s to his devouring eyes.

“My love, my bride!” he murmured rapturously, and caught her in his
arms, pressing fervent kisses on the face that was so lovely and so
happy.

And the sun, just sinking to rest below the restless sea, sent one
long lance of quivering golden light across the waves, touching with a
heavenly benison the dark and golden heads so close together.


THE END.

No. 1336 of the NEW EAGLE SERIES, entitled, “Madcap Merribel,” by Julia
Edwards, is a delightful love story with a rarely charming heroine.




Transcriber’s Notes:


Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.

Table of contents has been added and placed into the public domain by
the transcriber.

This novel was first serialized in the _New York Family Story Paper_
from April 8, 1893 to July 15, 1893. This electronic text is derived
from a 1931 paper-covered reprint, no. 1335 in the _New Eagle Series_.
The 1931 edition includes advertisements before and after the text of
the novel, but this extra material has been omitted here.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLIGHTED LOVE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


