The Project Gutenberg eBook of A new dictionary of the terms ancient and modern of the canting crew in its several tribes of gypsies, beggers, thieves, cheats, &c.
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A new dictionary of the terms ancient and modern of the canting crew in its several tribes of gypsies, beggers, thieves, cheats, &c.
        With an addition of some proverbs, phrases, figurative speeches, &c.

Author: B. E.

Release date: April 17, 2025 [eBook #75897]

Language: English

Original publication: London: W. Hawes, P. Gilbourne and W. Davis, 1699

Credits: Chris Curnow and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW DICTIONARY OF THE TERMS ANCIENT AND MODERN OF THE CANTING CREW IN ITS SEVERAL TRIBES OF GYPSIES, BEGGERS, THIEVES, CHEATS, &C. ***





                                  A NEW
                                DICTIONARY
                                  OF THE
                         Terms Ancient and Modern
                                  OF THE
                              Canting Crew,

                              In its several
                                 TRIBES,
                                    OF
                 _Gypsies, Beggers, Thieves, Cheats_, &c.

                                   WITH
                      An Addition of some Proverbs,
                   Phrases, Figurative Speeches, _&c._

               Useful for all sorts of People, (especially
          Foreigners) to secure their _Money_ and preserve their
         _Lives_; besides very Diverting and Entertaining, being
                               wholly New.

                             By _B. E._ Gent.

                                _LONDON_,
        Printed for _W. Hawes_ at the _Rose_ in _Ludgate-street_,
    _P. Gilbourne_ at the Corner of _Chancery-lane_ in _Fleet-street_,
            and _W. Davis_ at the _Black Bull_ in _Cornhill_.




THE PREFACE.


Before I present the Reader, with the following Dictionary of the
_Beggers_ and _Gypsies Cant_, I think it not amiss to premise a few
Words concerning the _Beggers_ and _Gypsies_ themselves, by way of an
Historical Account, of the Antiquity of the one, and the Universality of
the other.

It makes not a little for the Honour of the _Beggers_, that their
Original according to some Accounts, is no less Ancient than that of
_Christianity_ it self; for in the Opinion of _Charron_, as the _Slaves_
went off, the _Beggers_ came in their Place. So much at least is granted,
That the _Jews_ who allow’d of _Slaves_, had no _Beggers_. What shall we
say, but that if it be true, that the Emancipating or Freeing of _Slaves_
was indeed the making of _Beggers_; it follows that Christianity which is
daily employed in Redeeming _Slaves_ from the _Turks_, Ransom’d no less
than all at once from _Pagan Slavery_ at first, at no dearer a Rate, than
the Rent-charge of maintaining the _Beggers_, as the Price and Purchace
of our Freedoms.

As for the Antiquity of the _English Beggers_, it may be observed, That
the first _Statute_ which makes Provision for the _Parish-Poor_, is no
older than Queen _Elizabeth_; from which it may be fairly Collected,
That they entred with us upon the _Dissolution_ of the _Abbeys_, as with
them abroad, upon the _Delivery_ of the _Slaves_.

For the _Gypsies_, they and the _Foul Disease_ have alike the Fate to
run through a _Geography_ of _Names_, and to be made free of as many
_Countries_, as almost there are _Languages_ to call them Names in; for
as the _French_ call the _Pox_, the _Italian_ Disease, they again give
it to the _Spaniards_, as these to the _French_; so the _French_ call
the Gypsies _Boemie_, or _Bohemians_, belike, because they made their
first Appearance in _Bohemia_ of any Part of _Europe_; the _Italians_
Name them _Zingari_ or _Saracens_, the _Spaniards_ _Ilanos_ as we
_Egyptians_; whether it be, that the _Italians_ give them the _Turks_, as
the _Spaniards_ give them the _Moors_, as being both the next Neighbors
to each; I take not upon me to Determine, only it may be observed,
betwixt the Complement of either kind, the Odds is no greater than this,
of giving a Nation a Clap, or of laying a brood of Bastards at it’s Door.

Though _Holland_ has no Beggers, if the _Dutch_ themselves are not the
greatest Beggers in the World; and _Switzerland_ has no Thieves, if the
_Swiss_ who are altogether Soldiers, are not the greatest of Thieves.
Yet, I say, neither the _States_ that are without _Beggers_, nor the
_Cantons_ that are without _Thieves_, are notwithstanding either the one
or the other, without _Gypsies_. So as what they want of _Beggers_ and
_Thieves_ in point of Antiquity, the _Gypsies_ claim above both, in point
of Universality.

But though _Gypsies_ are found in all Christian Countries, yet are they
not in all Countries alike; their Nature and Genius being diverse, in
proportion to the Countries amongst whom they Stroul; so that the same
Question remains upon them, as is started of the _Winds_, as Universal
Travellers as the _Gypsies_, that it seems a Doubt, Whether they partake
more of the Nature of the Countries whence they rise, or of those through
which they Pass?

Nor is it also new to meet the _Beggers_ and the _Proverbs_ together, for
the Fashion is as old as _Plautus_, who puts the Proverbs and the Jests
in the Mouth of his _Slaves_. And in the Character of _Sancho Pancha_,
_Cervantes_ has Trod in the same Steps; in the History of _Don Quixot_,
_Sancho_ being distinguished no less by his _Proverbs_, than his _Asse_.
And between the _Slaves_ and the _Beggers_, the Difference is no greater,
than between _Fathers_ and their _Heirs_.

If some Terms and Phrases of better Quality and Fashion, keep so ill
Company, as Tag-Rag and Long-Tail; you are to remember, that it is no
less then Customary, for _Great Persons_ a broad to hide themselves often
in Disguises among the _Gypsies_; and even the late L. of _Rochester_
among us, when time was, among other Frolicks, was not ashamed to keep
the _Gypsies_ Company.




A NEW DICTIONARY.


_Abram-cove_, c. a Naked or poor Man, also a lusty strong Rogue.

_Abram-men_, c. the seventeenth Order of the Canting-crew. Beggers
antickly trick’d up with Ribbands, Red Tape, Foxtails, Rags, _&c._
pretending Madness to palliate their Thefts of Poultrey, Linnen, _&c._

_Academy_, c. a Bawdy-house, also an University or School to learn
Gentleman-like Exercises.

_Accutrements_, c. fine rigging (now) for Men or Women, (formerly) only
Trappings for Horses. _Well accoutred_, c. gentilly dress’d.

_Acquests_, and _Acquisitions_, the rights of Fortune purchased by
Labour, Arts or Arms, oppos’d to Hereditary and Paternal.

_Acteon_, a Cuckold.

_Acteon’d_, Cuckolded, or made a Cuckold of.

_Adam’s-ale_, Water.

_Adam-tiler_, c. a Pick-pocket’s Camerade, who receives Stolen Money or
Goods, and scowers off with them.

_Addle-pate_, one full of Whimsies and Projects, and as empty of Wit.

_Addle-plot_, a Martin-mar-all.

_Adrift_, loose. _I’ll turn ye adrift_, a Tar-phrase; I’ll prevent ye
doing me any harm.

_Affidavit men_, Knights of the Post, Mercenary Sweaters for Hire,
Inhabitants (formerly) of White Friers, now dispersed.

_Aft_ and _Abase_, towards the Stern, or hinder Part of the Ship.

_Aim_, Endeavour or Design. _To aim_ or _level at a Mark, he has mist his
Aim_ or _End_.

_Air of a Song_, the Tune.

_Air of a Face or picture_, the Configuration and consent of Parts in
each.

_Airy_, Light, brisk, pleasant; also a Nest of Hawks; He is an Airy
Fellow.

_Alabaster_, mixt by all the knavish Perfumers with the Hair-Powder they
sell, to make it weigh heavy, being of it self very cheap, that their
Gain may be the greater, found destructive to the Hair and Health.

_Alsatia_, White Friers.

_Alsatia the higher_, the same.

_Alsatia the lower_, the Mint in Southwark.

_Alsatians_, the Inhabitants, such as, broken Gentlemen, Tradesmen, _&c._
Lurking there.

_Allay_, the Embasing of a purer and finer Metal, by mixing it with an
inferior or coarser Metal, as of pale Gold with a Silver-Allay, or of
deep Gold with an Allay of Copper; also whatever is used to qualify what
is bitter or nauseous in Compositions, as gilding of Pills, sweetning of
Boluses, or Powders.

_Aloft_, above or over Head; also anciently an Upper-room or Garret, now
more us’d in Compounds, as _Cock-loft_, _Hay-loft_, &c.

_Altemall_, altogether.

_Altitudes_, _the Man is in his Altitudes_, he is Drunk.

_Ambidexter_, one that goes snacks in gaming with both Parties; also a
_Lawyer_ that takes Fees of _Plaintif_ and _Defendant_ at once.

_Ambient-Air_, Air abroad oppos’d to that pent and shut up in Wells,
Vaults, Caves, _&c._ Or else the outward Air in the House, oppos’d to
that shut up in the Cavities of Vessels, Glasses Vials, _&c._

_Ambrol_, among the Tarrs for Admiral.

_Amphibious Creatures_, of a doubtful kind or of a double Element; as a
Bat is between a Bird and a Beast; an Otter between a Beast and a Fish,
and a Puffin with the rest of the Sea-Fowl, between Fowl and Fish.

_Amuse_, to throw dirt in one’s Eyes, by diverting one from a serious
Thought to a pleasant one.

_Amusement_, a Blind or Disengagement from deep Thoughts to more
Diverting.

_An Ark_, c. a Boat or Wherry.

_Anglers_, c. Cheats, petty Thievs, who have a Stick with a hook at the
end, with which they pluck things out of Windows, Grates, _&c._ also
those that draw in People to be cheated.

_Animal_, a Fool. _He is a meer Animal_, he is a very silly Fellow.

_Antechambers_, forerooms for receiving of Visits, as the back and
Drawing Rooms are For Lodgings, anciently called Dining-rooms.

_Antidote_, a very homely Woman, also a medicine against Poyson.

_Antient_, at Sea, for Ensign, or Flag.

_Anticks_, little Images on Stone, on the out side of old Churches.
_Antick postures or dresses_, such as are odd, ridiculous and singular,
the habits and motions of Fools, Zanies, or Merry-andrews, of
Mountebanks, with Ribbands, mismatched colours and Feathers.

_Antiquary_, a curious Critick in old Coins, Stones and Inscriptions, in
Worm-eaten Records, and ancient Manuscripts; also one that affects and
blindly doats, on Relicks, Ruins, old Customs Phrases and Fashions.

_Antiquated-Rogue_, Old, out of date, that has forgot or left off his
Trade of Thieving, _&c._ also superannuated, obsolete Customs, or Words,
such as are worn out, out of use and Fashion.

_Apart_, severally, asunder.

_Apartments_, Rooms apart, private Lodgings, inner Chambers, secret
and withdrawn from the rest. Recesses of the House opposed to the
_Ante-chambers_.

_Arack_, an East-Indian Brandy, or strong Spirit drawn from Rice, and
(sometimes) Roes of Fish, best when old, much us’d in Punch, the double
distill’d _Goa_ most esteem’d.

          { _Rogue_, Witty.
  _Areh_, { _Wag_, Pleasant.
          { _Whore_, Cunning.

_Armi_, _to bear Arms_, a Profession not unbecoming a Gentleman, for
_Books_ and _Arms_ are Gentlemens Burdens.

_Armour_, _in his Armour_, Pot-valiant.

_Aristippus_, a Diet-drink, or Decoction of _Sarsa_, _China_, &c. Sold at
certain Coffee-houses, and drank as _T_.

_Arsworm_, a little diminutive Fellow.

_Ascendant_, Power, Influence, as, _he has the Ascendant over him_, or an
Hank upon him; also the Horoscope, or point of the Ecliptic that rises at
one’s Nativity.

_Assig_, now us’d for Assignation, an Appointment or meeting.

_Assuming_, conceited, as, _an Assuming Fellow_, one that abounds in his
own Sense, and imposes it upon every Man else.

_Assurance_, Confidence, as, _a Man of Assurance_, one that has a stock
of Confidence.

_Aunt_, a Bawd, as _one of my Aunts_, one of the same Order.

_Autem_, c. a Church, also Married.

_Autem mort_, c. a Married-woman, also the Twenty fourth Order of the
Canting Tribe, Travelling, Begging (and often Stealing) about the
Country, with one Child in Arms another on Back, and (sometimes) leading
a third in the Hand.

_Auxiliary beauty_, Dress, Paint, Patches, setting of Eye-brows, and
licking the Lipps with red.


B

_Babler_, a great Talker.

_Backt_, dead, as _he wishes the old Man backt_, he longs to have his
Father upon six Mens shoulders, or as _his Back’s up_, he is in a fume,
or angry.

_Bacon_, as _he sav’d his Bacon_, he has escap’d with a whole Skin. _A
good voice to beg Bacon_, said in jear of an ill voice.

_Badge_, a mark of Distinction among poor People; as, Porters, Water-men,
Parish-Pensioners and Hospital-boys, Blew-coats and Badges being the
ancient Liveries.

_Badgers_, they that buy up a quantity of Corn and hoard it up in the
same Market, till the price rises; or carry it to another, where it bears
a better. Also a Beast for sport, _Badger Eartheth_, _Lodgeth_.

_Badjob_, an ill bout, bargain, or business.

_Baffle_, to worst, or defeat. _A baffled Cause_, worsted, defeated.

_Baggage_, a Whore or Slut.

_Bagonet_ or _Bisnet_, a _Dagger_.

_Bail-dock_, the place in the Court, where the Prisoners are kept till
called to be Arraign’d.

_Balsom_, c. Money.

_Balderdash_, ill, unpleasant, unwholesom mixtures of Wine, Ale, _&c._

_Banbury-story_, of a Cock and a Bull, silly chat.

_Banditti_, Highwaymen, (Horse or Foot) Rogues of any kind, now, but
strictly Italian Outlaws.

_Bandog_, a Bailiff, or his Follower, a Sergeant, or his Yeoman; also a
very fierce Mastive.

_Bandore_, a Widows mourning Peak; also a Musical Instrument.

_Bandy_, a play at Ball with a Bat; also to follow a Faction.

_Bandy-legg’d_, crooked.

_Bang_, a blow, _to Bang_, to beat.

_Banillas_, a Seed growing in a Cod, somewhat resembling a Kidney-bean,
on Trees in the _Indies_, much us’d in Chocolate.

_Banter_, a pleasant way of prating, which seems in earnest, but is in
jest, a sort of ridicule, _What do you banter me?_ i. e. do you pretend
to impose upon me, or to expose me to the Company, and I not know your
meaning.

_Bantling_, a Child.

_Barker_, a Salesman’s Servant that walks before the Shop, and cries,
Cloaks, Coats, or Gowns, what d’ye lack, Sir?

_Barketh_, the Noise a Fox makes at Rutting time.

_Barnacle_, c. a good job, or a snack easily got, also Fish growing on
Ships sides when foul, and a Brake for unruly Horses Noses, also the
Gratuity to _Jockeys_, for selling or buying Horses.

_Barnacles_, c. the Irons Fellons wear in Goal.

_Bar-wig_, between a bob and a long one.

_Basset_, a Game at Cards.

_Baste_, to beat, as, _I’ll baste your sides Sirrah_, I’ll bang you
lustily.

_Bastonado-ing_, a Cudgelling.

_Batten_, c. to Fatten.

_Battner_, c. an Ox.

_Batter_, the ingredients for a Pudding or Pan-cake, when they are all
mixt and stirred together.

_Battery_, beating, assault, also, striking with the Edge and _feble_ of
one’s Sword, upon the edge and _feble_ of his Adversaries.

_Batter’d-bully_, an old well cudgell’d and bruis’d huffing Fellow.

_Baubee_, a half-penny.

_Baubels_, c. Jewels, also trifles and Childrens Play-things.

_Bawdy-baskets_, c. the Twenty third Rank of Canters, with Pins, Tape,
Obscene Books, _&c._ to sell, but live more by Stealing.

_Bawdy-batchelors_, that live long Unmarried.

_Bawdy-house-bottle_, a very small one.

_Bay-windows_, embowed, as of old, standing out from the rest of the
Building. _Stand at bay_, as Deer will, when closely pursued, or being
hard run, turn Head against the Hounds.

_Beach_, the Sea-shore, or Strand.

_Bear-garden-discourse_, common, filthy, nasty Talk. _If if had been a
Bear it would have bit you_, of him that makes a close search after what
just lies under his Nose. _As good take a Bear by the Tooth_, of a bold
desperate Undertaking. _Go like the Bear to the Stake_, or hang an Arse.
_As many tricks as a dancing Bear_, or more than are good.

_Beard-splitter_, an enjoyer of Women.

_Beateth_, the noise a Hare makes at Rutting time.

_Beating_, striking the _Feble_ of the Adversary’s Sword, with the _Fort_
and edge of one’s own.

_Beau_, a silly Fellow that follows the Fashions nicely, Powdering his
Neck, Shoulders, _&c._

_Beautrap_, a Sharper.

_Beck_, c. a Beedle.

_Beetle-head_, a heavy dull Block-head.

_Beldam_, a scolding old Woman.

_Belle_, a nice, gay, fluttring foolish Woman that follows every Fashion,
also fair.

_Belloweth_, see Roe.

_Belly-cheat_, c. an Apron.

_Belsh_, all Mault drinks.

_Belweather_, chief or Leader of the Flock, Master of misrule, also a
clamorous noisy Man.

_Bene_, c. good.

_Bene-cove_, c. a good Fellow.

_Bene-ship_, c. very good, also Worship.

_Bene-bowse_, c. strong Liquor, or very good Drink.

_Bene-darkmans_, c. good night.

_Benfeakers of Gyoes_, c. Counterfeiters of Passes.

_Benefit of Clergy_, see Neck-verse.

_Ben_, a Fool.

_Bennish_, Foolish.

_Beside-himself_, distracted, _beside the Cushion_, a mistake, _beside
the Lighter_, in a bad condition.

_Besom_, a Broom.

_Bestrid_, Mounted or got up astride.

_Bess_, c. _bring bess and glym_, c. forget not the Instrument to break
open the Door and the Dark-lanthorn.

_Betty_, c. a small Engin to force open the Doors of Houses; also, a
quarter Flask of Wine.

_Bever_, an afternoon’s Lunchion.

_Beveridge_, a Garnish-money, for any thing; also Wine and Water.

_Bevy_, a company of Roes, Quails, _&c._ _Bevy Grease_, Roes fat.

_Bewildred_, at a stand or nonplus in Business, not knowing what to do,
also lost in a Wood.

_Biddy_, a Chicken, also Bridget.

_Big_, choice Barley-making, the best Mault.

_Biggin_, a Woman’s Coif.

_Biggot_, an obstinate blind Zealot.

_Biggotry_, an obstinate blind Zeal.

_Bil-boa_, c. a Sword.

_Bite the Bil from the Cull_, c. whip the Sword from the Gentleman’s side.

_Bilk_, c. to cheat. _Bilk the Ratling-cove_, c. to sharp the Coach-man
of his hire.

_Bilk’d_, c. defeated, disappointed.

_Billeting_, Foxes Excrements. _Billeting_ of Soldiers, Quartering them.

_Billet-doux_, a Love letter.

_Bill-of-sale_, a Bandore, or Widow’s Peak.

_Billingsgate-dialect_, Scolding, ill Language, foul Words.

_Binding_, securing the Adversary’s Sword with Eight or ten Inches of
one’s one, upon Five or six of his.

_Bing_, c. _to go_, _&c._

_Bing-awast_, c. get you hence. _Bing’d awast in a Darkmans_, c. stole
away in the Night-time. _Bing we to Rume vile_, c. go we to _London_.

_Bingo_, c. Brandy.

_Bingo-boy_, c. a great Drinker or Lover thereof.

_Bingo-club_, c. a set of Rakes, Lovers of that Liquor.

_Birds of a Feather_, c. Rogues of the same gang; also, those of the same
Profession, Trade or Employment. _To kill two Birds with one Stone_, to
dispatch two Businesses at one Stroke.

_Bird-witted_, Wild-headed, not Solid or Stayed, opposed to a Sober-Wit.

_Bit_, c. Robb’d, Cheated or Out-witted. Also Drunk, as, _he has bit his
Grannam_; he is very Drunk. _Bit the Blow_, c. accomplish’d the Theft,
plaied the Cheat, or done the Feat: _You have Bit-a great Blow_, c. you
have Robb’d some body of a great deal, or to a considerable value.

_Bite_, c. a Rogue, Sharper or Cheat; also a Woman’s Privities.

_Bite the Biter_, c. to Rob the Rogue, Sharp the Sharper, or Cheat the
Cheater.

_Bite the Cully_, c. to put the cheat on the silly Fellow.

_Bite the Roger_, c. to Steal the Portmanteau. _Bite the Wiper_, c. to
Steal the Handkerchief. _The Cull wapt the Morts bite_, c. the Fellow
enjoyed the Whore briskly. _He will not bite, or swallow the Bait._ He
won’t be drawn in, _to bite on the bit_; to be pinched, or reduced to
hard Meat, a scanty or sorry sort of Living.

_Bitter-cold_, very Cold.

_Black and White_, under one’s Hand, or in Writing.

_Blab_, a Sieve of Secrets, a very prating Fellow that tells all he
knows.

_Black-box_, a Lawyer.

_Black-coat_, a Parson.

_Black-guard_, Dirty, Nasty, Tatter’d roguish Boys, that attend (at the
Horse-Guards) to wipe Shoes, clean Boots, water Horses, or run of Errands.

_Blackjack_, a Leather-Jug to drink in.

_Black-Indies_, Newcastle, from whence the Coals are brought.

_Blackmuns_, c. Hoods and Scarves of Alamode and Lustrings.

_Black-mouth_, foul, malicious, Railing, or Reflecting.

_Blacken_, to blast or asperse.

_Black-spy_, c. the Devil.

_Blank_, baffled, down-look’t, sheepish, guilty.

_Bleak_, sharp, piercing Weather.

_Bleach_, to whiten.

_Bleaters_, c. they that are cheated by Jack-in-a box.

_Bleating cheat_, c. a Sheep.

_Bleed freely_, c. part with their Money easily.

_Blemish_, when Hounds or Beagles find where the Chace has been, and make
a proffer to enter, but return.

_Blew-John_, Wash, or Asterwort.

_Blind-cheeks_, the Breech _Kiss my Blind-cheeks_, Kiss my Ar—.

_Blind-excuse_, a sorry shift. _A Blind Ale-house, or Blind Lane_,
obscure, of no Sign, Token, or Mark.

_Blind harpers_, c. Beggers counterfeiting blindness, with Harps or
Fiddles.

_Blind-man’s-buff_, a play us’d by Children blindfolded. _Bluffed_,
contracted from Blind-man’s-buff, he that is Blinded in the Play.

_Blind-man’s-holiday_, when it is too dark to see to Work.

_Blind side_, every Man’s weak Part.

_Bloated_, Smoked Herrings; also, one puffed or swelled with false Fat,
and has not a Healthy Complexion.

_Blobber-lipp’d_, very thick, hanging down, or turning over.

_Block_, a silly Fellow.

_Block-houses_, c. Prisons, also Forts upon Rivers.

_Blockish_, Stupid.

_Blockstock_, See _Block_.

_Bloss_, c. a Thief or Shop-lift, also, a Bulhes pretended Wife, or
Mistress, whom he guards, and who by her Trading supports him, also a
Whore.

_Blot the Skrip and jark it_, c. to stand Engaged, or be Bound for any
body.

_Blot in the Tables_, what is fair to be hit.

_Blot in a Scutcheon_, a blemish or imputation upon any one.

_Bloud_, _’twill breed ill Bloud_, of what will produce a
misunderstanding or Difference.

_Blower_, c. a Mistress, also a Whore.

_Blowing_, c. _the same_.

_Blow-off-on the grounsills_, c. to lie with a Woman on the Floor or
Stairs.

_Blown upon_, seen by several, or slighted; _not blown upon_, a secret
piece of News or Poetry, that has not taken air, spick and span-new. _To
blow Hot and Cold_ with a Breath, or play fast and loose.

_Blow off the loose corns_, c. to Lie now and then with a Woman. _It is
blow’d_, c. it is made publick, and all have notice.

_Blubber_, Whale-oyl, (imperfect.)

_Blubbering_, much Crying.

_Bluffer_, c. a Host, Inn-keeper or Victualler, _to look bluff_, to look
big, or like Bull-beef.

_Blunder_, an Ignorant Mistake.

_Blunderbuss_, a Dunce, an unganely Fellow, also a short Gun carrying
Twenty Pistol-Bullets at one Charge.

_Bluster_, to huff, a _blustring Fellow_, a rude ratling Fellow.

_Boor_, see wild Boar.

_Boarding-school_, c. Bridewell.

_Boarding-scholars_, c. Bridewell-birds.

_Bob_, c. a Shop-lift’s camrade, assistant, or receiver, also a very
short Periwig, and for Robert. _It’s all bob_, c. all is safe, the Bet is
secured.

_Bob’d_, c. Cheated, Trick’d, Disappointed, or Baulk’d.

_Bob-tail_, a light Woman, also a short Arrow-head.

_Bode-ill_, to presage or betoken ill. Also in _Holland_, a _Bode_ is a
Messinger, attending the Burgo-Masters, and executing their Orders.

_Bodle_, Six make a Penney, Scotch Coin.

_Boer_, a Country-Fellow or Clown.

_Boerish_, Rude, Unmannerly, Clownish.

_Boggs_, Irish Fastnesses or Marshes.

_Bog-houses_, Privies.

_Bog-landers_, Irish Men.

_Bog-trotters_, Scotch or North Country Moss-troopers or High-way Men
formerly, and now Irish Men.

_Boisterous Fellow_ or, _Sea_, Blustering, Rude, Rough.

_Boldface_, Impudent. _A Bold Harbour_, where Ships may Ride at Anchor
with safety, _a bold Shore_ where Ships may Sail securely.

_Bolter of White Friers_, c. one that Peeps out, but dares not venture
abroad, as a Coney bolts out of the Hole in a Warren, and starts back
again.

_Bolting_, the leaping by one’s Adversary’s Left-side quite out of all
measure.

_Boltsprit_, a Nose. _He has broke his Boltsprit_, he has lost his Nose
with the Pox.

_Bombast-poetry_, in Words of lofty Sound and humble Sense.

_Bone_, c. to Apprehend, _Seize_, Take or Arrest. _I’ll Bone ye_, c.
I’ll cause you to be Arrested. _We shall be Bon’d_, c. we shall be
Apprehended for the Robbery. _The Cove is Bon’d and gon to the Whit_, c.
the Rogue is taken up and carried to Newgate, or any other Gaol. _The
Cull has Bon’d the Fen_, (for _Fence_) _or Bloss that bit the Blow_,
c. the Man has Taken the Thief that Robb’d his House, Shop, or Pickt
his Pocket. _He has bit his Blow, but if he be Bon’d, he must shove the
Tumbler_, c. he has Stole the Goods, or done the Feat, but if he be
Taken, he’ll be Whipt at the Cart-tail. _I have Bon’d her Dudds Fagg’d,
and Brush’d_, c. I have took away my Mistress Cloathes, Beat her, and am
troop’d off. _Boning the Fence_, c. finding the Goods where Conceal’d,
and Seizing, _he made no bones of it_, he swallow’d it without Drinking
after it.

_Bonny-clapper_, sower Butter-milk.

_Booby_, a dull heavy Lob.

_Booberkin_, the same.

_Boon_, a Gift, Reward, or Gratification.

_Boon-companion_, a merry Drinking Fellow.

_Boot_, a Scotch Torture, or Rack, for the Leg, is to draw to Confession.

_What Boots it?_ What Avails it?

_Booty-play_, false, Cheating, also Plunder, _the Bowls Booty_, when
great Odds are laid, and he goes Halves, his Cast is designed by Bad.

_Boracho_, a But, a Drunkard, and a Hogskin.

_Borde_, c. a Shilling, _half a Borde_, c. Sixpence.

_Bordel-lo_, a Bawdy-House.

_Boreson or Bauson_, a Badger.

_Bottle-head_, void of Wit.

_Bottom_, _a Man of no Bottom_, of no Basis of Principles, or no
settlement of Fortune, or of no Ground in his Art. _Let every Tub stand
on it’s own Bottom_, or every one look to his own footing. _A Tale of a
Tub with the Bottom out_, a sleeveless frivolous Tale.

_Boughs_, _he is up in the Boughs, or a top of the House_, of one upon
the Rant, or in a great Ferment.

_Bounce_, to boast and vapour. _A meer Bounce_, a Swaggering Fellow.

_Bouncer_, c. a Bully.

_Bout_, a Tryal, Act, Essay.

_Bowse_, c. Drink, or to Drink, see _Benbowse_ and _Rumbowse_.

_Bowsy_, c. Drunk. _We Bows’d it about_, we Drank damn’d hard.

_Bowsingken_, c. an Ale-house. _The Cul tipt us a Hog, which we melted in
Rumbowse_, c. the Gentleman gave us a Shilling, which we spent in Strong
Drink.

_Box_, to Fight with the Fists. _Box it about Boys_, Drink briskly
round. _In a wrong Bow_, of one that has taken wrong measures, or made
false steps. _A pretty Box_, a Compleat little House, also a small
drinking place.

_Bracket-face_, Ugly, Homely, Illfavor’d.

_Bragget_, Meed, and Ale sweetned with Honey.

_Brag_, _Braggadocio_, A vapouring, Swaggering, Bullying Fellow.

_Brat_, a little Child.

_Branchers_, Canary-Birds of the first Year.

_Bravado_, a Vapouring, or Bouncing.

_Bravo_, a Mercenary Murderer, that will Kill any Body.

_Brawl_, Squabble, or Quarrel. _To Brangle, and Brawl_, to Squabble and
Scold.

_Brazen-fac’d_, Bold, Impudent, Audacious.

_Bread and Cheese Bowling-green_, a very ord’nary one, where they play
for Drink and Tobacco, all wet, as ’tis called.

_Bread and Cheese Constables_, that treats their Neighbors and Friends at
their coming into Office with such mean Food only.

_Breaking Shins_, c. borrowing of Money.

_Breast_, _in the breast of the Judge_, what he keeps in Reserve, or
Suspence.

_Briers_, _in the Briers_, in trouble.

_Brook_, _he cannot brook it_, bear or endure it.

_Brickle_, Brittle, ape to Break.

_Bristol-milk_, Sherry.

_Bristol-stone_, Sham-Diamonds.

_Broach’d_, Opinion or Doctrine, Published, Divulged.

_Brimming_, a Boor’s copulating with a Sow, also now us’d for a Man’s
with——

_Brim_, or _Brimstone_, a very Impudent, Lew’d Woman.

_Brock_, see Hart.

_Brock’s Sister_, see Hind.

_Broke_, Officers turn’d out of Commission, Traders Absconding, Quitting
their Business and Paying no Debts.

_Bromigham-conscience_, very bad, _Bromigham-protestants_, Dissenters or
Whiggs. _Bromigham-wine_, Balderdash, Sophisticate Taplash.

_Brother-starling_, that Lies with the same Woman, or Builds in the same
Nest.

                   { _Blade_, a Sword-Man or Soldier.
  _Brother_ of the { _Gussit_, a Pimp, Procurer, also, a Whore-Master.
                   { _Quill_, of the Scribbling Tribe.
                   { _String_, a Fidler, or Musician.

_Brothel-house_, a Bawdy House.

_Brow-beat_, to Cow, to Daunt, to awe with Big Looks, or Snub.

_Brown-study_, a Deep Thought or Speculation.

_Brush_, c. to Fly or Run away. _The Cully is Brusht or Rub’d_, c. the
Fellow is march’d off, or Broke. _Bought a Brush_, c. Run away: Also a
small Faggot, to light the other at Taverns, and a Fox’s Tail.

_Brusher_, c. an exceeding full Glass.

_Bub_, c. Drink. _Rum-bub_, c. very good Tip.

_Bub_, or _Bubble_, c. one that is Cheated; also an Easy, Soft Fellow.

_Bubber_, c. a drinking Bowl; also a great Drinker, and he that used to
Steal Plate from Publick-houses.

_Bube_, c. the Pox. _The Mort has tipt the Bube upon the Cully_, c. the
Wench has Clapt the Fellow.

_Buckaneers_, West-Indian Pirates, of several Nations; also the Rude
Rabble in _Jamaica_.

_Buckle_, to Bend or give Way. _He’ll buckle to no Man_, he won’t Yield
or Stoop to any Man.

_Buck_, _Great Buck_, the Sixth Year. _Buck of the first Head_, the Fifth
Year, a _Sore_, the Fourth Year, a _Sorel_, the Third Year, a _Pricket_,
the Second Year, a _Fawn_, the First Year. _A Buck Lodgeth._ _Rouze the
Buck_, Dislodge him. _A Buck Growneth or Troateth_, makes a Noise at
Rutting time.

_Buck-fitches_, c. old Leacherous, Nasty, Stinking Fellows; also He
Polecats, and their Fur.

_Buck’s Face_, a Cuckold.

_Buck_, Copulation of Conies.

_Bucksom_, Wanton, Merry.

_Budge_, c. one that slips into an House in the Dark, and taketh
Cloaks, Coats, or what comes next to Hand, marching off with them; also
Lambs-fur, and to stir, or move. _Standing Budge_, c. the Thieves Scout
or Perdu.

_Bufe_, c. a Dog.

_Buffcoat_, a Soldier, or Redcoat.

_Buffer_, c. a Rogue that kills good sound Horses, only for their Skins,
by running a long Wyre into them, and sometimes knocking them on the
Head, for the quicker Dispatch.

_Buffenapper_, c. a Dog-stealer, that Trades in _Setters_, _Hounds_,
_Spaniels_, _Lap_, and all sorts of Dogs, Selling them at a round Rate,
and himself or Partner Stealing them away the first opportunity.

_Buffers-nab_, c. a Dog’s Head, used in a Counterfeit Seal to a false
Pass.

_Buffle-head_, a Foolish Fellow.

_Buffoon_, a Great Man’s Jester or Fool.

_Buffoonery_, Jesting or playing the Fool’s Part. _To stand Buff_, to
stand Tightly or Resolutely to any thing.

_Bugher_, c. a Dog.

_Bugging_, c. taking Money by Bailiffs and Serjeants of the Defendant not
to Arrest him.

_Busy-bodies_, Pryers into other Folks Concerns, such as thrust their
Sickle in another’s Harvest; and will have an Oar in every Boat. _As busy
as a Hen with one Chick_, of one that has a great deal of business and
nothing to do.

_Bulchim_, a Chubbingly Boy or Lad.

_Bulls-Eye_, c. a Crown or Five shilling Piece.

_Bull-head_, see Miller’s Thumb.

_Bull_, an absurd contradiction or incongruity; also false Hair worn
(formerly much) by Women. _A Town-bull_, a Whore-master. _To look like
Bull-beef_, to look Big and Grim.

_Bulk and File_, c. one jostles while the other Picks the Pocket.

_Bulker_, c. one that lodges all Night on Shop-windows and Bulkheads.

_Bulky_, strong like common Oyl, also of large bulk or size.

_Bullet-headed_, a dull silly Fellow.

_Bully_, c. a supposed Husband to a Bawd, or Whore; also a huffing Fellow.

_Bully huff_, c. a poor sorry Rogue that haunts Bawdy-houses, and
pretends to get Money out of Gentlemen and others, Ratling and Swearing
the Whore is his Wife, calling to his assistance a parcel of Hectors.

_Bully-fop_, c. a Maggot-pated, huffing, silly ratling Fellow.

_Bully-rock_, c. a Hector, or Bravo.

_Bully-ruffins_, c. Highway-men, or Padders.

_Bully-trap_, c. or _Trapan_, c. a Sharper, or Cheat.

_Bum_, a Bailiff, or Serjeant; also one’s Breech.

_Bumbast_, see Bombast.

_Bumbaste_, to Beat much, or hard, on the Breech.

_Bumble_, Cloaths setting in a heap, or ruck.

_Bumfodder_, what serves to wipe the Tail.

_Bumpkin_, a Country Fellow or Clown.

_Bumper_, a full Glass.

_Bundletail_, a short Fat or squat Lass.

_Bungler_, an unperforming Husband, or Mechanic.

_Bung_, c. a Purse, Pocket, or Fob.

_Bung-nipper_, c. a Cut-purse, or Pickpocket. _Claying the Bung_, c.
cutting the Purse, or Picking the Pocket.

_Bunting-time_, when the Grass is high enough to hide the young Men and
Maids.

_Buntlings_, c. Pettycoats. _Hale up the Main-buntlings_, c. take up the
Woman’s Pettycoats.

_Bunny_, a Rabbit.

_Bur_, a Cloud, or dark Circle about the Moon, boding Wind and Rain;
also the part next to the Deer’s Head.

_Burlesque_, Raillery in Verse, or Verse in Ridicule.

_Burnish_, to spread, or grow broad; also to refresh Plate, being the
Trade of a

_Burnisher_, depending on Gold and Silver-Smiths.

_Burnt_, Poxt, or swingingly Clapt.

_Burnt the Town_, when the Soldiers leave the Place without paying their
Quarters.

_Burre_, a Hanger on, or Dependant.

_Bustle_, a Fray, Stir, Tumult in the Streets; also a Noise in any Place.
What a Bustle you make? What a Hurry or Rattle you Cause? _Bustle about_,
to be very Stirring, or bestir one’s Stumps.

_Butcher’d_, Barbarously Murder’d on the Ground, or Kill’d before his
Sword is out; also in Cold Bloud.

_Butter_, c. to double or treble the Bet or Wager to recover all Losses:
_No Butter will stick on his Bread_, nothing thrives or goes forward in
his Hand. _He knows on which side his Bread is Butter’d_, or the Stronger
side, and his own Interest.

_Butter-boxes_, Dutchmen.

_Butter’d Bun_, Lying with a Woman that has been just Layn with by
another Man.

_Buttock_, c. a Whore.

_Buttock-broker_, a Bawd, also a Match-maker. _A Buttock and File_, c.
both Whore and Pickpocket.

_Buttock and Twang, or a downright Buttock and sham File_, c. a Common
Whore but no Pickpocket.

_Buzzard_, c. a foolish soft Fellow, easily drawn in and Cullied or
Trickt.

_By-blow_, a Bastard.


C

_Cabal_, a secret Junto of Princes, a seated knot of Statesmen, or of
Conspirators against the State in Counter-Cabal.

_Cabbage_, a Taylor, and what they pinch from the Cloaths they make up;
also that part of the Deer’s Head where the Horns are Planted.

_Cabob_, a Loin of Mutton Roasted with an Onyon betwixt each joint; a
_Turkish_ and _Persian_ Dish but now used in _England_.

_Cacafuego_, a Shite-fire; also a furious fierce Felow.

_Cackle_, c. to discover. _The Cull Cackles_, c. the Rogue tells all.

_Cackling-cheats_, c. Chickens, Cocks or Hens.

_Cackling-farts_, c. Eggs.

_Cadet_, or _Cadee_, a Gentleman that Bears Arms in hopes of a
Commission; also a younger Brother.

_Caffan_, c. Cheese.

_Cakehis_, _Cake is Dough_, of a Miscarriage or failure of Business.
_The Devil ow’d her a Cake, and has pai’d her a Loaf_, when instead of a
small, a very great Disaster or Misfortune has happen’d to a Woman.

_Call_, a Lesson, Blowed on the Horn to comfort the Hounds.

_Caliver_, a small Sea-Gun.

_Calle_, c. a Cloak or Gown.

_Cambridge-Fortune_, a Woman without any Substance.

_Cameleon-Diet_, Air, or a very thin slender Diet.

_Cameronians_, Field-Conventiclers, (in _Scotland_) great outward
Zealots, and very squeemish Precisians.

_Camesa_, c. a Shirt or Shift.

_Campaign-coat_, Originally only such as Soldiers wore, but afterwards a
Mode in Cities. See _Surtout_.

_Canary-Bird_, a little Arch or Knavish, a very Wag.

_Cane upon Abel_, a good Stick or Cudgel well-favoredly laid on a Man’s
Shoulders.

_Canal_, a Channel, Kennel, Pipe, Passage, fine Pond, or small River.

_Cannal_, choice Coals, very Fat or Pitchy that Blaze and Burn pleasantly.

_Canibal_, a cruel rigid Fellow in dealing; also Men-Eaters.

_Cank_, c. Dumb. _The Cull’s Cank_, c. the Rogue’s Dumb.

_Cannikin_, c. the Plague, also (among the _Dutch_) a little Kan with a
Spout to pour out the Wine or Beer, making it Froth _As great as Cup and
Cann_; or _as great as two Inkle-makers_.

_Cant_, c. to speak, also (Cheshire) to grow Strong and Lusty; also to
Kick or throw any thing away.

_Canterbury_, a sort of a short or Hand-gallop; from the Road leading to
that famous City (of _Kent_) on which they Ride (for the most part) after
that manner.

_Canting_, c. the Cypher or Mysterious Language, of Rogues, Gypsies,
Beggers, Thieves, _&c._

_Canting-crew_, c. Beggers, Gypsies; also Dissenters in Conventicles,
who affect a disguised Speech, and disguised Modes of Speaking, and
distinguish themselves from others by a peculiar Snuffle and Tone, as the
Shibboleth of their Party; as Gypsies and Beggers have their peculiar
Jargon; and are known no less by their several Tones in Praying, than
Beggers are by their whining Note in Begging.

_Cap_, c. to Swear. _I’ll Cap downright_, c. I’ll Swear home. Or (in
another Sense) _he may fling up his Cap after it_, when a thing or
business is past Hope.

_Capitation-Drugget_, a Cheap, Slight Stuff, called so from the Tax of
that Name.

_Capricious_, Whimsical, Fantastic, Freakish.

_Captain-Hackum_, c. a Fighting, Blustring Bully.

_Captain-Queere nabs_, c. a Fellow in poor Cloths, or Shabby.

_Captain-Sharp_, c. a great Cheat; also a Huffing, yet Sneaking, Cowardly
Bully; and a noted English Buckaneer.

_Captain-Tom_, a Leader of, and the Mob.

_Captious_, Touchy, Snuffy, apt to take Exception.

_Caravan_, c. a good round sum of Money about a Man, and him that is
Cheated of it; also a great Convoy of _Arabian_, _Grecian_, _Persian_,
_Turkish_, and other Merchants, Travelling with Camels from Place to
Place; also a sort of Wagon.

_Carbuncle-Face_, very Red and full of large Pimples.

_Card-Wool_, to cleanse and prepare it for Spinning: Also a Game; _a sure
Card_, a trusty Tool, or Confiding Man; a _cooling Card_, cold comfort,
no hope; a _Leading Card_, an Example or Precedent.

_Cargo_, c. a good round Sum of Money about a Man; also the Lading of a
Ship.

_Carouse_, to Drink hard, or Quaff heartily.

_Carpet-road_, Level and very good.

_Carriers_, Pigeons that will with safety, and almost incredible
Swiftness convey Letters from one Place to another, much used at _Smyrna_
and _Aleppo_; also Milk-womens Hirelings, or Servants, that carry the
Pail Morning and Evening.

_Carrots_, Red hair’d People, from the Colour of the well known Root of
that Name, whence came

_Carrot-pated_, used in derision.

_Carted-Whore_, Whipt publickly, and packt out of Town. _The Cart before
the Horse_, of a thing preposterous, and out of Place.

_Cash_, c. Cheese.

_Case_, c. a House, Shop, or Ware-house; also a Bawdy-house. _Toute the
Case_, c. to view, mark, or eye the House or Shop. _There’s a peerey,
’tis snitcht_, c. there are a great many People, there’s no good to be
done. _’Tis all Bob, and then to dub the gigg_, c. now the coast is
clear, there’s good Booty, let’s fall on, and Rob the House. A _Case
fro_, c. a Whore that Plies in a Bawdy-house.

_Caster_, c. a Cloak.

_Cast_, to Bowl. _A bad cast_, an ill laid Bowl, or at great distance
from the Jack. _He is Cast for Felon and Dose_, c. found guilty of Felony
and Burglary.

_Cat_, a common Whore or Prostitute.

_Catch-fart_, a Foot-Boy.

_Catching-harvest_, when the Weather is Showery and Unsettled.

_Catch-pole_, a Serjeant, or Bayliff that Arrests People.

_Cat-in-pan_, turn’d, of one that has chang’d Sides or Parties.
_Who shall hang the Bell about the Cat’s Neck_, said of a desperate
Undertaking.

_Catchup_, a high _East-India_ Sauce.

_Caterwauling_, Men and Women desirous of Copulation, a Term borrowed
from Cats.

_Cathedral_, old-fashioned, out of Date, Ancient; also a chief Church in
a Bishop’s See.

_Catharpin-fashion_, when People in Company Drink cross, and not round
about from the Right to the Left, or according to the Sun’s motion; also
small Ropes to keep the Shrouds, taut or tight, and the Mast from Rolling.

_Catting_, drawing a Fellow through a Pond with a Cat.

_Catstick_, used by Boies at Trap-ball.

_Cattle_, Whores. _Sad Cattle_, Impudent Lewd Women.

_Catmatch_, c. when a Rook is Engag’d amongst bad Bowlers.

_Cavalcade_, a publick Show on Horseback.

_Cavaulting School_, c. a Bawdy-house.

_Caudge-paw’d_, Left Handed.

_Caveating_, or _Disengaging_, flipping the Adversary’s Sword, when ’tis
going to bind or secure one’s own.

_Caw-handed_, awkward not dextrous, ready or nimble.

_Changeable-ribbon_, or _Silks_, of diverse Colours, resembling those of
Doves-necks, or of the _Opal_ Stone.

_Chafe_, _in a great Chafe_, a great heat or pet. _To Chafe_, to fret or
fume. _Chafing_, fretting or fuming, _Chafing and fretting_, being the
same with fretting and fuming, hence a

_Chafing dish_, that carries Fire.

_Chaft_, c. well beaten or bang’d; also much rub’d or bath’d.

_Chagrin_, moody, out of humour, pensive, melancholy, much troubled.

_Chalk_, used in Powder by the Perfumers to mix with their _Grounds_; and
also scented Hair-Powders, being cheap and weighing heavy; found to Burn
and destroy Wiggs and all Hair in general.

_Chanticlere_, a Cock.

_Chape_, the Tip at the End of a Fox’s Tail; also the Cap at the End of
the Scabbard of a Sword.

_Character_, a distinguishing Sign or Mark of Distinction, the same among
Great Men or Ministers, that a Badge is among Low and little People. As
_a Man of Character_, of Mark or Note, as Privy-Chancellors, Judges,
Foreign Ministers, Ministers of State, _&c._

_Chare-women_, Under-drudges, or Taskers, assistants to Servantmaids.

_Char_, a Task or Work. _A good Char well Char’d_, a Work well over.

_Chates_, c. the Gallows.

_Chat_, Talk, Prate.

_Chatter_, to Talk fast or jabber.

_Chattering fellow_, a noisy prating Man.

_Chatts_, c. Lice. _Squeeze the Chatts_, c. to Crack or Kill those Vermin.

_Cheap_, Contemptible. _How Cheap you make your self_, how Contemptible
you render your self or undervalue your self.

_Chear_, _good_ or _bad_, high or ordinary fare. _How Chear you?_ How
fare you? _Chear up_, be of good courage, hence _chearful_, or _chearly_,
for one in Heart, or that keeps up his Spirits, _prety chearly_,
indifferent hearty or lightsom.

_Cheats_, Sharpers, which see; also Wristbands or sham Sleeves worn (in
good Husbandry) for true, or whole ones.

_Chicken_, a feeble, little creature, of mean Spirit; whence _a
Chicken-hearted Fellow_, or _Hen-hearted Fellow_, a Dastard.

_Childish_, Foolish.

_Childing-women_, Breeding.

_China-Ale_, From the well known _East-Indian_ Drug of that Name, of
which they ought to put some, but they seldom do any into it, making it
sweet only and adding a little Spice.

_Chink_, c. Money, because it chinks in the Pocket.

_Chip_, a Child.

_Chip of the old Block_, a Son that is his Father’s likeness; more
particularly the Son of a Cooper, or one brought up to the same Trade.

_Chirping-merry_, very pleasant over a Glass of good Liquor.

_Chit_, a Dandyprat, or Dergen.

_Chittiface_, a little puiny Child.

_Chitchat_, idle Prate, or empty Talk.

_Chive_, c. a Knife.

_Chop_, to change, or barter.

_Chopping-boy_, a bouncing Boy. _To chop up Prayers_, to huddle them up,
or slubber them over in posthast. _A Chop by chance_, a rare Contingence,
an extraordinary or uncommon Event, out of course.

_Chopps_, (of a Man) his Face (of Mutton) a Bone or Cut.

_Chounter_, to talk pertly, and (sometimes) angrily.

_Chouse_, to cheat or trick.

_Chop-houses_, where Both boyl’d and roast Mutton (in chopps) are alwayes
ready.

_Chub_, c. _he is a young chub, or a meer chub_, c. very ignorant or
inexperienc’d in gaming, not at all acquainted with Sharping. _A good
Chub_, said by the Butchers; when they have met with a silly raw Customer
and they have Bit him.

_Chuck-farthing_, a Parish-Clerk (in the Satyr against Hypocrites) also a
Play among Boies.

_Chum_, a Chamber-fellow, or constant Companion.

_Church-yard-cough_, that will terminate in Death.

_Churl_, an Ill-natur’d Fellow; a selfish, sordid Clown. _To put a Churl
upon a Gentleman_, to Drink Ale or any Mault-Liquor immediately after
Wine.

_Ciento_, an old Game at Cards.

_Citt_, for Citizen.

_Civil List_, all the Officers and Servants in the King’s Family.

_Clack_, a Woman’s Tongue.

_Clammed_, Starved, or Famished.

_Clan_, Family, Tribe, Faction, Party in _Scotland_ chiefly, but now
anywhere else.

_Clank_, c. a Silver-tankard.

_Clanker_, a swinging Lie.

_Clank-napper_, c. a Silver-tankard Stealer. See _Bubber_.

_Rum-clank_, c. a large Silver-tankard. _Tip me a rum Clank a Booz_, c.
give me a double Tankard of Drink.

_Clap_, a Venereal Taint.

_Clapperclaw’d_, beat soundly, or paid off in earnest.

_Clapperdogeon_, c. a Begger-born and Bred.

_Clark_, or _Clerk_, Scholar or Book-learned.

_Clerk-ship_, or _Clergy_, Scholarship or Book-learning, though of late
the one be more restrained to a Clergyman, and the other appropriate to
a Clergyman’s Skill or Qualifications; because it may be heretofore,
none but the Clergy were learned, or so much as taught to Read. Hence
the _Benefit of Clergy_, (or Reading) _&c._ _legit ut Clericus_, in the
Law, for him that cou’d Read his Neck-verse, like a Clerk or Scholar,
when so few perhaps were Scholars or Clerks, that every one that could
but only Read, passed for no less: We say still, the greatest Clarks (or
Scholars) are not the Wisest Men: And the Scots much to the same Effect.
An Ounce of Mother-Wit is worth a Pound of Clergy, or Book-learning.

_Claw’d off_, lustily lasht, also swingingly Poxt.

_Clear_, c. very Drunk. _The Cull is clear, let’s Bite him._ c. The
Fellow is Damn’d Drunk, let’s Sharp him.

_Cleave_, has two contrary Senses under one Sound; for _to cleave_, (Verb
Neuter) is to cling close or stick fast, and _to cleave_, (verb Active)
is to part or divide; as to cleave asunder, when _Cleft_ and _Cloven_.

_Clench_, a pun or quible; also to nick a Business by timing it.

_Cleymes_, c. Sores without Pain raised on Beggers Bodies by their
own Artifice and cunning, (to move charity) by bruising Crows-foot,
Speerwort, and Salt together, and clapping them on the Place, which frets
the Skin, then with a Linnen rag, which sticks close to it; they tear off
the Skin, and strew on it a little Powder’d Arsnick, which makes it look
angrily or ill favoredly, as if it were a real Sore.

_Click_, c. to Snatch. _I have Clickt the Nab from the Cull_, c. I whipt
the Hat from the Man’s Head. _Click the rum Topping_, c. Snatch that
Woman’s fine Commode.

_Clicker_, the Shoemaker’s Journey-man, or Servant, that Cutts out all
the Work, and stands at or walks before the Door, and saies, what d’ye’
lack Sir, what d’ye buy Madam.

_Clicket_, Copulation of Foxes, and sometimes, used waggishly for that of
Men and Women.

_Clinker_, c. a crafty Fellow.

_Clinkers_, c. the Irons Felons wear in Goals.

_Clip_, to hug or embrace. _To clip and cling_, of a close hug or fast
embrace. _To Clip the Coin_, to diminish or Impair it. _To clip the
King’s English_, not to Speak Plain, when one’s Drunk.

_Clod-hopper_, c. a Plough-man.

_Clodpate_, a heavy, dull Fellow.

_Close_, reserv’d, silent, not talkative, or open.

_Close-confident_, a trusty Bosom-friend.

_Close-fisted_, covetous, stingy, pinching.

_Clotts_, or thick dropps of Bloud clottered or in clots.

_Cloud_, c. Tobacco. _Will ye raise a Cloud_, c. shall we Smoke a Pipe?

_Clouds_, or _Cloudy-Sky_, in opposition to clear open Sky; as _Clouds in
Gemms and Stones_, to clear ones; and _Clouded Fate_, to a clear pleasant
one. _Under a Cloud_, in disgrace, under misfortunes or disasters;
_Speaks in the Clouds_, of one that flies or soars in Talking above the
common reach or capacity.

_Cloudy_, dark complexion’d.

_Clout_, c. a Handkerchief.

_Cloy_, c. to Steal. _Cloy the Clout_, c. to Steal the Handkerchief.
_Cloy the Lour_, c. to Steal the Money; also, in another Sense, _to
Cloy_, is to Nauseate or Satiate.

_Cloyers_, c. Thieves, Robbers, Rogues.

_Cloying_, c. Stealing, Thieving, Robbing; also Fulsom or Satiating.

_Clowes_, c. Rogues.

_Clown_, a Country-Fellow, also one very Ill-bred or unmannerly, Being.

_Clownish_, rustical, unpolish’d, uncouth.

_Club_, each Man’s particular Shot, also a Society of Men agreeing to
meet according to a Scheme of Orders under a slight Penalty to promote
Trade and Friendship.

_Cluck_, the noise made by Hens, when they set upon their Eggs to Hatch
and are disturb’d, or come off to Eat, and also when they wou’d have Eggs
put under them for that purpose.

_Clump_, a Heap or Lump.

_Clunch_, a clumsy Clown, an awkward or unhandy Fellow.

_Clutch the Fist_, or close the Hand, whence _Clutches_. I’ll keep out of
your Clutches or Claws; _the Clutches of the Parish_, the Constable or
Beadle.

_Clutchfisted_, the same as Closefisted.

_Clutter_, Stir. _What a Clutter you keep?_ What a stir you make?

_Cly_, c. Money. _To Cly the Jerk_, c. to be Whipt. _Let’s strike his
Cly_, c. let’s get his Money from him; also a Pocket, _Filed a cly_, c.
Pickt a Pocket.

  _Coach-wheel_, { _Fore_ { _Half a Crown._
                 { _Hind_ { _A Crown or Five Shilling-Piece._

_Coals to Newcastle_ when the Drawer carries away any Wine in the Pot or
Bottle. _To blow the Coals_, to raise differences between Parties. _He’ll
carry no Coals_, not be Pissed upon, or Imposed upon, nor bear a Trick,
or take an Affront, or tamely pass by any ill Treatment. _Let him that
has need blow the Coals_, Let him Labour that wants.

_Cob_, a Dollar (in _Ireland_.)

_Cobble_, to mend or patch.

_Cobbled_, bunglingly done.

_Cobble-colter_, c. a Turkey. _A rum Cobble-colter_, c. a fat large
Cock-Turkey.

_Cobweb-cheat_, easily found out.

_Cobweb-pretence_, slight, trivial, weak.

_Cock-a-hoop_, upon the high Ropes Rampant, Transported.

_Cockish_, wanton uppish, forward.

_Cockale_, pleasant Drink, said to be provocative.

_Cock-baw’d_, a Man that follows that base Employment.

_Cocker_, one skill’d in, or much delighted with the sport of
Cock-fighting.

_Cockney_, Born within the Sound of Bow-bell; (in _London_) also one
ignorant in Country Matters.

_Cock-oyster_, the Male.

_Cock pimp_, a Supposed Husband to a Bawd.

_Cock-robbin_, a soft easy Fellow.

_Cock-sure_, very Sure.

_Cod_, a good sum of Money; also a Fool. _A meer Cod_, a silly, shallow
Fellow. _A rum Cod_, c. a good round sum of Money. _A jolly or lusty
Cod_, c. the same. _An honest Cod_, a trusty Friend.

_Codders_, gatherers of Peascods.

_Cod’s Head_, a Fool.

_Codsounds_, the Pith or Marrow in the Cod’s Back, esteem’d as choice
Peck.

_Cofe_, c. as Cove.

_Cog_, to cheat at Dice, _Cog a Die_, to conceal or secure a Die; also
the Money or whatever the _Sweetners_ drop to draw in the Bubbles; also
to wheedle, as _Cog a Dinner_, to wheedle a Spark out of a Dinner.

_Cogue_, of Brandy, a small Cup or Dram.

_Coker_, c. a Lye, _rum Coker_, c. a whisking Lye.

_Cokes_, the Fool in the Play, or Bartholomew-Fair, and hence (perhaps)
Coxcomb.

_Cold_, shy, or averse to Act.

_Cold-Tea_, Brandy. _A couple of cold words_, a Curtain-Lecture.
_Cold-Iron_, Derisory Periphrasis for a Sword. _In cold Blood_, when the
heat of War, or Passion are over. _The Matter will keep cold_, it will
stay a while, and not be the worse for keeping.

_Cole_, c. Money.

_Coliander-seed_, c. Money.

_Collation_, a Treat or Entertainment.

_College_, c. Newgate; also the Royal Exchange.

_Collegiates_, c. those Prisoners and Shop-keepers.

_Collogue_, wheedle.

_Colquarron_, c. a Man’s Neck.

_Colt_, c. an Inn-keeper that lends a Horse to a Highway-man, or to
Gentlemen Beggers; also a Lad newly bound Prentice.

_Coltish_, said when an old Fellow is frolicksom or wanton; or he has a
Colt’s Tooth.

_Colt bowl_, laid short of the Jack by a

_Colt bowler_, a raw or unexperienc’d Person.

_Colt-veal_, very red.

_Come_, c. to Lend. _Has he come it?_ c. has he lent it you?

_Comical_, very pleasant, or diverting.

_Coming-women_, such as are free of their Flesh; also breeding Women.

_Commission_, c. a Shirt.

_Commode_, a Woman’s Head-dress, easily put on, and as soon taken off.

_Common garden-gout_, or rather Covent-garden, the Pox.

_Common Women_, Whores, Plyers in the Streets and at Bawdy-Houses.

_Complement_, the Ship’s or Regiment’s compleat Number or Company.

_Comfortable Importance_, a Wife.

_Conceited_, a Self-lover, and Admirer, Wise in his own Opinion.

_Coney-sitteth_.

_Confect_, c. Counterfeit.

_Conger_, a Set or Knot of Topping Book-sellers of _London_, who agree
among themselves, that whoever of them Buys a good Copy, the rest are to
take off such a particular number, as (it may be) Fifty, in Quires, on
easy Terms. Also they that joyn together to Buy either a Considerable, or
Dangerous Copy. And a great over-grown Sea-Eel.

_Conjurers_, _Astrologers_, _Physiognomists_, _Chiromancers_, and the
whole Tribe of Fortune-tellers, by the common People (Ignorantly) so
called.

_Consent_, Leave, Approbation, Agreement. _Affected by Consent_, as one
Sore Eye infects the other, (unseen) because they are both strung with
one Optic Nerve: As in two Strings set to an Unison, upon the Touch of
One, the other will Sound.

_Consult of Physicians_, Two, or more.

_Content_, a thick Liquor, made up in Rolls in imitation of Chocolate,
Sold in some Coffee-Houses.

_Contre-temps_, making a Pass or Thrust without any advantage, or to no
purpose.

_Convenient_, c. a Mistress; also a Whore.

_Conveniency_, c. a Wife; also a Mistress.

_Conundrums_, Whimms, Maggots, and such like.

_Cony_, a silly Fellow, _a meer Cony_, very silly indeed.

_Cook-ruffin_, c. the Devil of a Cook, or a very bad one.

_Cool-crape_, a slight Chequer’d Stuff made in imitation of Scotch Plad.

_Cooler_, a Woman.

_Cool-Lady_, a Wench that sells Brandy (in Camps).

_Cool nantz_, Brandy.

_Cool Tankard_, Wine and Water, with a Lemon, Sugar and Nutmeg.

_Copper-nos’d_, extremely Red.

_Coquet_, a flippant, pert Gossip.

_Corky-brain’d_ Fellow, silly, foolish.

_Corinthian_, a very impudent, harden’d, brazen-fac’d Fellow.

_Cornish-hug_, a hard gripe, or squeeze.

_Corn-jobber_, an Enhancer of the Price, by early buying, monopolizing,
and sharp tricks. _A great Harvest of a little Corn_, a great adoe in a
little Matter. _He measures my Corn by his own Bushel_, _he muses as he
uses_, he thinks me Bad because he is so himself.

_Cornuted_, made a Cuckold of.

_Corny-fac’d_, a very Red or Blue pimpled Phiz.

_Cosset_, a Fondling Child.

_Cosset-Colt or Lamb_, brought up by Hand, made Tame, and used to follow
any Body about the House.

_Costard_, the Head, _I’ll give ye a knock on the Costard_, I’ll hit ye
a blow on the Pate.

_Coster-monger_, a Wholesale Dealer in Apples, Pears, _&c._

_Cot_ for _Cotquean_, a Man that meddles with Womens matters.

_Cotton_, _they don’t cotton_, they don’t agree well.

_Cote_, a sorry, slight Country-House or Hovel, now a _Cottage_. Hence
the Compounds yet in use, of _Dove-cote_, _Sheep-cote_, &c.

_Couchee_, going to Bed _I was at Court at the Couchee_, I attended the
King at his going to Bed.

_Couch a Hogs-head_, c. to go to Bed.

_Cove_, c. a Man, a Fellow, also a Rogue. _The Cove was bit_, c. the
Rogue was out-sharp’d or out-witted. _The Cove has bit the Cole_, c. The
Rogue has Stolen the Money. _The Cove’s a rum Diver_, c. that Fellow is a
cleaver Pick-pocket.

_Covey of Whores_, a well fill’d Bawdy-house; also of _Partridges_, a
Nest or Brood.

_Counterfeit-cranks_, c. the Twentieth Rank or Order of the Canting Tribe.

_Counterfeit_, a Cheat Or Impostor. _A Counterfeiter of Hands_, a Forger.
_A Counterfeiter of Persons_, a Sham. _Counterfeit Gemms or Jewels_,
Bristol-stones. Counterfeits, for the most part exceed the Truth. Thus a
Flatterer pleases more than a Friend; a Braggadochio-coward thunders more
than a Hero; a Mountebank promises more than a Doctor, and a Hypocrite
over-acts a Religious Man, as a Counterfeit Gem is often fairer than a
True one.

_Country-put_, a silly Country-Fellow.

_Couped up_, Imprison’d, Environ’d, Surrounded Pent up.

_Court-promises_, fair Speeches, or empty Promises without performances.
Much the same with Court-holy-water. _Court-card_, a gay fluttering
Fellow. _Court-tricks_, State-Policy.

_Course_, or rather

_Coarse_, homely, ord’nary, oppos’d to fine; as _Coarse treatment_,
rough or rude Dealing; _Coarse fare_, homely Food; _a Coarse Dish_, a
mean one; _Coarse or Hard-Favor’d_, oppos’d to Fair or Handsom. _Of
Course_ of Custom; _out of Course_, extraordinary, or out of the way;
_a Horse-Course_ a Race, also the place where the Race is Run. _A
Water-course_, a Drain. _Course of Law_, the proceedings, at Law, _The
Law must have its Course_, or run freely. _I’ll take a Course with you_,
I’ll hamper ye, or stick close on your Skirts. _A Course of Physick_,
an Order or set Constitution of Physick, for a continuance or course
of time. _Course of the Sun_, _Yearly or Daily_, a Yearly or Daily
Revolution, _Course of the Moon_, the Circle of a Month.

_Court-holy-water_, Court Promises.

_Cow-hearted_, fearful or Hen-hearted.

_Cows-thumb_, when a thing is done exactly, nicely, or to a Hair.

_Cows-baby_, a Calf.

_Coxcomb_, a Fool; _a silly Coxcomb_, a very foolish Fellow.

_Crabbed_, sower, churls.

  _Crab-lice_, { Cock, Male.  } Vermin breeding in Moist and Hairy Parts
               { Hen, Female. }   of the Body.

_Crack_, c. a Whore.

_Cracker_, c. an Arse; also Crust.

_Crackish_, c. Whorish.

_Cracking_, Boasting, Vaporing. _Crackt credit_, Lost, Gone. Broken.
_Crackt-title_, Unsound _Crackt-brains_, lost Wits.

_Crackmans_, c. Hedges.

_Cramped_, a weight with a string tied to one’s Toe, when a Sleep, much
used by School-boies, one to another; also obstructed or hampered in any
Business whatever.

_Crag_, a Neck; also a Rock.

_Cramp-rings_, c. Bolts or Shackles.

_Cramp-words_, difficult or uncommon.

_Crank_, brisk, pert.

_Cranksided-ship_, that does not bear Sail well.

_Cranked-shells_ or _Stones_, wrinkled or wreathed.

_Crap_, c. Money. _Nim the Crap_, c. to Steal the Money. _Wheedle for
Crap_, c. to coakse Money out of any Body.

_Crash_, c. to Kill.

_Crash the Cull_, c. Kill the Fellow.

_Crashing-cheats_, c. Teeth.

_Craz’d_, Mad.

_Crazy_, infirm or distemper’d.

_Creatures_, Men raised by others, and their _Tools_ ever after.

_Creeme_, to slip or slide any thing into another’s Hand.

_Crew_, the Coxon and Rowers in the Barge, or Pinnace, are called the
_Boats-crew_, in distinction from the Complement of Men on Board the
Ship, who are term’d the _Ships-company_, not _Crew_; also an ill Knot or
Gang, as a _Crew of Rogues_.

_Crimp_, one that undertakes for, or agrees to unlade a whole Ship of
Coals. _To play Crimp_, to lay or bet on one side, and (by foul play)
to let t’other win, having a share of it. _Run a Crimp_, to run a Race
or Horse-match fouly or knavishly. _He Crimps it_, he plays booty. _A
Crimping Fellow_, a sneaking Cur.

_Crinkums_, the French Pox.

_Crispin_, a Shoe-maker, from the St. of that Name, their Patron.

_Crispin’s Holy-day_, ev’ry Munday in the Year, but more particularly the
Twenty fifth of _October_, whereon the whole Fraternity fail not to lay
they Hearts in Soak.

_Crochets_ in the crown, whimsies, Maggots.

_Crockers_, Forestallers, Regraters, see _Badgers_.

_Croker_, c. a Groat or Four-pence. _The Cull tipt me a Croker_, c. the
Fellow gave me a Groat.

_Crony_, a Camerade or intimate Friend; _an old Crony_, one of long
standing; used also for a tough old Hen.

_Crop_, one with very short Hair; also a Horse whose Ears are Cut.

_Crop-ear’d-Fellow_, whose Hair is so short it won’t hide his Ears.

_Croppin-ken_, c. a Privy, or Bog-house.

_Crop-sick_, Stomack-sick.

_Crossbite_, c. to draw in a Friend, yet snack with the Sharper.

_Crosspatch_, a peevish froward Person.

_Crotiles_, Hares Excrements.

_Crow-over_, to insult or domineer. _To pluck a Crow with one_, to have
a bout with him. _Strut like a Crow in a Gutter_, said in jeer of the
Stalking of a proud Fellow. _The Crow thinks her own Bird the Fairest_,
applied to those that dote on their foul issues. _As good Land as any
the Crow Flies over_, with regard it may be, to the Crow’s being a long
Liver; as _no Carrion will kill a Crow_, to his being so hardy a Bird.

_Crowder_, a Fidler.

_Crown_, the top of the Head or Hat; Imperial or Regal Crown. _Where the
Earth is raised_ it is said, to be Crown’d with Hills, in Poetry. _The
End Crowns all_, said both of the Event of Actions, and Finishing of
Works. _In the Crown-Office_, Drunk; also _to Crown_, to pour on the Head.

_Cruisers_, c. Beggers; also nimble Friggats Coasting to and fro for
Prizes, and to carry Orders, _&c._

_Crump_, c. one that helps Sollicitors to _Affidavit-men_, and
_Swearers_, and _Bail_, who for a small Sum will be Bound or Swear for
any Body; on that occasion, putting on good Cloaths to make a good
appearance, that Bail may be accepted.

_Crump-back’d_, Crooked or Huncht-backt.

_Crumplings_, wrinkled Codlings, usually the least, but sweetest.

_Crusty-beau_, one that lies with a Cover over his Face all Night, and
uses Washes, Paint, _&c._

_Cub_, or _young Cub_, c. a new Gamester drawn in to be rookt; also a
young Bear, a Fox, and a Martern the first Year.

_Cucumbers_, Taylers.

_Cucumber-time_, Taylers Holiday, when they have leave to Play, and
Cucumbers are in season.

_Cudgelliers_, a Mob rudely arm’d; also Cudgel-Players.

_Cuffin_, c. a Man.

_Cuffin-quire_, c. see Quire-cuffin.

_Culp_, a kick, or blow, also a bit of any thing.

_Culp of the Gutts_, (Suffolk) a hearty kick at the Belly.

_Cull_, _Cully_, c. a Man, a Fop, a Rogue, a Fool or silly Creature that
is easily drawn in and Cheated by Whores or Rogues. _Cully napps us_,
c. the Person Robb’d, apprehends us. _A Bob-cull_, c. a sweet-humour’d
Man to a Whore, and who is very Complaisant. _A Curst-cull_, c. an
ill-natur’d Fellow, a Churl to a Woman.

_Culm_, the small or dust of Sea-coal.

_Cunning-shaver_, a sharp Fellow.

_Cup-shot_, Drunk.

_Cup of Comfort_, as

_Cup of the Creature_, Strong-liquor. _A Cup too low_, when any of
the Company are mute or pensive. _To carry one’s Cup even between two
Parties_, to be equal and indifferent, between them. _Many things fall
out between the Cup and the Lip_, or many things intervene between the
forming and accomplishing a Design.

_Cur_, a Dog of a mungrel Breed, good for nothing.

_Curle_, c. Clippings of Money.

_Currish-fellow_, snapping, snarling.

_Curmudgeon_, an old Covetous Fellow, a Miser.

_Currant-coyn_, good and Lawful Money. _Currant Custom_, a received
custom, the

_Current_, Stream; also humor or bent of the People.

_Cursitors_, c. Vagabonds; the first (old) Rank of Canters.

_Curst_, _a curst Cur_, a sower, surly, snarling, fierce Dog; a Curst Cow
has short Horns.

_Curtals_, c. the Eleventh Rank of the Canting Crew.

_Curtail’d_, cut off, shorten’d.

_Curtezan_, a gentile fine Miss or Quality Whore.

_Curtain-Lecture_, Womens impertinent Scolding at their Husbands.

_Cushion_, _beside the Cushion_, beside the Mark.

_Cut_, Drunk. _Deep Cut_, very Drunk. _Cut in the Leg or Back_, very
drunk. _To Cut_, c. to Speak. _To Cut bene_, c. to Speak gently, civilly
or kindly; _to Cut bene_ (or _bennar_) _Whidds_, c. to give good Words.
_To Cut quire whidds_, c. to give ill Language. _A Cut_ or _Chop_ of
Meat. _Cut and come again_, of Meat that cries come Eat me. _A cutting
wind_, very sharp. _Of the precize Cut or Stamp_, a demure starcht
Fellow. _No Present to be made of Knives, because they Cut kindness.
Ready Cut and Dried, or turned for the purpose._ _Not Cut out for it_,
nor turned for it. _To Cut another out of any business_, to out-doe
him far away, or excell, or circumvent. _I’ll cut you out business_,
I’ll find you Work enough. A Book with Cuts or Figures; Brass or Wooden
Cutts or Prints from Copper-plates, or Wood. _A Cut throat House or
Town_, where sharp and Large Reckonings are imposed, as at _Gravesend_,
_Deal_, _Dover_, _Portsmouth_, _Plimouth_, _Harwich_, _Helvoetsluyce_,
the _Briel_, and indeed all _Sea-ports_, nay and _Common-wealths_ too,
according to the observation of a late Learned Traveller in his ingenious
Letters publish’d in _Holland_.


D

_Dab_, c. expert exquisite in Roguery; a Rum-dab, c. a very Dextrous
fellow at fileing, thieving, Cheating, Sharping, _&c._ _He is a Dab at
it_, He is well vers’d in it.

_Dablers_, in Poetry, meer Pretenders.

_Dace_, c. Two-pence, Tip me a _Dace_. c. Lend Two-pence, or pay so much
for me.

_Dag_, a Gun.

_Draggle-tail_, a nasty dirty Slut.

_Damask the Claret_, Put a roasted Orange slasht smoking hot in it.

_Damber_, c. a Rascal.

_Damme-boy_, a roaring mad, blusttring fellow, a Scourer of the Streets.

_Dancers_, c. Stairs.

_Dandyprat_, a little puny Fellow.

_Dangle_, to hang.

_Dapper-fellow_, a short, pert, brisk, tidy Fellow.

_Darby_, c. ready Money.

_Darbies_, c. Irons, Shackles or Fetters.

_Darkmans_, c. The night, _The Child of darkness_, c. a Bell-man.

_Darkmans-Budge_, c. a House-creeper, one that slides into a House in the
dusk, to let in more Rogues to rob.

_Dash_, a Tavern-Drawer. _A dash of Gentian, Wormwood, or stale Beer_, a
slight touch or tincture of each, _to dash or brew_ as Vintners jumble
their Wines together, when they sophisticate them. _A dash of Rain_, a
sudden, short, impetuous pouring down, to distinguish it from a soft
Shower, or a sprinkling of Rain.

_Dastard_, a Coward.

_Dawn_, Day-break or peep of Day, as the Dusk is twilight or shadow of
the Evening. _One may see day at a little hole, or discover the Lyon by
his Paw._

_Dawbing_, bribing; also ill painting or thick laying on of Colours:
Hence _bedawb’d with Gold or Silver-Lace_, when it is laid thick or close
on.

_Dead Cargo_, not a quarter or half freighted. _To wait for dead mens
shoes_, for what is little worth, or may never come to pass. _To play or
work for a dead horse_, for a trifle.

_Dead-men_, empty-Pots or bottles on a Tavern-table.

_Dear Joies_, Irishmen.

_Debauchee_, a Rake-hel.

_Decayed Gentleman or Tradesman_, broken.

_Deckt-out_, tricked up in fine Cloaths.

_Decus_, c. a Crown or five shilling-piece. _The Cull tipt me a score of
Decuses_, c. my Camerade lent me five Pounds.

_Deft-Fellow_, a tidy, neat little Man.

_Defunct_, dead and gone.

_Degen_, c. a Sword. _Nimm the Degen_, c. steal the Sword, or whip it
from the Gentleman’s Side.

_Deists_, against the Trinity.

_Dells_, c. the twenty sixth order of the canting Tribe; young bucksome
Wenches, ripe and prone to Venery, but have not lost their Virginity,
which the _upright man_ pretends to, and seizes: Then she is free for any
of the Fraternity; also a common Strumpet.

_Dequarting_, throwing of the left Foot and Body backwards.

_Dergin_, a very short Man or Woman.

_Desperate Fellow_, fit for any lewd Prank or Villany, _desperate
condition_, without any hopes.

_Devil drawer_, a sory Painter.

_Deuseavile_, c. the Country.

_Deuseavile-Stampers_, c. Country-Carriers.

_Dews wins_, c. two Pence.

_Dewitted_, cut in pieces, as that great Statesman _John de Witt_, was
in Holland Anno 1672. by the Mob.

_Diamond cut Diamond_, bite the Biter.

_Dibble_, a poaking Stick to set Beans with.

_Die like a Dog_, to be hang’d, the worst Employment a Man can be put to.
_Die on a Fish-day, or in his shoes_ the same, _die like a Rat_. To be
poysoned.

_Dig the Badger_, dislodge him.

_Dimber_, c. pretty.

_Dimber-cove_, a pretty Fellow.

_Dim-mort_, c. a pretty Wench.

_Dimber-Damber_, c. a Top-man or Prince among the Canting Crew; also the
chief Rogue of the Gang, or the compleatest Cheat.

_Dimple_, a small graceful dent in the Chin called in Ignoramus, Loves
pretty Dimple.

_Din_, c. what a din you keep! what a noise you make!

_Dine with Duke Humphrey_, to go without a Dinner.

_Ding_, c. to knock down. _Ding the Cull_, c. knock down the Fellow.

_Ding-boy_, c. a Rogue, a Hector, a Bully, Sharper.

_Ding-dong_, helter-skelter.

_Dint_, edge or force _dint of the sword_, edge of the Sword, _dint of
argument_, force or power of Argument.

_Dippers_, Ana-baptists.

_Dipt_, engag’d or in debt, Land pawn’d or mortgag’d. _Damnably dipt_,
deep in debt, _He has dipt his Terra firma_, he has mortgaged his dirty
Acres. _He has dipt his Bill_, he is almost drunk. _The cull has dipt his
Tol_, c. the Spark has pawn’d his Sword. _The Dell has dipt her Rigging_,
c. the Whore has pawn’d her Cloaths.

_Dirty Acres_, an Estate in Land.

_Dirty Beau_, a slovenly Fellow, yet pretending to Beauishness.

_Dirty puzzle_, a sorry Slattern or Slut.

_Disaffection_, a disorder of any part of the Body. _Disaffected to the
State._ Malecontents or factious.

_Disgruntled_, disobliged or distasted.

_Disingenuous, or indirect dealing_, oppos’d to dealing on the Square.

_Disguis’d_, drunkish.

_Dismal ditty_, a Psalm at the Gallows; also a dull Ballad, or silly Song.

_Dive_, c. to pick a Pocket.

_Diver_, c. a Pick-pocket.

_Doash_, c. a cloak.

_Dock_, c. to lie with a Woman. _The Cull Dockt the Dell in the Darkmans_
the Rogue lay with a Wench all night.

_Doctor_, c. a false Die that will run but two or three Chances. _They
put the Doctor upon him_, c. they cheated him with false Dice.

_Dog’d_, follow’d close, way-laid. _Agree like Dog and Cat_, of those
that are at variance. _Every Dog will have his day_, none so wretched but
has his good Planet. _An easy thing to find a Stick to beat a Dog_, or it
costs little to trouble those that cannot help themselves. _It is an ill
Dog is not worth the whistling after_; or spare to speak spare to speed.
_He play’d me a Dog-trick_, he did basely and dirtily by me.

_Dogged_, Sullen, pouting, or in the Dumps.

_Doggrel_, a Term for the meanest and basest Verse; such as Ballads,
_Bellmens-songs_, and the like _Meeter_ of _snow hill_.

_Doit_, half a Farthing. Dutch Money, eight to a Penny, _not a doit
left_, he has spent all.

_Doll_, a wooden Block to make up Commodes upon, also a Child’s Baby.

_Doltish_, c. Foolish.

_Dolthead_, a Fool.

_Domerars_, c. Rogues, pretending to have had their Tongues cut out,
or to be born dumb and deaf, who artificially turning the tip of their
Tongues, into their Throat, and with a stick makeing it bleed, weak
people think it the stump of their Tongue; one of whom being askt hastily
_how long he had been dumb?_ answer’d _but three weeks_, this is the
twenty first Order of Canters, the Word also signifing Mad-men.

_Dotard_, An old drowsy Fellow come to Dotage.

_Doudy_, An ugly coarse hard favored Woman. _She is a meer Doudy_ that
is, very ugly.

_Dover court_, all Speakers and no Hearers.

_Down hills_, c. Dice that run low.

_Doxies_, c. She-beggers, Trulls, Wenches. Whores, the twenty fifth
Rank of _Canters_; being neither, Maids, Wives, nor Widdows, will for
good Victuals, or a very small piece of money prostitute their Bodies,
protesting they never did so before, and that meer necessity then oblig’d
them to it (tho’ common Hackneys). These are very dextrous at picking
Pockets (in the action) and so barbarous as often to murder the Children
thus got.

_Drab_, a Whore, or Slut, a _Dirty drab_, a very nasty Slut.

_Drag_, a Fox’s Tail.

_Dragg’d_, _through the Horse-pond_ or _Bog-house_. Bailives and
Sergeants are served so that presume to arrest any Body within the Verge
of the Court-royal, or Precincts of the Inns of Court.

_Dragg’d up_, as the _Rakes_ call it, educated or brought up.

_Dray_, of Squirrels.

_Drawers_, c. Stockings.

_Drawing_, Beating the Bushes after the Fox.

_Draw-Litches_, c. the fourth (old) Order of the Canting Tribe of Rogues.

_Drawling in Speech_, or _dreaming of Speech_ when the Words are drawn
out at length, and keep as great a distance from one another, as if they
were not all of a Company.

_Dreaming Fellow_, a dull, drowsy, heavy Creature. _Drift_, Design, Aim,
Intent.

_Drill_, to draw in, and entice by degrees; also boring of Pearl.

_Dripper_, a sort of Clap, or venereal gleating.

_Dripping-weather_, the same with dropping.

_Dromedary_, c. a Thief or Rogue, also a kind of Camel with two bunches
on his Back. _You are a purple Dromedary_, c. You are a Bungler or a dull
Fellow at thieving.

_Drommerars_, c. see Domerars.

_Droppers_, c. Sweetners.

_Drop a cog_, c. to let fall (with design to draw in and cheat) a Piece
of Gold; also the piece it self.

_Drop-in-his-eye_, almost drunk.

_Droop_, to fall away, to pine, to break with Age or Infirmity, _a
drooping bird_ that hangs the Wing.

_Drovers_, Horse-leaders in Fairs, or Markets, and Graziers or Drivers of
Beasts.

_Drub_, beat with a stick or Cable-end.

_Drudge_, or rather _dredge_, the way of catching Oysters; also a
laborious Person.

_Drumbelo_, a dull heavy Fellow. _A meer drumbelo_, a very Slug.

_Drunk with a continuando_, de die in diem.

_Dry blows_, or _dry-basting_ for Rib roasting.

_Dry-bob_, a smart or sharp Repartee.

_Dry-boots_, a sly, close cunning Fellow.

_Dry-drinking_, without a bit of Victuals. _Dry-wine_, a little rough
upon, but very grateful to the Palate.

_Dry youth_, sharp, close, witty.

_Dub_, c. a Pick-lock-key.

_Dub, the Giger_, c. open the Door. _We’ll strike it upon the dub_, c. we
will rob that Place.

_Dubber_, c. a Picker of Locks.

_Dub’d_, Knighted.

_A Duce_, c. two Pence.

_Duck-leggs_, short-leggs.

_Dudds_, c. Cloaths or Goods. _Rum dudds_, c. fine or rich cloaths or
Goods.

_Dudd, Cheats wonne._ c. Cloaths and things stolen. _Abram Cove has
wonne (or bit) Rum dudds._ c. the poor Fellow has stolen very costly
Cloaths.

_Dudgeon_, Anger, Quarrel, Displeasure.

_Duke of Exeter’s Daughter_, a Rack in the Tower of London, to torture
and force Confession; supposed to be introduced by him, sometimes
(formerly) now not in use.

_Dullard_, a heavy dull stupid Fellow.

_Dulpickle_, the same.

_Dum-found_, to beat soundly. _I dumfounded the sawcy Rascal_, I bang’d
his Back tightly. _In the dumps_, troubled, chagrin, melancholic.

_Dunaker_, c. a Cow-stealer.

_Duncarring_, Buggering.

_Dunner_, a Sollicitor for Debts.

_Dunn’d_, teiz’d, or much importun’d.

_Dunder head_, a dull heavy Creature.

_Dundering Rake_, a thundering Rake, or of the Rank, one develishly lewd.

_Dup_, c. to enter, or open the door, _dup the ken_, c. enter the House,
_dup the boozing ken and booz a gage_, c. go into the Ale-house and drink
a Pot.

_Durance_, a Prison.

_Durk_, a short Dagger, in use with the _Scots_, as Stilletto is with the
_Italians_.

_Dusk_, or Twilight, the shadow of the Evening, as Dawn is Daybreak or
peep of Day.

_Dust_, money, _down with your Dust_, deposit your Money, pay your
Reckoning. Also in another sence, _dust it away_ drink quick about.

_Dutchified_, in the Dutch Interest, or of that Faction.

_Dutch-Reckoning_, or _Alte-mall_, a verbal or Lump-account without
particulars.


E

_Eager_, warm, or earnest in Debate; also sharp Liquors, as hard Beer,
Wine turned soure, &c. Hence the Compounds, Vinegar, Alegar.

_Eagle_, c. the winning Gamester.

_Earnest_, c. Part or Share. _Tip me my earnest_, c. give me my Snack or
Dividend.

_Easy_, facil, supple, pliable, managable. _He is an easy fellow_, very
silly or soft, _an easy mort_, c. a forward or coming wench.

_Ebb-water_, c. when there’s but little Money in the Pocket.

_Edge-tools_, as Scythes, Swords, and such as are set or ground, as
Razors. Knives, Scissors, Sheers, &c. to distinguish them from flat
Tools and Tongs, _&c._ _’tis ill jesting with Edged tools_ or trusting
unexpert Men with dangerous things. _Fall back fall edge_ or come what
will.

_Effort_, an Endeavour or Proffer, a _Weak Effort_, an Offer in vain.

_Egge one on_, to prick him on, to provoke or stir him up. _He’ll be
glad to take Eggs for his money_, or to compound the matter with Loss.
_You come in with your five Eggs a penny, and four of ’em addle_, of
a Pragmatical Prater, or Busi-body, that wasts many Words to little
purpose. _To leave a Nest-egg_, to have alwaies a Reserve to come again.
_As sure as Eggs be Eggs._ When nothing is so sure. _As full of Roguery
as an Egg is full, of Meat._

_Elbow-grease_, a derisory Term for Sweat. _It will cost nothing but a
little Elbow-grease_; in a jeer to one that is lazy, and thinks much of
his Labour. _Who is at your Elbow?_ a Caution to a Lyer. _He lives by
shaking of the Elbow_; a Gamester.

_Elonge_, to stretch forward the right Arm and Leg, and to keep a close
Left-foot.

_Elevated_, pufft up; also raised to Honour, Dignity, _&c._ _Above the
common Elevation_, above the common Level.

_Eminence_, a Rising opposed to a flat Ground, _rais’d to an Eminence of
pitch of greatness; to make a figure, or be a Man of mark in the World_,
i. e. to be conspicuous, as a City set on a Hill cannot be hid. _His
Eminence_, the Title given to a Cardinal.

_Empty-fellow_, Silly.

_Empty-skull’d_, Foolish.

_Empty-talk_, silly, idle vain Discourse, more Noise then Sense.

_Ends_, Aim, Design, Drift, and variously used in composition as,
_Candle-ends_, _Ends of gold and silver_, Shreds of either. _Cable-ends_,
_finger-ends_ for extremity or utmost part of either. _’Tis good to make
both Ends meet_, or to cut your Coat according to your Cloth. Every thing
has an End, and a Pudding has two.

_English-cane_, an oaken Plant.

_English Manufacture_, Ale, Beer, or Syder.

_Ensnaring Questions_, Interrogatories laid to trap and catch one.

_Entries_, where the Deer have lately passed the thickets.

_Epicurean_, one that indulges himself, nice of Palate, very curious and
a critick in eating.

_Equip_, c. to furnish one.

_Equipt_, c. rich; also having new Clothes. _Well equipt_, c. plump in
the Pocket, or very full of Money; also very well drest. _The Cull equipt
me with a brace of Meggs_, c. the Gentleman furnish’d me with a couple of
Guineas.

_Eriffs_, Canary-birds two years old.

_Evasion_, a Shift, sly or indirect Answer.

_Eves-drop_, to be an

_Eves-dropper_, one that skulks, lurks at or lies under his Neighbor’s
Window or Door.

_Ewe_ or _the White Ewe_, c. a Top-woman among the Canting Crew, very
Beautiful.

_Execution-day_, Washing-day; also that on which the Malefactors Die.

_Exigence_, a special or extraordinary occasion, a pinch.

_Expedient_, a ready shift or trick to deliver one from any difficulty,
or danger near at hand.

_Ey_, of Pheasants, the whole Brood of young ones.

_Eye-sore_, an Annoyance, whatever is grievous or offensive, an unwelcome
dish or guest. _All that you get you may put in your Eye and see ne’er
the worse_, a pleasant Periphrasis or Round of Words, for getting nothing
at all. ’Tis good to have an Eye to the main Chance, or look to your
Hits. What the Eye ne’er sees the Heart ne’er rues: Or out of Sight, out
of Mind.


F

_Facer_, c. a Bumper without Lip-room.

_Face_, in Wine, the Colour. _A good Face_, a very fine bright Colour.
_To make a Face_, to make a show or feign; also to wryth, contract or
distort the Face in Contempt or Derision. _To set a good Face upon a bad
Cause, or Matter_, to make the best of it. _A good Face needs no Band_,
or no advantage to set it off. _The Broad-fac’d Bird, or the Bird that is
all Face under Feathers_, a Periphrasis for an Owl. _Face about to the
Right or Left_, turn about. _To Face Danger_, to meet it. _Facing of the
Sleeve_, the Turn-up.

_Facetious_, full of Merry Tales and Jests, pleasantly merry.

_Factitious_, Bodies made by Art, as Glass, Paper, and all Compound or
made Metals, as Brass, Steel, Pewter, Latin _&c._

_Fadge_, it won’t fadge or doe.

_Fag_, c. to Beat.

_Fag’d_, c. Beaten.

_Fag the Bloss_, c. bang the Wench.

_Fag the Fen_, c. drub the Whore.

_Faggot the Culls_, c. Bind the Men.

_Faggots_, Men Muster’d for Souldiers, not yet Listed.

_Fair Roe-Buck_, the Fifth Year.

_Fair Speech_, or fine Words. _Fair-spoken_, or Courteous. _A Fair Day_,
or Fair Weather. _Fair in the Cradle, and foul in the Saddle_, a pretty
Boy, and a hard-favor’d Man. _Soft and Fair goes far_; or not more Haste
than good Speed. _Fair and far off_; wide of the Mark. _You have made a
Fair Speech_, said in derision of one that spends many Words to little
purpose. _A Fair or Market for Beasts._ _A Day after the Fair_, a Day too
late, of one that has out-stayed his Markets.

_Fall-a-bord_, fall on and Eat heartily.

_Fallacies_, Cheats, Tricks, Deceipts.

_Falter_, to fail or more particularly a failure, or Trip of the Tongue,
entangled with the Palsy, produced also from excess of Drink, or Guilt.

_Famms_, c. Hands.

_Fambles_, c. Hands.

_Famble-cheats_, c. Gold-rings, or Gloves.

_Famgrasp_, c. to agree or make up a Difference. _Famgrasp the Cove_, c.
to agree with the Adversary.

_Family of Love_, Lewd Women, Whores; also a Sect.

_Fangs_, Beast-claws as Talons are of a Bird.

_Fanning_, or refreshing of the Trees or Woods with Wind. _Fanning_ or
refreshing of a Close Room, opening the Windows. _Fire-fanns_, little
Hand-Skreens for the Fire.

_Fantastick_, Whimsical, Freakish, or Capricious. _A Fantastick Dress_,
very particular, remarkable.

_Fardel_, a Bundle.

_Fardy_, for Ferdinando.

_Fare_, Hire; also a litter of Piggs.

_Farting-crackers_, c. Breeches.

_Fast-friends_, sure or trusty.

_Fastner_, c. a Warrant.

_Fastnesses_, Boggs.

_Fat_, the last landed, inned or stow’d of any sort of Merchandize
whatever, so called by the several Gangs of Water-side-Porters, _&c._

_Fat Cull_, c. a rich Fellow. _All the Fat is in the Fire_, of a
miscarriage or shrewd Turn. _Change of Pasture makes Fat Calves_, of him
that thrives upon mending his Commons.

_Faulkner_, c. see Tumbler, first Part.

_Faytors_, c. the Second (old) Rank of the Canting Crew.

_Feat_, strange, odd.

_Feats of Activity_, exercise, or Agility of Body in Tumbling, turning
through a Hoop, Running, Leaping, Vaulting, Wrestling, Pitching of the
Bar, Quoiting, _&c._ or Slights of Hand, Tricks, Legerdemain, _&c._

_Feats of Chivalry_, Exploits of War, Riding the great Horse, Tilting,
Tournaments, Running at the Ring, _&c._

_Feather-bed-lane_, any bad Road, but particularly that betwixt
_Dunchurch_ and _Daintrie_. _He has a Feather in his Cap_, a Periphrasis
for a Fool. _Play with a Feather_, of things that are gamesom and full of
Play, as Kittens and Kids. _To Feather his Nest_, to enrich himself by
indirect means, or at the Expence of others. _Fine Feathers make fine
Birds_, Gay Cloaths make fine Folks.

_Feble_, the narrowest Part of the Sword-blade nearest the Point.

_Feinting, or Falsifying_, to deceive the Adversary, by pretending to
thrust in one Place, and really doing it in another.

_Fence_, c. to Spend or Lay out. _Fence his Hog_, c. to Spend his
Shilling. _A Fence_, c. a Receiver and Securer of Stolen-goods.

_Fencing Cully_, c. a Broker, or Receiver of Stolen-goods.

_Fencing-ken_, c. the Magazine, or Ware-house, where Stolen-goods are
secured.

_Ferme_, c. a Hole.

_Fermerly Beggers_, c. all those that have not the Sham-sores or
_Cleymes_.

_Ferret_, c. a Tradesman that sells Goods to young Unthrifts, upon Trust
at excessive Rates.

_Ferreted_, c. Cheated; also driven out of Holes and lurking Places, and
hunted as Conies, by a little, Fierce, red-eyed Beast. Hence _Ferret
eyed_, or Eyes as red as a Ferret.

_Fetch_, a Trick or Wheedle. _A meer Fetch_, that is far fetched, or
brought in by Head and Shoulders.

_Fetids_, Vegetables, or Animals, rank and strong-scented; as Garlick,
Assa fœtida, _&c._ Pole-cats, Foxes, Goats, _&c._

_Fewmets_, Deers Excrements.

_Fib_, c. to beat; also a little Lie.

_Fib the Cove’s quarons in the Rum-pad, for the Lour in his Bung_, c.
Beat the Man in the High-way lustily for the Money in his Purse.

_Fickle_, mutable, or changeable, of many Minds in a short time.

_Fiddle_, c. a Writ to Arrest.

_Fiddle-faddle_, meer silly Stuff, or Nonsense; Idle, Vain Discourse.

_Fidlers-pay_, Thanks and Wine.

_Filch_, c. to Steal.

_Filchers_, c. Thieves, Robbers. _A good Filch_, c. a Staff, of Ash or
Hazel, with a Hole through, and a Spike at the bottom, to pluck Cloathes
from a Hedge or any thing out of a Casement.

_Filching-cove_, c. a Man-thief.

_Filching-mort_, c. a Woman-thief.

_File_, c. to Rob, or Cheat. _The File_, c. a Pick-pocket.

_Fine-mouth’d_, nice, dainty.

_Finical_, spruce, neat.

_Finify_, to trick up or dress sprucely.

_Fire-drakes_, Men with a Phenix for their Badge, in Livery, and Pay from
the _Insurance-Office_, to extinguish Fires, covering their Heads with
an Iron-pot, or Head-piece; also a Fiery Meteor, being a great unequal
Exhalation inflamed between a Hot and a Cold Cloud.

_Fire-ship_, a Pockey Whore.

_Fire-side_, a Health to the Wife and Children.

_Firkin of foul Stuff_, a very Homely coarse corpulent Woman.

_Fishing Bill_, in Chancery, to make what Discoveries may be. _Who Cries
Stinking Fish?_ or who dispraises his own Ware? _Good Fish when it is
Caught_, of what is not got so soon as reckoned upon. _All is Fish that
comes to Net_, of him that flies boldly at all Game. _I have other Fish
to Fry_, I am otherwise taken up, engag’d, or have other Business on my
Hands.

_Fixen_, a froward, peevish Child; also a She-Fox.

_Fizzle_, a little or low-sounding Fart.

_Flabby_, flimsy, not sound, firm or solid.

_Flagg_, c. a Groat; also a coarse rough Stone us’d in Paving. _To
Flagg_, to fall off, droop, decline, or fail; also to suspend or let fall
a Suit or Prosecution. _The Flag of Defiance is out_, (among the Tarrs)
the Fellow’s Face is very Red, and he is Drunk.

_Flam_, a Trick, or Sham-story.

_Flanderkin_, a very large Fat Man or Horse; also Natives of that Country.

_Flanders-fortunes_, of small Substance.

_Flanders-pieces_, Pictures that look fair at a distance, but coarser
near at Hand.

_Flapdragon_, a Clap or Pox.

_Flare_, to Shine or glare like a Comet or Beacon.

_Flash_, c. a Periwig. _Rum Flash_, c. a long, full, high-priz’d Wig.
_Queer Flash_, c. a sorry weather-beaten Wig, not worth Stealing, fit
only to put on a Pole or dress a Scare-Crow. _Flash-ken_, c. a House
where Thieves use, and are connived at.

_Flasque_, a Bottle (or it’s resemblance) of Sand, bound about with Iron,
into which the melted Metal is by Coyners and others poured; also a
Pottle or five Pints and half, that quantity, formerly of _Florence_, now
of any Wine; A Box for Gun-powder; a Carriage for Ordinance; an Arch-line
somewhat distant from the corner of the Chief, and swelling by degrees
toward the middle of the Escutcheon.

_Flat_, dead Drink; also dull Poetry or Discourse.

_Flavour_, Scent of Fruits; as Peaches, Quinces, _&c._ Or of Wines, as
Rhenish, Canary, _&c._

_Flaunting_, tearing-fine. _To Flaunt it_, to Spark it, or Gallant it.

_Flaw_, a water-flaw and a crack in Chrystals, as well as a speck in
Gemms and Stones.

_Flaw’d_, c. Drunk.

_Flay_, to flea or skinn. _He’ll flay a Flint_, of a meer _Scrat_ or
_Miser_.

_Flear_, to grinn. _A Flearing Fool_, a grinning silly Fellow.

_Fleece_, to Rob, Plunder or Strip; also Wooll, the true Golden-Fleece of
_England_, a clear Spring, or Flowing Fountain of Wealth.

_Fleet_, swift of Wing or Foot, in flight or Course, used not only of
Birds upon the Wing, but of winged Arrows, resembling them in Flight.

_Flegmatic_, dull, heavy. _A Flegmatic Fellow_, a drowsy insipid Tool, an
ill Companion.

_Flesh-broker_, a Match-maker; also a Bawd; between whom but little
difference, for they both (usually) take Money.

_Flibustiers_, West-Indian Pirates, or Buckaneers, Free-booters.

_Flicker_, c. a Drinking Glass. _Flicker snapt_, c. the Glass is broken.
_Nim the Flicker_, c. Steal the Glass. _Rum Flicker_, c. a large Glass or
Rummer. _Queer Flicker_, c. a Green or ordinary Glass. _To Flicker_, to
grin or flout. _Flickering_, grinning or laughing in a Man’s Face.

_Flicking_, c. to cut, cutting.

_Flick me some Panam and Cash_, c. cut me some Bread and Cheese.

_Flick the Peeter_, c. cut off the Cloak-bag or Port-manteau.

_Flip_, Sea Drink, of small Beer, (chiefly) and Brandy, sweetned and
Spiced upon occasion: _A Kan of Sir. Clously_, is among the Tarrs, a Kan
of choice Flip, with a Lemon squeez’d in, and the Pill hung round.

_Flippant_, pert and full of Prattle.

_Flimsy_, flabby, not firm, sound or solid.

_Flocks and Herds_, Flocks are of lesser Cattel, Herds are of Black
Cattel, a Flock of Sheep or Goats, and sometimes of Birds, as Pidgeons;
and in Imitation of the Gregarious Creatures, Men, that are sociable, are
said to follow and flock after one another as Sheep, or to flock together
to see Shows and Spectacles.

_Flog_, c. to Whip _Flog’d_, c. severely Lasht.

_Flogging-cove_, c. the Beadle, or Whipper in Bridewell, or any such
Place.

_Flogging-stake_, c. a Whipping-post.

_Flogg’d at the Tumbler_, c. Whipt ac the Cart’s Arse.

_Flogging_, c. a Naked Woman’s whipping (with Rods) an Old (usually) and
(sometimes) a Young Lecher. _As the Prancer drew the Queer-Cove, at the
cropping of the Rotan, the Rum Pads of the Rum vile, and was Flogg’d by
the Rum Cove_, c. the Rogue was dragg’d at the Cart’s tail through the
chief Streets of _London_, and was soundly Whipt by the Hangman.

_Florence_, a Wench that is touz’d and ruffled.

_Florentine_, a made Dish of Minced Meats, Currans, Spice, Eggs, _&c._
Bak’d.

_Flounce_, to toss, _to fling and flounce_, to fling and toss.

_Flout_, a jeer, to flout or jeer.

_Flummery_, a cleansing Dish made of Oatmeal boyl’d in Water to a kind
of Jelly or Consistence and strained.

_Flush in the Pocket_, c. full of Money. _The Cull_ is flush in the
_Fob_, the Spark’s Pocket is well Lined with Money. _Flushing in the
Face_, a frequent redning, occasion’d by a sudden Question, surprize, and
also from a distemper’d Liver.

_Flustered_, Drunk.

_Flute_, c. the Recorder of _London_, or of any other Town.

_Flutter_, or Flie low, anciently to _Flitter_, hence a Flitter-mouse or
Bat; as much as to say, a Flying Mouse, as an Owl is a Flying-Cat.

_Flyers_, c. Shoes.

_Flying-Camps_, Beggers plying in Bodies at Funerals.

_Fob_, c. a cheat, trick; also a little Pocket.

_Fob off_, slyly to cheat or deceive.

_Fogus_, c. Tobacco. _Tip me gage of Fogus_, c. give me a Pipe of Tobacco.

_Foiling_, the Footing of Deer on the Grass, scarce seen.

_Folks_, the Servants, or ordinary People, as Country-folks,
Harvest-Folks, Work-folks, _&c._ _The Folks Bread or Pudding_, for the
coarsest Bread or Pudding.

_Fool’s Coat_, or _Colours_, a Motley of incongruous Colours too near a
Kin to match, as Red and Yellow, which is the Fool’s Coat with us, as
Blew and Green is with the French. _A Fool’s-Coat_, a Tulip so called,
striped with Red and Yellow.

_Fools-Cap_, a sort of Paper so called.

_Footman’s Mawnd_, c. an artificial Sore made with unslack’d Lime, Soap
and the Rust of old Iron; on the Back of a Begger’s hand, as if hurt by
the bite or kick of a Horse.

_Foot-pad_, c. see _Low-pad_, for _one Foot in the Grave_, a Pariphrasis
an old Man. _He has the length of his Foot._

_Fop_, _Foppish_, one that is singular or affected in Dress, Gestures,
_&c._

_Foplin_, the same, only younger.

_Forebode_, to presage, betoken or fore-show.

_Foreboding-signs_, tokens, Presages of ill Luck; as _spilling of the
Salt_, _a Hare’s crossing the Way_; _Croaking of Ravens_; _Screaking of
Screach-Owls_. Or of ill Weather, either natural Signs or artificial; as,
Aches, Corns, Cry of a Peacock, Water-galls, Weather-Glasses, _&c._

_Forecast_, contrivance or laying a design; Precaution, or the Wisdom
of Prevention, which is beyond the Wisdom of Remedy. _To Forecast_, to
contrive, or digest Matters for Execution.

_Foreman of the Jury_, he that engrosses all the Talk to himself.

_Forestall_, to antedate or anticipate.

_Fork_, c. a Pick-pocket. _Let’s fork him_, c. let us Pick that Man’s
Pocket, the newest and most dextrous way: It is, to thrust the Fingers,
strait, stiff, open, and very quick into the Pocket, and so closing them,
hook what can be held between them.

_Fork is often Rakes Heir_, or after a scraping Father comes a scattering
Son.

_Forlorn-hope_, c. losing Gamesters; also in another Sense, a Party of
Soldiers, _&c._ put upon the most desperate Service.

_Fort_, the broad Part of the Sword-blade nearest to the Hilt.

_Fortune_, a rich Maid, or wealthy Widdow, an Heiress.

_Fortune-hunters_, Pursuers of such to obtain them in Marriage. _A
Creature of Fortune_, one that Lives by his Wits. _A Soldier of Fortune_,
the Heir of his own Right-hand as the Spaniards call him. _A Gamester of
Fortune_, one that Lives by shaking his Elbow. _He has made his Fortune_,
he has got a good Estate.

_Fortune-Tellers_, c. the Judges of Life and Death, so called by the
Canting Crew: Also _Astrologers_, _Physiognomists_, _Chiromancers_, &c.

  _Founder’d_, { _Horse_, _Lame_.
               { _Ship at sea_, that sprung a Leak and Sunk down-right.

_Foundling_, a Child dropt in the Streets for the Parish (the most able)
to keep.

_Foul Jade_, an ordinary coarse Woman.

_Foul Wine_, when it stinks; also when unfine, or Lees flying in the
Glass.

_Fox_, the second Year; also a sharp cunning Fellow. _Fox’d_, Drunk.
_He has caught a Fox_, he is very Drunk. _An old Fox_, after the second
Year; also a subtil old Fellow; also an old broad Sword. _A Fox-blade_,
a Sword-blade with a Fox (or some thing like it) Grav’d on it, esteem’d
good Metal.

_Foxkennelleth_, Lodgeth.

_Foy_, a farewell or taking leave, usually a Parting-glass. _To Pay his
Foy_, to make his Friends Merry, before he leaves them.

_Foyl-cloy_, c. a Pick-pocket, a Thief, a Rogue.

_Foyst_, c. a Cheat, a Rogue; also a close strong Stink, without Noise or
Report.

_Fraters_, c. the eighth Order of Canters, such as Beg with a
Sham-patents or Briefs for Spitals, Prisons, Fires, _&c._

_Fray_, an Encounter, or Disorder. _Better come at the latter end of a
Feast, than the beginning of a Fray._ _To Fray_, to scare or frighten;
also to break or crack in wearing. Hence frail, brittle or soon broke;
and when Deer rub and push their Heads against Trees to get the pells of
their new Horns off.

_Freak_, a Whim or Maggot.

_Freakish_, Fantastic, Whimsical, Capricious.

_Freameth_, see Wild Boar.

_Free-booters_, Lawless Robbers, and Plunderers; also Soldiers serving
for that Privilege without Pay, and Inroaders.

_Freeholder_, he whose Wife goes with him to the Ale-house; also he that
has to the Value of Fourty Shillings (or more) a Year in Land.

_Freeze_, a thin, small, hard _Cyder_ much us’d by Vintners and Coopers
in parting their Wines, to lower the Price of them, and to advance their
Gain.

_French Gout_, the Pox. _A blow with a French Faggot Stick_, when the
Nose is fallen by the Pox.

_Frenchified_, in the French Interest or Mode; also Clapt or Poxt.

_Fresh-man_, a Novice, in the University.

_Fresh-water-seamen_, that have never been on the Salt, or made any
Voyage, meer Land-Men.

_Fret_, to fume or chafe; also Wine in fermenting is said to be upon the
_Fret_.

_Fricassee_, any Fried Meats, but chiefly of Rabbets.

_Friggat, well rigg’d_, a Woman well Drest and Gentile.

_Frigid_, a weak disabled Husband, cold, impotent.

_Frippery_, old Clothes.

_Froe_, c. for _Urowe_, (_Dutch_) a Wife, Mistress, or Whore. _Brush
to your Froe_, (or _Bloss_,) _and wheedle for Crap_, c. whip to your
Mistress and speak her fair to give, or lend you some Money.

_Frog-landers_, Dutchmen.

_Frolicks_, lewd or merry Pranks, pleasant Rambles, and mad Vagaries.

_Frummagem’d_, c. choaked.

_Frump_, a dry Bob, or Jest.

_Fuants_, Excrements of all Vermin.

_Fubbs_, a loving, fond Word used to prety little Children and Women;
also the Name of a Yacht.

_Fuddle_, Drink. _This is Rum fuddle_, c. this is excellent Tipple.

_Fuddle-cap_, a Drunkard.

_Fulsom_, is a Nauseous sort of Excess; as _fulsom fat_, loathsom fat,
or fat to loathing. _Fulsom flattery_, nauseous or gross Flattery laid
on too thick; as Embroidery too thick Laid on is dawbing with Gold or
Silver-lace.

_Fumbler_, an unperforming Husband, one that is insufficient, a weak
Brother.

_Fumblers-Hall_, the Place where such are to be put for their
Nonperformance.

_Fun_, c. a Cheat, or slippery Trick; also an Arse. _What do you fun me?_
Do you think to Sharp or Trick me? _I’ll Kick your fun_, c. I’ll Kick
your Arse. _He put the Fun upon the Cull_, c. he sharp’d the Fellow. _I
Funn’d him_, c. I was too hard for him, I out-witted or rook’d him.

_Fund_, or _Fond_, a Bank, or Stock or Exchequer of Money, or Moneys
worth; also a Bottom or Foundation.

_A Staunch Fund_, a good Security.

_Funk_, c. Tobacco Smoak; also a strong Smell or Stink. _What a Funk
here is!_ What a thick Smoak of Tobacco is here! _Here’s a damn’d Funk_,
here’s a great Stink.

_Furbish-up_, to Scrub-up, to Scowre, or Refresh old Armour, _&c._ _He is
mightily Furbish’d up on a suddain_, when a Man not accustom’d to wear
fine Cloaths, gets a good Suit on his Back.

_Fur-men_, c. Aldermen.

_Fussocks_, _a meer Fussocks_, a Lazy Fat-Ars’d Wench. _A Fat Fussocks_,
a Fulsom, Fat, Strapping Woman.

_Fustian-verse_, Verse in Words of lofty Sound, and humble Sense.

_Fustiluggs_, a Fulsom, Beastly, Nasty Woman.


G

_Gad up and down_, to Fidle and Fisk, to run a Gossiping.

_Gadding-Gossips_, way-going Women, Fidging and Fisking every where. A
Gad of Steel.

_Gag_, c. to put Iron-pinns into the Mouths of the Robbed, to hinder them
Crying out.

_Gage_, c. a Pot or Pipe. _Tip me a Gage_, c. give me a Pot or Pipe or
Hand hither, the Pot or Pipe.

_Gallant_, a very fine Man; also a Man of Metal, or a brave Fellow; also
one that Courts or keeps, or is Kept by a Mistress. _Gallant a Fan_, to
break it with Design, or Purpose to have the Opportunity and Favour to
Present a better.

_Gambals_, Christmas Gamballs, merry Frolicks or Pranks.

_Game_, c. Bubbles drawn in to be cheated, also at a Bawdy-house, Lewd
Women. _Have ye any Game Mother?_ Have ye any Whores Mistress Bawd, and
in another Sense. _What you game me?_ c. do you jeer me, or pretend to
expose me, to make a May-game of me.

_Gamesome_, Wanton, Frolicksom, Playful.

_Gan_, c. a Mouth.

_Ganns_, c. the Lipps.

_Gang_, an ill Knot or Crew of Thieves, Pick-pockets or Miscreants; also
a Society of Porters under a Regulation, and to go.

_Gape-feed_, whatever the gazing Crowd idly stares and gapes after; as
Puppet-shows, Rope-dancers, Monsters, and Mountebanks, any thing to feed
the Eye.

_Garish_, gaudy, tawdry, bedawbed with Lace, or all bedeck’t with
mismatcht, or staring Colours.

_Garnish-money_, what is customarily spent among the Prisoners at first
coming in.

_Gaume_, see _Paume_.

_Gaunt_, lank, thin, hollow.

_Gears_, Rigging or Accoutrements. _Head-gear_, the Linnen or dress of
the Head. _In his Gears_, ready Rigg’d or Drest. _Out of his Gears_, out
of Kelter, or out of sorts.

_Gee._ _It wont Gee_, it won’t Hit, or go.

_Gelt_, c. Money. _There is no Gelt to be got_, c. Trading is very Dead.

_Gentian-wine_, Drank for a Whet before Dinner.

_Gentry-cove_, c. a Gentleman.

_Gentry-cove-ken_, c. a Nobleman’s or Gentleman’s House.

_Gentry-mort_, c. a Gentlewoman.

_George_, c. a half Crown piece. _He tipt me Forty Georges for my
Earnest_; c. he paid me Five Pounds for my Share or Snack.

_Gibbrish_, the Canting Tongue, or Jargon.

_Gig_, c. a Nose; also a Woman’s Privities. _Snichel the Gig_, c. Fillip
the Fellow on the Nose. _A young Gig_, a wanton Lass.

_Gigger_, c. a Door. _Dub the Gigger_, c. open the Door with the
Pick-lock that we may go in and Rob the House.

_Giglers_, c. wanton Women. _Gigling_, Laughing loud and long.

_Gill_, a Quartern (of Brandy, Wine, _&c._) also a homely Woman. _Every
Jack must have his Gill. There’s not so Ord’nary a Gill, but there’s at
Sorry a Jack. Gill-ale_, Physic-ale.

_Gillflurt_, a proud, Minks.

_Gilt_, c. a Pick-lock; also a Slut or light Housewife.

_Gimcrack_, a spruce Wench; also a Bauble or Toy.

_Ginger-bread_, Money.

_Gingerly_, gently, softly, easily.

_Gin_, a snare or nooze, to catch Birds, as a spring is to catch Hares.

_Gingumbobs_, Toies or Baubles.

_Ginny_, c. an Instrument to lift up a Grate, the better to Steal what is
in the Window.

_Gipp_, to cure or cleanse Herrings in order to Pickling.

_Girds_, Taunts, Quips, Gibes or Jeers. _Bitter Girds_, Biting sharp
Reflections. _Under his Girdle_, within his Power, or at his Beck. _If
you are angry, you may turn the Buckle of your Girdle be hind you_, to
one Angry for a small Matter, and whose Anger is as little valued.

_Give Nature a Fillip_, to Debauch a little now and then with Women, or
Wine.

_Glade_, _Shade_.

_Glance of an Eye_, a Cast of the Eye; _at the first Glance_, at a Brush
or at the first Cast.

_Glanders_, filthy yellow Snot at (Horses) Noses, caught from Cold.

_Glare_, a Glister; also the weak Light of a Comet, Candle, or Glow-worm.
_To Glare_, or blaze like a Comet, or Candle. Hence Glore, _as Pottage
Glore_, or Shine with Fat.

_Glaive_, a Bill or Sword.

_Glaver_, to Fawn and Flatter. _A Glavering Fellow_, a False Flattering
Fellow.

_Glaze_, c. the Window.

_Glazier_, c. one that creeps in at Casements, or unrips Glass-windows to
Filch and Steal.

_Glaziers_, c. Eyes. _The Cove has Rum Glaziers_, c. that Rogue has
excellent Eyes, or an Eye like a Cat.

_Glee_, Mirth, Pastime.

_Gleam_, a weak or waterish Light; hence a Glimmering or Twinkling of a
Star.

_Glib_, Smooth, without a Rub. _Glib tongued_ Voluble, ready or Nimble
tongued.

_Glim_, c. a Dark-Lanthorn used in Robbing Houses; also to burn in the
Hand. _As the Cull was Glimm’d, he gangs to the Nubb_, c. if the Fellow
has been Burnt in the Hand, he’ll be Hang’d now.

_Glimfenders_, c. Andirons. _Rum Glimfenders_, Silver Andirons.

_Glimflashy_, c. angry or in a Passion. _The Cull is Glimflashy_, c. the
Fellow is in a Heat.

_Glimmer_, c. Fire.

_Glimjack_, c. a Link-boy.

_Glimmerer_, c. the Twenty second Rank of the Canting Tribe, begging with
Sham Licences, pretending to Losses by Fire, _&c._

_Glimstick_, c. a Candlestick. _Rum Glimsticks_, c. Silver Candlesticks.
_Queer Glimsticks_, c. Brass, Pewter or Iron Candlesticks.

_Glow_, either to Shine or be Warm, as _Glow-worm_ from the first, and
_glowing of the Cheeks_, or _glowing of Fire_, with relation to the last.

_Goads_, c. those that Wheedle in Chaomen for Horse-coursers.

_Goalers-Coach_, a Hurdle.

_Goat_, a Lecher, or very Lascivious Person.

_Goatish_, Lecherous, Wanton, Lustful.

_Gob_, c. the Mouth; also a Bit or Morsel; hence _Gobbets_, now more in
use for little Bits; as _a Chop of Meat_ is a good Cut. _Gift of the
Gob_, a wide, open Mouth; also a good Songster, or Singing-master.

_God’s Penny_, Earnest Money, to bind a Bargain.

_Gold-droppers_, Sweetners, Cheats, Sharpers.

_Going upon the Dub_, c. Breaking a House with Picklocks.

_Gold-finch_, c. he that has alwaies a Purse or Cod of Gold in his Fob.

_Gold-finders_, Emptiers of Jakes or Houses of Office.

_Good Fellow_, a Pot-companion or Friend of the Bottle.

_Goose_, or _Goose-cap_, a Fool. _Find fault with a Fat Goose_, or
without a Cause. _Go Shoe the Goose._ _Fie upon Pride when Geese go
Bare-legg’d._ _He’ll be a Man among the Geese when the Gander is gon_, or
a Man before his Mother. _A Tayler’s Goose Roasted_, a Red-hot smoothing
Iron, to Close the Seams. _Hot and heavy like a Tayler’s Goose_, may be
applied to a Passionate Coxcomb.

_Goree_, c. Money, but chiefly Gold.

_Gossips_, the Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings; also those that
are noted for

_Gossiping_, much Idle Prating, and Tittle Tattle.

_Graces_, or Ornaments of Speech. _With a good Grace_, what is Becoming,
Agreeable. _With an ill Grace_, what is Unbecoming or Disagreeable.

_Grafted_, made a Cuckold of.

_Grannam_, c. Corn.

_Grannam gold_, old Hoarded Coin.

_Granny_, an old Woman, also a Grandmother.

_Grapple_, to close in Fisticuffs or Fighting, Oppos’d to Combating
at Arms-end; also a fastning of Ships together in an Engagement with
Grappling Irons, a kind of Anchors (or resembling them) with four Flooks
and no Stock.

_Grasp_, to Catch and Hold fast, or press with the close Fist.

_Grating_, harsh Sounds, disagreeable, shocking and Offensive to the Ear.

_Great Buck_, the Sixth Year.

_Great Hare_, the Third Year and afterwards.

_Gratings_, the chequer’d Work clapt on the Deck of a Ship to let in the
Light and Air.

_Green-bag_, a Lawyer.

_Green-gown_, a throwing of young Lasses on the Grass and Kissing them.

_Green-head_, a very raw Novice, or unexperienc’d Fellow.

_Greshamite_, a Virtuoso, or Member of the Royal Society.

_Grig_, c. a Farthing; also a very small Eel. _A merry Grig_, a merry
Fellow. _Not a Grig did he tip me_, c. not a Farthing wou’d he give me.

_Grilliade_, any Broild Meats, Fish or Flesh.

_Grimaces_, Mops and Mows, or making of Faces.

_Grim_, Stern, Fierce, Surly.

_Grinders_, c. Teeth, _The Cove has Rum Grinders_, c. the Rogue has
excellent Teeth.

_Gripe_ or _Griper_, an old Covetous Wretch; also a Banker, Money
Scrivener, or Usurer.

_Griping_, is an Epithet commonly affixed either to the Exactions of
Oppressive Governors, or to the Extortions of Usurers; Griping Usurers,
and griping Usury being as ordinary in English as _Usura vorax_ in Latin.

_Griskins_, Steaks off the Rump of Beef, also Pork-bones with some tho’
not much Flesh on them, accounted very sweet Meat Broyled.

_Gropers_, c. blind Men.

_Grotesque_, a wild sort of Painting mostly us’d for Banquetting or
Summer-houses.

_Grounds_, Unscented Hair Powder, made of Starch, or Rice. See Alabaster.

_Grownd-Sweat_, a Grave.

_Growse_, Heath-polts.

_Growneth_, the Noise a Buck makes at Rutting time.

_Groyne_, corruptly by the Tarrs for _Coronna_, a Seaport of _Galicia_ in
_Spain_.

_Grub Street News_, false, Forg’d.

_Grum_, the same as _Grim_, Stern or Fierce.

_Grumbletonians_, Malecontents, out of Humour with the Government, for
want of a Place, or having lost one.

_Grumbling of the Gizzard_, Murmuring, Muttering, Repining, Resenting.

_Grunter_, c. a Sucking Pig.

_Grunting Cheat_, c. a Pig.

_Grunting Peeck_, c. Pork.

_Guard_, of old Safe-guard, now shortned into Guard, either for State, as
Princes have their Guards, or for security so Prisoners have theirs; also
the Shell of a Sword, and the best Posture of Defence.

_Gugaws_, Toies. Trifles.

_Gull_, c. a Cheat.

_Gull’d_, c. Cheated, Rookt, Sharpt.

_Gullet_, a Derisory Term for the Throat, from _Gula_.

_Gull-gropers_, c. a Bystander that Lends Money to the Gamesters.

_Gundigutts_, a fat pursy Fellow. _In the Gun_, Drunk. _As sure as a gun,
or Cock-sure._ _Out of Gun-shot_; aloof from Danger, or out of Harm’s way.

_Gun-powder_, an old Woman.

_Gust_ or _Gusto_, a right Relish, Savour, or true Taste of any thing. _A
Delicious Gusto_, Wines, Fruits, or Meats of a curious or pleasant Taste.
_A Gust of Wind_, a short, sudden, furious Blast, as we say _a Dash of
Rain_, for a sudden, short, impetuous Beat of Rain.

_Guzzle_, Drink.

_Guzzling_, Drinking much.

_Gut-foundred_, exceeding Hungry.

_Gutling_, Eating much. _A Gutling Fellow_, a great Eater.

_Gutter Lane_, the Throat.

_Gutters_, the little streak in a Deer’s Beam.

  _Gutting_, { _An House_, Rifling it, Clearing it.
             { _An Oyster_, Eating it.

_Gutts_, a very fat, gross Person.

_Gybe_, c. any Writing or Pass Sealed; also Jerk or Jeer.

_Gyb’d_, c. Jerkt or Whipt.

_Gybing_, jeering.

_Gypsies_, a Counterfeit Brood of wandering Rogues and Wenches, herding
together, and Living promiscuously, or in common, under Hedges and in
Barns, Disguising themselves with Blacking their Faces and Bodies,
and wearing an Antick Dress, as well as Devising a particular _Cant_,
Strolling up and down, and under colour of Fortune-telling, Palmestry,
Physiognomy, and Cure of Diseases; impose allwaies upon the unthinking
Vulgar, and often Steal from them, whatever is not too Hot for their
Fingers, or too Heavy to carry off. _A Cunning Gypsy_, a sharp, sly
Baggage, a Witty Wench. _As Tann’d as a Gypsy_, of a Gypsy-hue or colour.

_Gyrle_, see Roe.


H

_Habberdasher of Nouns and Pronouns_, School-master or Usher.

_Hab-nab_, at Aventure, Unsight, Unseen, Hit or Miss.

_Hack_, the Place where the Hawk’s meat is laid.

_Hack and Hue_, to Cut in Pieces.

_Hacks_ or _Hackneys_, hirelings. _Hackney-whores_, Common Prostitutes.
_Hackney-Horses_, to be let to any Body. _Hackney-Scriblers_, Poor
Hirelings, Mercenary Writers.

_Hackum_, a Fighting Fellow, see _Captain Hackum_.

_Haddums_, _The Spark has been at Haddums_, He is Clapt, or Poxt.

_Hag_, an old Witch.

_Hagged_, Lean Witched, Half-Starved.

_Hagboat_, a huge Vessel for Bulk and Length, Built chiefly to fetch
great Masts, _&._

_Hagbut_, a Hand-gun Three quarters of a Yard long.

_Haggle_, to run from Shop to Shop, to stand hard to save a Penny. _A
Hagler_, one that Buys of the Country-Folks and Sells in the Market, and
goes from Door to Door.

_Halfbord_, c. Six Pence.

_Half a Hog_, c. Six Pence.

_Half Seas over_, almost Drunk.

_Hamlet_, c. a High Constable.

_Hamper’d_, caught in a Nooze, entangled, or embarassed in an intricate
Affair.

_Handy_, Dextrous.

_Handy Blows_, Fisty-cuffs.

_Handycrafts_, the Manual Arts or Mechanic Trades. _A great Twohanded
Sword_, a swinging broad Sword. _A great Twohanded Fellow_, a huge
swinging Fellow. _Such a thing fell into his Hand_, of one that improve
another’s Notion, Speech, or Invention. _He will make a Hand of it_, he
will make a Penny of it, or make it turn to Account. _They are Hand and
Glove_, of Friends or Camerades that are Inseparable, and almost to the
same purpose. _Clove and Orange._ _Change Hands, and change Luck_, or to
Play your Cards in another Hand. _The same Hand and Fair Play_, when
they Play on without changing Hands. _Many Hands make light Work._ _You
stand with your Hands in your Pockets_, to an Idle Fellow that finds
nothing to do.

_Hank_, _He has a Hank upon him_, or the Ascendant over him.

_Hanker after_, to Long or wish much for.

_Hanktelo_, a silly Fellow, a meer Cods-head.

_Hans-en kelder_, Jack in the Box, the Child in the Womb, or a Health to
it.

_Hard Drink_, that is very Stale, or begining so Sower. _Hard-drinking_,
excessive Soking, or toping aboundance. _Hard Bargain_, a severe one.
_Hard-favor’d_, Ugly, Homely. _Hard Frost_, a Keen or Sharp one. _Hard
Case_, a severe or deep Misfortune, or ill Treatment. _Hard Master_ or
_Dealer_, a very near one or close.

_Hare_, the second Year. _A great Hare_, the third Year, _Leveret_ the
first Year. _To hold with the Hare and run with the Hound_, or to keep
fair with both Parties at once. _Hare-lipp’d_, Notcht or turn’d up in
the middle. _Hare-sleep_, with Eies a’most open. _Hared_, Hurried. _Hare
Seateth_ or _Formeth_, the proper term for the Place where she Setts or
Lies. _A Hare Beateth or Tappeth_, makes a noise at Rutting time. _He has
swallow’d a Hare_, he is very Drunk.

_Harking_, Whispering on one side to borrow Money.

_Harman_, c. a Constable.

_Harmans_, c. the Stocks.

_Harman-beck_, c. a Beadle.

_Harp-upon_, a business to insist on it.

_Harridan_, c. one that is half Whore, half Bawd.

_Hart_, the Sixth Year, _A Stag_, the fifth Year. _A Staggard_, the
fourth. _A Brock_, the third. _A Knobber_, the second. _Hind Calf_, or
Calf, the First.

_Hart Harboureth_, Lodgeth.

_Hart Royal_, having been Hunted by a King or Queen. _Unharbour the
Hart_, Dislodge him. _A Hart Belleth_, maketh a Noise at Rutting time. _A
Hart goeth to Rut_, the Term for Copulation.

_Hartfordshire-kindness_, Drinking to the same Man again.

_Hartbold or prety Hearty_, of good Courage, or pert Spirit.

_Hasty_, very Hot on a sudden. _The most Haste the worst speed_, or
_Haste makes Waste_, of him that loses a Business by hurrying of it. _You
are none of the Hastings_, of him that loses an Opportunity or a Business
for want of Dispatch.

_Hatchet-fac’d_, Hard-favor’d, Homely. _Under the Hatches_, in Trouble,
or Prison.

_Haut-bois_, Oaks, Beaches, Ashes, Poplars, _&c._ Also well known and
pleasant Martial Music.

_Havock_, Waste, Spoil. _They made sad Havock_, they Destroy’d all before
’em.

_Hawk_, c. a Sharper.

_Hawkers_, Retail News-Sellers.

_Hawking_, going about Town and Country with Scotch-Cloth, _&c._ or
News-Papers; also Spitting difficultly.

_Hay_, a separate Enclosure of Wood Land, within a Forrest or Park,
Fenced with a Rail or Hedge, or both. _To Dance the Hay._ _To make Hay
while the Sun Shines_, or make good use of one’s Time.

_Hazy Weather_, when it is Thick, Misty, Foggy.

_Hazle-geld_, to Beat any one with a Hazle-Stick or Plant.

_Heady_, strong Liquors that immediately fly up into the Noddle, and so
quickly make Drunk.

_Headstrong_, Stubborn, Ungovernable. _A Scald Head is soon Broke._

_Head Bully of the Pass or Passage Bank_, c. the Top Tilter of that Gang,
throughout the whole Army, who Demands and receives Contribution from all
the Pass Banks in the Camp.

_Hearing Cheats_, c. Ears.

_Hearts-ease_, c. a Twenty shilling piece; also an ordinary sort of
Strong Water; and an Herb called by some the Trinity, by others, Three
Faces in a Hood, Live in Idleness, Call me to you, or Pansies, an
excellent Antivenerean _&c._

_Heathen Philosopher_, a sorry poor tatter’d Fellow, whose Breech may be
seen through his Pocket-holes.

_Heave_, c. to Rob.

_Heave a Bough_, c. to Rob a House.

_Heaver_, c. a Breast.

_Heavy_, is either gross in Quantity or slow in Motion, because
ordinarily the one is not without the other, and therefore we say, _heavy
Bodies move slowly_. _A heavy Fellow_, a dull Blockish Slug.

_Hector_, a Vaporing Swaggering Coward.

_Hedge_, to secure a desperate Bet, Wager or Debt. _By Hedge or by
Style_, by Hook or by Crook.

_Hedge-bird_, a Scoundrel or sorry Fellow.

_Hedge-creeper_, c. a Robber of Hedges.

_Hedge-grapes_, very Crabbed, wholly unfit to make Wine.

_Hedge-priest_, a sorry Hackney, Underling, Illiterate, Vagabond, see
_Patrico_.

_Hedge-Tavern_, or _Ale house_, a Jilting, Sharping Tavern, or Blind
_Ale house_. _It hangs in the Hedge_, of a Law-suit or any thing else
Depending, Undetermined. _As common as the Hedge, or High-way_, said of a
Prostitute or Strumpet.

_Hell_, the Place where the Taylers lay up their Cabbage, or Remnants,
which are sometimes very Large.

_Hell-born-babe_, a Lewd, Graceless, Notorious Youth.

_Hell-cat_, a very Lewd Rakehelly Fellow.

_Hell-driver_, a Coach-man.

_Hell-hound_, a Profligate, Lewd Fellow.

_Helter-skelter_, Pell-mell.

_Hempen-widdow_, one whose Husband was Hang’d.

_Hem_, to call after one with an inarticulate Noise.

_Hemuse_, see Roe.

_Hen-hearted_, Cowardly, Fearful.

_Hen-peckt Friggat_, whose Commander and Officers are absolutely sway’d
by their Wives.

_Henpeckt Husband_, whose Wife wears the Breeches.

_Herd of Dear or Hares_, a Company.

_Hick_, c. any Person of whom any Prey can be made, or Booty taken from;
also a silly Country Fellow.

_Hide-bound-horse_, whose Skin sticks very close, and tite like a Pudding
Bag, usually when very Fat.

_Hide-bound-muse_, Stiff, hard of Delivery, Sir _J. Suckling_ call’d
_Ben. Johnson’s_ so.

_Higglede-piggledy_, all together, as Hoggs and Piggs lie Nose in Arse.

_High Flyers_, Impudent, Forward, Loose, Light Women; also bold
Adventurers.

_High shoon_, or _Clouted-shoon_, a Country Clown.

_High Pad_, c. a Highway Robber well Mounted and Armed.

_Highjinks_, a Play at Dice who Drinks.

_Hightetity_, a Ramp or Rude Girl.

_High Tide_, c. when the Pocket is full of Money.

_Hind_, the Plough-boy or Ploughman’s Servant at Plough and Cart.

_Hinde_, the third Year; _Hearse or Brockets Sister_, the second Year;
Calf the first Year.

_Hip_, _upon the Hip_, at an Advantage in Wrestling or Business.

_Hissing_, the Note of the Snake and the Goose, the Quenching of Metals
in the Forge; also upon any dislike at the Play-house, and sometimes tho’
seldom in the Courts of Judicature, upon any foul Proceedings. The like
is done also in other larger Assemblies.

_Hob_, a plain Country Fellow; or Clown, also the Back of a Chimney.

_Hobinal_, the same.

_Hobbist_, a Disciple, and fond Admirer of _Thomas Hobbs_, the fam’d
Philosopher of _Malmsbury_. Sir _Posthumus Hobby_, one that Draws on his
Breeches with a Shoeing-horn; also a Fellow that is Nice and Whimsical in
the set of his Cloaths.

_Hob-nail_, a Horse Shoe-nail; also a High-shoon or Country Clown.

_Hobsons-choice_, that or None.

_Hocus-pocus_, a Juggler that shews Tricks by Slight of Hand.

_Hodge_, a. Country Clown, also Roger.

_Hodmenduds_, Snails in their Shells.

_Hodge podge_, see Hotch-potch.

_Hog_, c. a Shilling; also see _Wild Boar_. _You Darkman Budge, will
you Fence your Hog at the next Boozing-ken_ c. do ye hear you House
Creeper, will you Spend your Shilling at the next Ale-house. _A meer Hog
or Hoggish Fellow_, a greedy, covetous, morose Churl. _A Hog-grubber_, a
close-fisted, narrow-soul’d sneaking Fellow. _He has brought his Hoggs
to a fair Market, or he has Spun a fair Thread. Great Cry and little
Wooll, as the Man said, when he Shear’d his Hoggs_, Labour in Vain which
the Latines express by _Goats-wooll_, as the English by the shearing of
Hoggs. _Hogg steer_, see _Wild Boar_.

_Hogen-mogen_, a Dutch Man; also High and Mighty, the Sovereign States of
_Holland_.

_Hogo_, for _Haut Goust_, a strong Scent; also a high Taste or Relish in
Sauce.

_Hold his Nose to the Grind-stone_, to Keep him Under or Tie him Neck and
Heels in a Bargain.

_Hollow hearted_, False, Base, Perfidious, Treacherous.

_Holyday-bowler_, a very bad Bowler, _Holyday Cloths_, the Best. _Blind
Men’s Holyday_, when it is Night.

_Hop-merchant_, a Dancing-master. _To Hop_, denotes the Progressive
Motion of Reptiles on the Ground, whence Grashopper, and Answers to the
Fluttring or low Flight of Insects in the Air; or Else the Transits or
Leaps of a Bird from one Perch to another in a Cage, or the Skips of a
Squirrel from Tree to Tree and Bough to Bough in the Wood.

_Homine_, Indian Corn. _To beat Homine_, to pound that in a Mortar.

_Honey-moon_, the first Month of Marriage.

_Hood_, the ancient Cover for Men’s Heads, (before the Age of Bonnets and
Hatts) being of Cloath Button’d under the Chin, not unlike a Monk’s Cowl.
_Two Faces under one Hood_, a Double Dealer.

_Hood wink’d_, Blindfolded or Bluffed.

_Hoof it, or Beat it on the Hoof_, to walk on Foot.

_Hookt_, over-reached, Snapt, Trickt. _Off the Hooks_, in an ill Mood, or
out of Humor, _By Hook or by Crook_, by Fair Means or Foul.

_Hookers_, c. the third Rank of Canters; also Sharpers.

_Hopper-arst_, when the Breech sticks out.

_Horn-mad_, stark staring Mad because Cuckolded.

_Horse-play_, any rude Boisterous sort of Sport. _You must not look a
Given Horse in the Mouth_, or _what is freer than Gift?_ _One Man may
better Steal a Horse than another look on. The Master’s Eye makes the
Horse Fat. An ill Horse that can’t carry his own Provender. Set the
Saddle on the Right Horse_, lay the Blame where the Fault is. _The Cart
before the Horse._ _A short Horse is soon Curried_, a little Business is
soon Dispatched. _The Gray Mare is the better Horse_, said of one, whose
Wife wears the Breeches. _Fallen away from a Horse-load to a Cart-load_,
spoken Ironically of one considerably improved in Flesh on a sudden.

_Host_, an Inn-keeper or Victualler; also an Army. _Hostess_, a
Land-lady. _To reckon without your Host: Or count your Chickens before
they are Hatcht._

_Hot_, exceeding Passionate. _Hot Work_, much Mischief done, or a great
Slaughter.

_Hot-cockles_, a Play among Children. _It revives the Cockles of my
Heart_, said, of agreeable News, or a Cup of Comfort, Wine or Cordial
Water.

_Hot Pot_, Ale and Brandy boyled together.

_Hot Spur_, a fiery furious passionate Fellow; also early or forward
Peas.

_Hotch potch_, an Oglio or Medly of several Meats in one Dish.

_House of Call_, the usual lodging Place of Journey-men Tailers.

_House Tailers_, Upholsterers.

_How_, to a Deer.

_Howleth_, the Noise a Wolf maketh at Rutting time.

_Hubbub_, a Noise in the Streets made by the Rabble.

_Huckster_, a sharp Fellow. _Hucksters_, the Retailers of the Market, who
Sell in the Market at second Hand. _In Huckster’s Hands_, at a desperate
Pass, or Condition, or in a fair way to be Lost.

_Hue_, c. to Lash; also the Complexion or Colour. _Hued_, c. Lasht
or Flogg’d. _The Cove was Hued in the Naskin_, c. the Rogue was
severe-Lasht in Bridewell. _Hue and Cry_, the Country rais’d after a
Thief.

_Huff_, a Bullying Fellow. _Captain Huff_, any noted Bully, or Huffing
Blade. _To Huff and Ding_, to Bounce and Swagger.

_Hugger-mugger_, Closely or by Stealth, Under board: _To Eat so_, that
is, to Eat by one’s self.

_Hulver-head_, a silly foolish Fellow.

_Hum-cap_, old, mellow and very strong Beer.

_Hum and haw_, to Hesitate in Speech; also to delay, or difficultly to be
brought to Consent.

_Hummer_, a loud Lie, a Rapper.

_Hum_, or _Humming Liquor_, Double Ale, Stout, Pharoah.

_Hummums_, a Bagnio.

_Humorist_, a Whimsical Fantastical Fellow.

_Hump-backt_, Crook-backt. _Hump-shoulder’d_, or Crook-shoulder’d.

_Humptey-dumptey_, Ale boild with Brandy.

_Hunch_, to justle, or thrust.

_Hunks_, a covetous Creature, a miserable Wretch.

_Hunting_, c. decoying, or drawing others into Play.

_Hunteth for his Kind_, see Otter.

_Hurly-burly_, Rout, Riot, Bustle, Confusion.

_Hurrican_, a violent Storm or Tempest; also a disorder or confusion in
Business.

_Hurridun_, see Harridan.

_Hush_, very still, quiet. _All was Hush_, a great or profound Silence.
_Husht up_, concealed, or clapt up without Noise.

_Husky-lour_, c. a Guinea, or Job.

_Hussy_, an abbreviation of Housewife, and sometimes a Term of Reproch,
as, _how now Hussy_, or _she is a Light Hussy_, or Housewife.

_Hut_, from; a Term much us’d by Carters, _&c._ Also, a little House or
slight Abode for Soldiers, Peasants, _&c._

_Huzza_, Originally the Cry of the _Huzzars_, or Hungarian Horsemen; but
now the Shouts and Acclamations, of any Soldiers, or of the Mob.


I

_Jabber_, to Talk thick and fast, as great Praters do, or to Chatter like
a Magpye.

_Jack_, c. a Farthing, a small Bowl (the mark) to throw at, an Instrument
to draw on Boots, hence Jack-boots; also a Leathern Vessel to Drink out
of, and an Engine to set the Spit a going. _Jack in an Office_, of one
that behaves himself Imperiously in it. _Every Jack will have a Gill_, or
the Coursest He, will have as Coarse a She. _He wou’dn’t tip me Jack_,
c. not a Farthing wou’d he give me.

_Jack-adams_, a Fool.

_Jack-a dandy_, a little impertinent insignificant Fellow.

_Jack Kitch_, c. the Hangman of that Name, but now all his Successors.

_Jack in a Box_, c. a Sharper, or Cheat.

_Jackanapes_, a Term of Reproach, a little sorry Whipper-snapper; also a
well known waggish Beast. _As full of Tricks as a Jackanapes._

_Jack-sprat_, a Dwarf, or very little Fellow, a Hop-on-my-thumb.

_Jack at a Pinch_, a poor Hackney Parson.

_Jack-hawk_, the Male.

_Jacobites_, Zealous Sticklers for the late King _James_, and his
Interest; also sham or Collar Shirts, and Hereticks _Anno_ 530, following
one _Jacobus Syrus_, who held but one Will, Nature and Operation in
Christ, Circumcision of both Sexes, _&c._

_Jade_, a Terme of Reproch given to Women, as _Idle Jade_, _Lazy Jade_,
_Silly Jade_, _&c._ As dull Jade, tried Jade, to a heavy or over-ridden
Horse.

_Jakes_, a House of Office.

_Jague_, c. a Ditch.

_Janizaries_, formerly, only the Grand Signior’s Foot Guard, chosen out
of Tributary Christians, taken early from their Parents, and perverted to
Mahumetanism, ever accounted their best Soldiers; but now any Prince’s
or great Man’s Guards; also the Mob sometimes so called, and Bailives,
Serjeants, Followers, Yeomen, Setters, and any lewd Gang depending upon
others.

_Jarke_, c. a Seal.

_Jarke-men_, c. the Fourteenth Order of the Canting Tribe; also those
who make Counterfeit Licences and Passes, and are well paid by the other
Beggers for their Pains.

_Jarrs_, Quarrels, Disputes, Contentions.

_Jason’s Fleece_, c. a Citizen cheated of his Gold.

_Jayl-birds_, Prisoners.

_Ice-houses_, Repositories to keep Ice and Snow under Ground all Summer,
as there are Conservatories to House Orange-Trees, Limes, and Myrtles
in the Winter. _Break Ice in one place and it will Crack in more_, or
find out one slippery Trick, and suspect another. _When the Ice is once
broke_, or when the Way is open others will Follow. _Ice_ or _Icicles_,
little pendulous pieces of Ice under the Eaves.

_Idioms_, Proprieties of any Speech or Language, Phrases or particular
Expressions, peculiar to each Language.

_Idio-syncrasies_, peculiar Constitutions, or Affections, incident
only in particular to some Temperaments, as several Sympathies and
Antipathies, as different and unaccountable as the Variety of Gifts and
Talents in Men.

_Jenny_, c. an Instrument to lift up a Grate, and whip any thing out of a
Shop-window.

_Jesses_, short Strapps of Leather fastned to the Hawk’s Leggs.

_Jetting along_, or _out_, a Man Dancing in his Gate, or Going; also a
House starting out farther than the rest in the Row.

_Jew_, any over-reaching Dealer, or hard, sharp Fellow. _He treated me
like a Jew_, he used me very barbrously.

_Jews_, Brokers behind St. _Clement’s_ Church in _London_, so called by
(their Brethren) the Tailers.

_Ignoramus_, Novice, or raw Fellow in any Profession; also, we are
Ignorant, written by the Grand Jury upon Bills, when the Evidence is not
Home, and the Party (thereupon) Discharg’d.

_Jig_, a Trick; also a well known Dance. _A Pleasant Jig_, a witty, arch
Trick.

_Jigget_, (of Mutton) the Leg cut off with part of the Loin.

_Jilt_, a Tricking Whore.

_Jilted_, abused by such a one; also deceived or defeated in one’s
Expectation, especially in Amours.

_Jingling_, the Noise of Carriers Horses Bells, or Ringing of Money that
chinks in the Pocket.

_Jingle-boxes_, c. Leathern Jacks tipt and hung with Silver Bells
formerly in use among Fuddle caps.

_Jinglers_, c. Horse-Coursers frequenting Country Fairs.

_Jingle-brains_, a Maggot-pated Fellow.

_Jiniper-Lecture_, a round scolding Bout.

_Ill fortune_, c. a Nine-pence.

_Ill-mann’d_, a Hawk not well broke, taught or train’d.

_Impost-taker_, c. one that stands by and Lends Money to the Gamester at
a very high Interest or Premium.

_Implement_, Tool, a Property or Fool, easily engag’d in any (tho’
difficult or Dangerous) Enterprize.

_Importunate_, Dunning, pressing.

_Importunity of Friends_, the stale Excuse for coming out in Print, when
Friends know nothing of the Matter.

_Inadvertency_, any slip or false step, for want of Thinking and
Reflection.

_Inching-in_, Encroaching upon. _One of his Inches_, of his Size or
Stature. _Won by Inches_, dearly or by little and little. _Give you
an Inch and you’ll take an Ell_, of one that presumes much on little
Encouragement.

_Incog_, for Incognito, a Man of Character or Quality concealed or in
disguise.

_Incongruous_, or _an Incongruity_; Treating any Person not according
to his Character, or appearing in any Country, without conforming to
the Habits and Customs of the Place, as teaching a General the Art of
War, talking with an Ambassador without his Language, or the help of an
Interpreter, moving the Hat to _Turks_, that never stirr their Turbants,
or calling for a Chair with such Nations, as sit alwaies crosse-legg’d
upon Carpets.

_Indecorum_, any violation of the Measures of Congruity, in Story,
Painting, or Poetry, as introducing Persons together that are not
Contemporaries, and of the same Age, or representing them with Habits,
Arms or Inventions, unknown to their Times, as the _Romans_ with Gunns
or Drumms, which wou’d be no less Preposterous and Absurd than Painting
the Noblemen of _Venice_ on Horseback, or describing the _West Indians_
before the Arrival of the _Spaniards_, with the Shipping, Horses, and
Arms of the _Europeans_.

_Indulto_, his Catholic Majesty’s Permission to the Merchants to unlade
the Galeons, after his Demands are adjusted.

_In his Ale_ or _Beer_, Drunk, tho’ it be by having too much of that in
him.

_Iniskilling-men_, fam’d for their Prowess, in the late Irish Wars; also
the Royal Regiment (of Citizens) in derision so called, soon raised, and
as soon laid down.

_Inke_, the Neck from the Head to the Body of any Bird the Hawk doth prey
upon.

_Inkle_, Tape. _As great at two Inkle-makers_, or as great as Cup and
Cann.

_Inlayed_, _well inlayed_, at ease in his Fortune, or full of Money.

_Inmates_, Supernumeraries, who have no House or Being of their own,
and yet are no Members of the House or Family they Live in, from whom
they differ in the same Nature, as the Excrescences of Trees do from the
Fruits either Genuin or Grafted; as Misletoe of the Oak, Galls, _&c._
differ from the Mast or Acorns.

_Insipids_, Block-heads; also things that are castless.

_Interlopers_, Hangers on, retainers to, or dependers upon other folks;
also Medlers and Busy-bodies, intruders into other Men’s Professions, and
those that intercept the Trade of a Company, being not legally authorized.

_Intrigues_, Finesses, Tricks of War, or State, as Court-tricks,
Law-quirks, tho’ in War they are rather called Stratagems.

_Intriguing_, Plotting, Tricking, Designing, full of Tricks and
Subtilties.

_Inveterate_, either Enemies that are implacable and of long continuance,
or Diseases that are confirmed, deep-rooted and riveted.

_Joan_, a _homely Joan_, a Coarse Ord’nary Woman, _Joan in the Dark is as
good as my Lady_, or _when the Candles are out all Cats are Gray_.

_Job_, c. a Guinea, Twenty shillings, or a Piece. _Half a Job_, c. half 3
Guinea, Ten shillings, half a Piece, or an Angel.

_Jobbers_, see Badgers, Matchmakers, Salesmen, Stock-jobbers.

_Jobbernoll_, c. a very silly Fellow.

_Jock_ or _Jockumcloy_, c. to copulate with a Woman.

_Jockum-gage_, c. a Chamberpot. _Tip me the Jockumgage_, c. give me or
hand me the Member-mug. _Rum Jockum-gage_, c. a Silver-chamberpot.

_Jockeys_, rank Horse-Coursers, Race Riders; also Hucksters or Sellers of
Horses, very slippery Fellows to deal with.

_Jolter-head_, a vast large Head; also Heavy and Dull. To Jolt or Shake,
jolting or shaking of a Coach.

_Jordain_, c. a great Blow or Staff; also a Chamberpot. _I’ll tip him a
Jordain if I transnear_, c. I will give a Blow with my Staff if I get up
to him.

_Joseph_, c. a Cloak or Coat. _A Rum Joseph_, c. a good Cloak or Coat.
_A Queer Joseph_, c. a coarse ord’nary Cloak or Coat; also an old or
Tatter’d one.

_Irish Toyles_, c. the Twelfth Order of Canters; also Rogues carrying
Pinns, Points, Laces, and such like Wares about, and under pretence of
Selling them, commit Thefts and Robberies.

_Iron-doublet_, a Prison.

_Itch-land_, Wales.

_Jugglers_, Nimble and expert Fellows at Tricks, and Slights of Hand, to
distinguish them from Tumblers, that perform Bodily Feats, or Feats of
Activity, by playing of Tricks with the whole Body.

_Jukrum_, c. a License.

_Jumble gut lane_, any very bad or rough Road. _To Jumble_, to shake much
or often.

_Justice_, _I’ll do Justice Child_, c. I will Peach or rather Impeach
or Discover the whole Gang, and so save my own Bacon; also in another
Sense, _I’ll do you Justice Sir_, I will Pledge you.


K

_Kate_, c. a Pick-lock. _’Tis a Rum Kate_, c. that is a Cleaver Pick-lock.

_Keel-bullies_, Lighter-men that carry Coals to and from the Ships, so
called in Derision.

_Keel-hale_, to draw by a Rope tied to the Neck and fastned to a Tackle
(with a jerk) quite under the Keel or bottom of the Ship.

_Keffal_, a Horse.

_Kelter_, _out of Kelter_, out of sorts.

_Ken_, c. a House. _A bob Ken_, or _a Bowman-ken_, c. a good or well
Furnished House, full of Booty, worth Robbing; also a House that Harbours
Rogues and Thievs. _Biting the Ken_, c. Robbing the House.

_Ken-miller_, c. a House-breaker. _Friend John_, _or sweet Tom_, _’tis a
bob Ken_, _Brush upon the Sneak_, c. ’tis a good House, go in if you will
but Tread softly, and mind your Business. _Now we have Bit_, c. the House
is Robb’d, or the Business is done. _There’s a Cull knows us, if we don’t
pike he’ll Bone us_, c. that Fellow sees us, if we don’t scour off, he
will Apprehend us. _Ding him_, c. Knock him Down. _Then we’ll pike, tis
all Bowman_, c. we will be gone, all is well, the Coast is clear.

_Keaping Cully_, one that Maintains a Mistress, and parts with his Money
very generously to her.

_Kicks_, c. Breeches. _A high Kick_, the top of the Fashion; also
singularity therein. _Tip us your Kicks, we’ll have them as well as your
Loure_, c. pull off your Breeches, for we must have them as well as your
Money.

_Kid_, c. a Child; also the first Year of a Roe, and a young Goat.

_Kidnapper_, c. one that Decoys or Spirits (as it is commonly called)
Children away, and Sells them for the Plantations.

_Kidder_, c. see Crocker.

_Kidlay_, c. one who meeting a Prentice with a Bundle or Parcel of Goods,
wheedles him by fair Words, and whipping Sixpence into his Hand, to step
on a short and sham Errand for him, in the mean time Runs away with the
Goods.

_Kidney_, (Beans) _French_. _Of that Kidney_, of such a Stamp. _Of a
strange Kidney_, of an odd or unaccountable Humor.

_Kilkenny_, c. an old sorry Frize-Coat.

_Kill-Devil_, Rum. _Kill two Birds with one Stone_, Dispatch two
Businesses at one Stroak.

_Kimbaw_, c. to Trick, Sharp, or Cheat; also to Beat severely or to
Bully. _Lets Kimbaw the Cull_, c. Let’s Beat that Fellow, and get his
Money (by Huffing and Bullying) from him.

_Kinchin_, c. a little Child.

_Kinchin-coes_, c. the Sixteenth Rank of the Canting Tribe, being little
Children whose Parents are Dead, having been Beggers; as also young Ladds
running from their Masters, who are first taught Canting, then thieving.

_Kinchin-cove_, c. a little Man.

_King’s Head Inn_, or _the Chequer Inn in Newgate-street_, c. the Prison
or Newgate.

_King’s Pictures_, c. Money.

_King of all Beasts of Venery_, a Hare.

_King of the Gypsies_, the Captain, Chief, or Ring-leader of the Gang,
the Master of Misrule.

_Kindly_, Fruit, or Season, towardly. _Kindness will creep where it
cannot go_.

_Kinchin-morts_, c. the Twenty seventh and last Order of the Canting
Crew, being Girls of a Year or two old, whom the _Morts_ (their Mothers)
carry at their Backs in _Slates_ (_Sheets_) and if they have no Children
of their own, they borrow or Steal them from others.

_Kissing the Maid_, an Engine in _Scotland_, and at _Halifax_ in
_England_, in which the Head of the Malefactor is Laid to be Cut off, and
which this way is done to a Hair, said to be invented by Earl _Morton_
who had the ill Fate to Handsel it. _Kissing goes by Favour_, I suppose
another sort is meant by this Proverb than the foremention’d.

_Knack_, or Slight in any Art, the Craft or Mystery in any Trade, a petty
Artifice, or Trick like those upon the Cards. _Knacks_ or Toies, _a
Knack-shop_, or Toy-shop, freight with pretty Devices to pick Pockets.

_Knave in Grain_, one of the First Rate. _Knaves and Fools are the
Composition of the whole World._

_Knight Errant_, the Knight or Hero in Romances, that alwaies is to Beat
the Giant, and Rescue the destressed Damsel.

_Knight-Errantry_, Romantick and Fabulous Exploits, out of the common
Road, and above the ordinary Size, such as the wild Adventures of
wandering Knights.

_Knight of the Blade_, c. a Hector or Bully.

_Knight of the Post_, c. a Mercenary common Swearer, a Prostitute to
every Cause, an Irish Evidence.

_Knight of the Road_, c. the chief High-wayman best Mounted and Armed,
the Stoutest Fellow among them.

_Knobber_, see Hart.

_Knock in the Cradle_, a Fool.

_Knock-down_, very strong Ale or Beer.

_Knock off_, to give over Trading; also to Abandon or Quit one’s Post or
Pretensions.

_Knowledge is no Burden. Knowledge makes one laugh, but wealth makes one
dance._

_Knot_, a choice Bird, something less than a Ruff.

_Knotting_, making Fringe.


L

_Labourinvain_, lost Labour, such as washing of Blackamoors, shearing of
Hoggs, hedging in the Cuckoe, _&c._

  _Lac’d_ { _Coffee_, Sugar’d.
          { _Mutton_, a Woman.

_Lacing_, Beating, Drubbing. _I’ll Lace your Coat Sirrah_, I will Beat
you soundly.

_Ladder_, see _Badger_, first Part.

_Lady_, a very crooked, deformed and ill shapen Woman.

_Lady-birds_, Light or Lewd Women; also a little Red Insect, variegated
with black Spots.

_Lag_, c. Water; also Last.

_Lag-a dudds_, c. a Buck of Cloths. _As we cloy the Lag of Dudds_, c.
come let us Steal that Buck of Cloths. _To Lagg behind_, or come after
with Salt and Spoons. _Lagg of the Flock_, the Hindmost.

_Lambaste_, to Beat soundly.

_Lamb-pye_, Beating or Drubbing.

_Lamb-skin men_, c. the Judges of the several Courts.

_Lambs-wool_, roasted Apples and Ale.

_Lame Excuse_, a sorry Shift or Evasion.

_Land-lopers_ or _Land-lubbers_, Fresh-water Sea-men so called by the
true Tarrs; also Vagabonds that Beg and Steal about the Country.

_Land-pirates_, c. Highwaymen or any other Robbers.

_Land-lord_ and _Land-lady_, Host and Hostess; also Possessors of Land
or Houses, and Letters out of either to farm or for Lodgings. _How lies
the Land?_ How stands the Reckoning? _Who has any Lands in Appleby?_ a
Question askt the Man at whose Door the Glass stands Long.

_Lank_, Gaunt, Thin, Hollow, Lean, Meager, Slender, Weak. _Lank Ears of
Corn_, very thin Ears.

_Lanspresado_, c. he that comes into Company with but Two pence in his
Pocket.

_Lantern-jaw’d_, a very lean, thin faced Fellow. _A Dark-Lanthorn_, the
Servant or Agent that Receives the Bribe (at Court.)

_Lap_, c. Pottage, Butter-milk, or Whey. _’Tis rum Lap_, c. this is
excellent Soupe.

_Larbord_, on the left side or Hand.

_Lare-over_, said when the true Name of the thing must (in decency) be
concealed.

_Largess_, a Pittance properly given to Reapers and Harvest Folks, now
used for any petty Donative, or small Gratuity.

_Latitudinarian_, a Church-man at large, one that is no Slave to Rubrick,
Canons, Liturgy, or Oath of Canonical Obedience, and in fine looks
towards _Lambeth_, and rowes to _Geneva_.

_Layd-up-in Lavender_, when any Cloaths or other Moveables are pawn’d or
dipt for present Money; also _Rodds in Pickle_, of Revenge in reserve,
till an opportunity offers to show it.

_Lawn_, a naked Space in the middle of a Park or Forrest, left Untilled,
and without Wood, contrary to a _Hay_, which see in it’s proper Place;
also very thin Linnen, formerly much Worn.

_Layr_, the Impression where any Deer hath Harboured or reposed.

_Leachers_, Lascivious or Lustful Men.

_Leaden Pate_, a dull, heavy, stupid Fellow.

_Leaders_, the first Players, Generals of Armies, and Men of most sway in
great Councils or Assemblies; also the Fore-horses in Coaches and Teams.
_Who Leads?_ Who begins or Plays first.

_Leash_, Three; also the String wherewith a Grey-hound is Led.

_Leather-head_, a Thick-skull’d, Heavy-headed Fellow.

_Leather-mouth’d Fish_, Carp, Roach, _&c._ having their Teeth in their
Throats.

_Leathern Convenience_ (by the Quakers) a Coach.

_Leaves_, of a Tree, of a Book, of Doors, or Window-shutters, and of
folding Tables; _I must turn over a new Leaf with you_, or take another
Course with you.

_Legerdemain_, Jugglers Tricks; also Sharping.

_Lesses_, Boars Excrements.

_Let’s take an Ark and Winns_, c. let us hire a Skuller.

_Let’s buy a Brush_ or _Let’s Lope_, c. let us scour off, and make what
shift we can to secure our selves from being apprehended. _Let him Laugh
that Wins_: _Let the World say what they will, if I find all well at
Home._ _Let every Man meddle with his own._

_Leveret_, the first Year, see Hare.

_Levite_, a Priest or Parson; also those of the Tribe of Levi, whose
Inheritance the Priest-hood (craft and all) was.

_Levy_, the Prince’s, or any great Man’s time of Rising.

_Leystall_, a Dunghil.

_Lib_, c. to Tumble or Lye together.

_Libben_, c. a private dwelling House.

_Libbege_, c. a Bed.

_Libkin_, c. a House to Lye in; also a Lodging.

_Libertines_, Pleasant and profuse Livers, that Live-apace, but wildly,
without Order, Rule, or Discipline, lighting the Candle (of Life) at both
Ends. _A short Life and a Merry one._ _Life is sweet._ _Life is half
Spent, before we know what it is._

_Lickt_, Pictures new Varnished, Houses new Whitened, or Womens Faces
with a Wash.

_Lifter_, c. a Crutch.

_Light Finger’d_, Thievish.

_Light-mans_, c. the Day or Day-break.

_Light Friggat_, a Whore; also a Cruiser.

_Light Woman_, or _Light Huswife_, Lewd, Whorish.

_Light-timber’d Fellow_, limber or slender Limb’d; also weak.

_Lilly-white_, c. a Chimney-sweeper.

_Linnen-armorers_, c. Tailers.

_Line of the old Author_, a Dram of Brandy.

_Litter_, any thing clatter’d up, out of Place or Order, _What a litter
here is?_ What a toss and tumble? Also _a Litter of Cubbs_, young Foxes;
_of Whelps, Puppies_, young Doggs.

_Little Barbary_, Wapping.

_Little Fellow or Action_, Contemptible, Base, Sneaking,
Ungentleman-like.

_Loblolly_, any ill-cookt Mess.

_Lob-cock_, a heavy, dull Fellow. _In Lob’s Pound_, Laid by the Heels, or
clap’d up in Jail.

_Lobster_, a Red Coat Soldier.

_Lock all fast_, c. one that Buys and Conceals Stolen Goods. _The Lock_,
c. the Magazine or Ware-house whither, the Thieves carry Stolen Goods to
be secur’d; also an Hospital for Pockey Folks in _Kent-street_.

_Lockram-jaw’d_, Thin, Lean, Sharp-visag’d.

_Loge_, c. a Watch. I suppose from the French _Horloge_, a Clock or
Watch. _Filed a Cly of a Loge, or Scout_, c. Pickt a Pocket of a Watch.
_Biting a Loge, or Scout_, c. the same.

_Loggerhead_, a heavy, dull Fellow. _To go to Loggerheads_, to go to
Fisticuffs.

_Lolpoop_, a Lazy, Idle Drone. _To Loll_, to Lean on the Elbows; also to
put out the Tongue in derision.

_Long-headed_, Wise, of great reach and foresight.

_Long-meg_, a very tall Woman.

_Long-shanks_, Long-legged.

_Long-winded Pay-master_, one that very slowly, heavily, or late Paies.

_Looby_, a lazy dull Fellow.

_Looking-glass_, a Chamber-pot.

_Loon-slatt_, c. a Thirteen Pence half Penny. _A Loon_, see _Lout_. _A
False Loon_, a true _Scotch_ Man, or Knave of any Nation.

_Lord_, a very crooked, deformed, or ill-shapen Person.

_Lore_, Learning or Skill in any Thing.

_Louse-land_, Scotland. _A Scotch Louse-trap_, a Comb.

_Lout_, an heavy, idle Fellow. _To Lout_, to Low like a Cow, or Bellow
like a Bull.

_Loure_, c. Money.

_Low Tide_, when there’s no Money in a Man’s Pocket.

_Low-pad_, c. a Foot-Pad.

_Lubber_, _Lubberly_, a heavy, dull Fellow.

_Lud’s-bulwark_, c. Ludgate Prison.

_Luggage_, Lumber.

_Luggs_, Ears: Hence to Lug by the Ears. _Ye can he make a Silk-Purse of
a Sowe’s Luggs_, a Scotch Proverb. _To Lug out_, to draw a Sword.

_Lullaby-cheat_, c. a Child.

_Lumber_, Rubbish, Trash, Trumpery.

_Lumpish_, heavy dull, drowsy.

_Lurched_, Beaten at any Game. _Left in the Lurch_, Pawn’d for the
Reckoning, or left at Stake to Smart for any Plot.

_Lure_, c. an idle Pamphlet; also a Bait. _Throw out a Lure_, to lay Bait.

_Lurries_, c. Money, Watches, Rings, or other Moveables.

_Lyome_, the String wherewith a Hound is Led.


M

_Mab_, a Slattern. _Mab’d up_, Drest carelessly, like a Slattern, of such
a one it is said. _Her Cloths fit on her, like a Saddle on a Sow’s Back._
_Queen Mab_, Queen of the Fairies.

_Mackarel_, c. a Bawd.

_Mackarel-back_, a very tall, lank Person.

_Machiavilian_, one wickedly or knavishly Politic.

_Machines_, Vessels full of Carcasses and Bombs, under Shelter or Covert
of the _Smokers_, to come close up under Walls, Forts, Fortifications,
_&c._ being fixt to Blow up the same. Also Engines or Instruments of
divers Arts, and Movements upon the Stage.

_Madam Van_, c. a Whore, _The Cull has been with Madam Van_, c. the
Fellow has enjoyed such a one.

_Mad-cap_, a frolicksom Person.

_Made_, c. Stolen. _I Made this Knife at a beat_, c. I Stole it cleaverly.

_Mad Tom_, alias of Bedlam, the Eighteenth Rank of Canters.

_Madge-howlet_, an Owl.

_Maggot_, a whimsical Fellow, full of strange Fancies and Caprichio’s,
_Maggotty_, Freakish.

_Maiden-sessions_, when none are Hang’d.

_Mailes_, the Breast-Feathers of a Hawk.

_Main_, great, excellent, choice, rare; also the Sea. _Maingood_, very
good. _With Might and Main_, Tooth and Nail.

_Make_, c. a half Penny.

_Make-bait_, a Trouble-House, or Mischief-maker, a stirrer of Strife, and
maker of Debate, a Boute feu, or Incendiary.

_Male-contents_, Disaffected to the State, out of Humor with the
Government.

_Malkin_ or _Maukin_, a Scare-crow, Drest and Set up to fright the Birds.
Also a Scovel (of old Clouts) to cleanse the Oven: Hence _Malkin-trash_,
for one in a rueful Dress, enough to Fright one. _There are more Maids
than Malkins_, _Mawks_, the same abbreaviated. _Mawkish_, a Wallowish,
ill Tast.

_Malmesey-nose_, a jolly, red Nose.

_Man o’ th’ Town_, a Lew’d Spark, or very Debaushe.

_Manning_, a Hawk, making him endure Company.

_Mannikin_, a Dwarf, or diminutive Fellow.

_Mantles_, when Drink is brisk and smiles; also when a Hawk stretcheth
one of her Wings after her Leggs, and so the other.

_Margery-prater_, c. a Hen.

_Marinated_, c. Transported into some forreign Plantation; also Fish
Soused.

_Marriage-music_, Childrens Cries.

_Marks_, the Footing of an Otter.

_Marrel_, a Bird about the bigness of a Knot, but not good Meat.

_Martern_, a Wild Cat, the second Year, called a Cub, the first. _A
Martern Treeth_, Lodgeth; _Tree the Martern_, Dislodge him.

_Masons mawn’d_, c. a Sham sore above the Elbow, to counterfeit a broken
Arm, by a Fail from a Scaffold, expos’d by subtil Beggers, to move
Compassion, and get Money.

_Masons-Word_, who ever has it, shall never want, there being a Bank at
a certain Lodge in _Scotland_ for their Relief. Tis communicated with a
strict Oath, and much Ceremony, (too tedious to insert) and if it be sent
to any of the Society, he must, (nay will) come immediately, tho’ very
Busy, or at great Distance.

_Match_ or _Make_, the Copulation of Woolves.

_Match makers_, a better sort of Procurers of Wives for Men, or Husbands
for Women, Maiden-head-jobbers, Virginity Sellers, Brokers, _&c._

_Maul’d_, swingingly Drunk, or soundly Beat.

_Maunders_, c. Beggers.

_Maunding_, c. to Beg, Begging.

_Maundring-broth_, Scolding.

_Mawdlin_, weepingly Drunk, as we say the Tears of the Tankard. _What are
you Mawdlin you Rake?_ are ye’ neither Drunk, nor Sober?

_May-games_, Frolicks Plaies, Tricks, Pastimes, _&c._ _Do you make a
May-game of me?_ do you Abuse or Expose me?

_Mead_, a pleasant Summer Drink, made of Water and Honey, Boyled, and
Bottled fine, in great vogue in _Moscovy_, where ’tis said the best in
the World is made.

_Meadites_, a Faction of Quakers, that follow most, and are in the
Interest of _Mead_.

_Meal-mouth_, a sly, sheepish Dun, or Sollicitor for Money.

_Measure_, the Distance of Duellers. _To break Measure_, to be out of
the Adversaries reach.

_Mechanic_, a Tradesman; also a mean, inconsiderable, contemptible Fellow.

_Meggs_, c. Guineas. _We fork’d the rum Cull’s Meggs to the tune of
Fifty_, c. We Pickt the Gentleman’s Pocket of full Fourty Guineas.

_Mellow_, a’most Drunk; also smooth, soft Drink.

_Melt_, c. to spend Money. _Will you Melt a Bord?_ c. Will you spend
your Shilling? _The Cull Melted a couple of Decusses upon us_, c. the
Gentleman spent ten Shillings upon us.

_Member-mug_, a Chamber-pot.

_Mercury_, Wit; also Quick-silver, and a Courant or News-Letter.

_Mercurial_, Witty; also one Born under ☿, _i. e._ when that Planet is
Lord of the Horoscope or Ascendant at Birth.

_Mercury Women_, Wholesale News-sellers, who Retail to the _Hawkers_.

_Metheglin_, a strong Drink, made of new Wort and Honey.

_Mew_, when Deer cast their Horns; also the Place where the Hawk is set
down, during the time she raiseth her Feathers.

_Meyny_, the Folks, or Family-Servants. Hence Menial-Servant, yet in use,
for a Domestic or Family-Servant.

_Mifty_, apt to take Pet, or be out of Humor.

_Mill-clapper_, a (Woman’s) Tongue. _As Safe as a Thief in a Mill_, a
waggish Periphrasis for a Miller, who is a Thief by his Trade.

_Milch-kine_, a Term us’d by Goalers, when their Prisoners will bleed
freely to have some Favor, or be at large.

_Mill_, c. to Steal, Rob, or Kill.

_Mill-a-ken_, c. to Rob a House, _Milling the Gig with a Betty_, c.
Breaking open the Door with an Iron-Crow. _Milling the Glaze_, c.
Breaking open the Window. _Mill them_, c. Kill them.

_Miller_, c. a Killer or Murderer.

_Mill-a-crackmans_, c. to break a Hedge.

_Mill-a-bleating-cheat_, c. to kill a Sheep.

_Mill a-grunter_, c. to Kill a Pig.

_Mil-ken_, c. a House-breaker. _Mill the Gig with a Dub_, c. to open the
Door with a Pick-lock or false Key.

_Miller’s-Thumb_, or _Bull-head_, a Fish with a broad Head, and wide
Mouth, two Finns near his Eyes, and as many under his Belly, and on his
Back; and one below the Vent, his Tayl round, and his Body cover’d with
Whitish, Blackish and Brownish Spotts.

_Mince the Matter_, to tell it Sparingly or by Halves.

_Miniature_, Painting in little.

_Minks_, a proud Flirt.

_Mint_, c. Gold; also a late Sanctuary (in _Sowthwark_) for such as broke
either out of Necessity, or in Design to bring their Creditors the more
easily to a Composition. Hence _Minters_, the Inhabitants.

_Miquelets_, Mountaneers, (in _Spain_) or Spanish Rapparies.

_Miscreant_, a lewd, wicked Fellow.

_Mish_, c. a Shirt or Smock.

_Mish-topper_, c. a Coat or Petticoat.

_Miskin_, a Dunghil or Lay-stall.

_Miss_, a Whore of Quality; also a little Girl.

_Moabites_, Serjeants, Bailiffs and their Crew.

  _Mob_,      }
  _Mobile_,   } the Vulgar, or Rabble.
  _Mobility_, }

_Mock-song_, that Ridicules another Song, in the same Terms and to the
same Tune. _A Mock-Romance_, that ridicules other Romances, as _Don
Quixot_. A Mock-Play, that exposes other Playes, as the _Rehearsal_. _A
Mock-holy-day._ _To Mock_, or mimick another.

_Moggy_, in Scotch, as _Peg_ in English, for Margaret.

_Moil_, to Drudge or Labour Hard. _To Moil and Toil_, to Slave at it. _A
Moiling Fellow_, a Drudge or great Pains-taker.

_Molinet_, a Chocolate Stick, or little Mill.

_Mongrel_, c. a Hanger on among the Cheats, a Spunger. _Of a Mongrel race
or Breed_, a Curr or Man of a base, ungenerous Breed.

_Mood_, Humor. _In a merry Mood_, or good Humor; _in an ill Mood_, or out
of Humor. _Moody_, Humorous.

_Moon-curser_, c. a Link-boy, or one that under Colour of lighting Men,
Robs them or leads them to a gang of Rogues, that will do it for him.

_Moon-men_, c. Gipsies.

_Moon-blind_, a sort of Horses, weak-sighted.

_Moppet_, _a pretty Moppet_, a very pretty little Baby.

_Mopsie_, a Dowdy, or Homely Woman.

_Mop eied_, one that can’t see well, by living too long a Maid.

_Mop’d_, Maz’d.

_Mopus_, c. a half Penny or Farthing. _A meer Mopus grown_, become
dispirited, dull and Stupid.

_Morglag_, a Watch-man’s brown Bill; as Glaives, are Bills or Swords.

_Morisco_, a Morris or Morrice-dance, being belike some Remains of a
Moorish Custom with us, as the _Juego de Toros_, or Feast of Bulls is, in
_Spain_.

_Mort_, or Death, is Blown at the Death of the Deer.

_Morts_, c. Yeomen’s Daughters; also a Wife, Woman, or Wench.

_Moss-Troopers_, so called from the Mosses, wast Lands in _Lancashire_,
as the _Bog-Trotters_ in _Ireland_, are from the Boggs there.

_Mother_, a Bawd.

_Mother-midnight_, a Midwife (often a Bawd.)

_Mouchets_, Patches for Ladies Faces.

_Moveables_, c. Rings, Watches, Swords, and such Toies of value. _As we
bit all the Cull’s Cole and Moveables_, c. we Won all the Man’s Money,
Rings, Watches, _&c._ _Very Moving_, prevailing, powerful, perswading.

_Mountings_, a Soldier’s Arms and Cloths.

_Mouse-trap._ _The Parson’s Mouse-trap_, Marriage. _He watcht me, as a
Cat does a Mouse_, i. e. narrowly. _A Man or a Mouse_, a Prince or a
Peasant. _A Mouse in the Pot is better than no Flesh_, or something
has some Savour. _’Tis pitty to fling Water on a Drown’d Mouse_, or to
depress the Miserable. _A sorry Mouse that has but one Hole_, or a poor
Creature that has but one Shift.

_Mouth_, a noisy Fellow. _A Mouthing Fellow_, a Bawling or Scolding
Person. _He never Speaks, but his Mouth opens._ _Mouth half Cockt_,
gaping and staring at every thing they see.

_Mower_, c. a Cow.

_Mow-beater_, c. a Drover.

_Muck_, Money, Wealth; also Dung to manure Land.

_Muckworm_, a covetous Wretch.

_Muckinder_, a Child’s Handkerchief tied by the side.

_Muddled_, half Drunk. _To Muddle on_, tho’ so, yet to Drink on.

_Muff_, c. a Woman’s Secrets. _To the well wearing of your Muff Mort_,
c. to the happy Consummation of your Marriage Madam, a Health.

_Muffting-cheat_, c. a Napkin.

_Muggletonians_, the Sect or Disciples of _Lodowick Muggleton_.

_Mulligrubs_ or _Mumps_, a Counterfeit Fit of the Sullens.

_Mum-for-that_, not a Word of the Pudding.

_Mumble_, to Mutter or Speak between the Teeth.

_Mum-chance_, one that sits mute. _He looks like Mum-chance that was
Hang’d for saying of nothing._

_Mum-glass_, the Monument, erected at the City-charge, in Memory of the
dreadful Fire 1666, which consum’d the greatest Part of it.

_Mumpers_, c. Gentile-Beggers, who will not accept of Victuals, but Money
or Cloths.

_Mumpers-Hall_, c. several Ale-houses in and about this City and
Suburbs, in Allies, and By-places, much used by them, and resorted to in
the Evening, where they will be very Merry, Drunk, and Frolicksom.

_Mun-corn_, half Wheat, half Rye.

_Muns_, c. the Face. _Toute his Mans_, c. note his Phis, or mark his Face
well.

_Musick_. _It makes ill Musick_, of any unwelcom or unpleasing News.
_Touch that String most which makes best Musick_, or that cannot
be Harped upon too often that pleases. _The Musick’s paid_, c. the
Watch-word among High-way-men, to let the Company they were to Rob,
alone, in return to some Courtsey from some Gentleman among them.

_Must_, new Wine, or Wine on the Lea. _After Beef_, _Mustard_ of a thing
preposterous, or out of Place; as we say, _the Cart before the Horse_.

_Mute_, when Hounds or Beagles run long without opening, or making any
Cry; also a certain dumb Executioner among the _Turks_.

_Muting_, the Excrements of a Hern or Hawk.

_Mutter_, to Speak inwardly and between the Teeth.

_Mutton-monger_, a Lover of Women; also a Sheep-stealer.

_Mutton-in-long-coats_, Women. _A Leg of Mutton in a Silk-Stocking_, a
Woman’s Leg.

_Muzzle_, c. a Beard, (usually) long and nasty.

_Myrmidons_, c. the Constable’s Attendants, or those whom he commands (in
the King’s Name) to Aid and assist him; also the Watch-men.


N

_Nab_, c. a Hat, Cap, or Head; also a Coxcomb. _I’ll Nab ye_, c. I’ll
have your Hat or Cap. _Nim the Nab_, c. to Steal the Hat or Cap. _Nab’d_,
c. Apprehended, Taken or Arrested.

_Nab-cheat_, c. a Hat.

_Nab-girder_, c. a Bridle.

_Nanny-house_, a Bawdy-house.

_Nap_, c. by Cheating with the Dice to secure one Chance; also a Clap, or
Pox, and a short sleep. _Nap the Wiper_, c. to Steal the Handkerchief.
_You have Napt it_, c. you are Clapt Sir. _To be caught Napping_, to be
Surpriz’d, or Taken a sleep.

_Napper_, c. a Cheat, or Thief.

_Napper of Napps_, c. a Sheep-stealer.

_Nappy-Ale_, very Strong, Heady.

_Nare-a-face-but-his-own_, Not a Penny in his Pocket.

_Narrow_, when the Biass of the Bowl holds too much. _’Tis all Narrow_,
said by the Butchers one to another when their Meat proves not so good
as expected. _A Narrow-soul’d Fellow_, poor or Mean-spirited, stingy.
_Narrow or near search or Escape, watch him narrowly or nearly. Of a
Narrow_ or slender Fortune.

_Nask_, c. or _Naskin_, c. A Prison or Bridewell. _The old Nask_, c. the
City Bridewell. _The new Nask_, c. Clerkenwell Bridewell. _Tuttle Nask_,
c. the Bridewell in Tuttle-Fields. _He Napt it at the Nask_, c. he was
Lasht at Bridewell.

_Natural_, c. a Mistress, a Wench; also a Fool.

_Natural-children_, Bastards.

Mr. _Nawpost_, a foolish Fellow.

_Nay-word_, a common By-word, or Proverb.

_Nazie_, c. Drunken.

_Nazie-cove_, c. a Drunkard.

_Nazy-nabs_, c. Drunken Coxcombs.

_Neb_, the Bill of a Bird, and the slit or point of a Pen. _She holds up
her Neb_, she turns up her Snout to be Kist.

_Neck-stamper_, c. the Pot-Boy at a Tavern or Ale-house.

_Neck-verse_, a Favor (formerly) indulged to the Clergy only, but (now)
to the Laity also, to mitigate the Rigor of the Letter of the Law, as
in Man-slaughter, _&c_. Reading a Verse out of an old Manuscript Latin
Psalter, (tho’ the Book now used by the Ordinary is the same Printed in
an old English Character) saves the Criminal’s Life. Nay now even the
Women (by a late Act of Parliament) have (in a manner) the benefit of
their Clergy, tho’ not so much as put to Read; for in such Cases where
the Men are allow’d it; the Women are of course sizz’d in the Fist,
without running the risque of a Halter by not Reading.

  _Negro_ }          { Flat.
  _Hawk_  } _Nos’d_, { Hook’d.
  _Roman_ }          { Rais’d in the middle like _Kingston Bridge_.

_Needle-point_, c. a Sharper.

_Neither-Vert_, all sorts of Under-wood.

_Neighborly_, Friendly, Kind, Loving, Obliging. _You Live a great way off
good Neighbors_, to him, that is the Trumpet of his own Praises.

_Nestlings_, Canary-Birds, brought up by Hand. _What a Nestling you
keep_, how restless and uneasy you are. _Nest of Rabbets._

_Nettled_, Teiz’d, provoked, made uneasy. _He has pist upon a Nettle_,
he is very uneasy, or much out of Humor. _In Dock, out Nettle_, upon the
change of Places, when one is no sooner out, but another is in his Place.

_Nice_, squeemish, precise. _More nice than wise_, _a Sir Courtly Nice_,
a silly empty, gay, foolish Fellow.

_Nickum_, c. a. Sharper; also a Rooking Ale-house or Innkeeper, Vintner,
or any Retailer. _Nick it_, to win at Dice, to hit the Mark, to Drink the
pin to or button. _Old Nick_, the Devil. _Nick and Froth built the Pye at
Aldgate_, sharping in the Reckonings and cheating in the Measure built
that (once) Noted House.

_Nickum-poop_, a Fool, also a silly soft, Uxorious Fellow.

_Nick-ninny_, an empty Fellow, a meer Cod’s Head.

_Nig_, c. the Clippings of Money.

_Nigler_, c. a Clipper.

_Nigging_, c. Clipping.

_Nigling_, c. accompanying with a Woman.

_Night-Magistrate_, a Constable.

_Night-men_, Gold-finders, Tom-turd-men.

_Night-rale_, a Woman’s combing Cloth, to dress her Head in.

_Night-walker_, c. a Bell-man; also a Light Woman, a Thief, a Rogue.

_Nigit_, a Fool.

_Nigmenog_, a very silly Fellow.

_Nikin_, a Natural, or very soft creature; also Isaac.

_Nim_, c. to Steal, or whip off or away any thing. _Nim a Togeman_, c. to
Steal a Cloak. _Nim a Cloak_, c. to cut off the Buttons in a Crowd, or
whip it off a Man’s Shoulders.

_Nim-gimmer_, c. a Doctor, Surgeon, Apothecary or any one that cures a
Clap or the Pox.

_Ninny_, c. a Canting whining Begger; also a Fool.

_Ninny-hammer_, a silly Senseless Fellow.

_Nip_, c. a Cheat; also to Pinch or Sharp any thing. _Nip a-bung_, c. to
cut a Purse. _To Nip_, to Press between the Fingers and Thumb without the
Nails, or with any broad Instrument like a pair of Tongs as to squeeze
between Edged Instruments or Pincers. _Nipping Frost or Wind_, Sharp or
Cutting. _To Nip in the Bud_, of an early Blast or Blite of Fruit; also
to crush any thing at the beginning.

_Nipperkin_, c. half a Pint of Wine, and but half a Quartern of Brandy,
Strongwaters, _&c._

_Nipps_, c. the Shears with which Money was wont to be Clipt.

_Nit_, wine that is brisk, and pour’d quick into a Glass; also a young
Louse. _Nitts will be Lice._

_Nizy_, c. a Fool, or Coxcomb.

_Nob_, c. a Head.

_Nocky_, c. a silly, dull Fellow.

_Noddle_, a Head.

_Noddy_, c. a Fool. _Knave-Noddy_, a Game on the Cards.

_Nokes_, a Ninny or Fool; also a noted Droll but lately Dead.

_Nol_, Oliver. _Old Nol_, the late Usurper _Cromwel_.

_Noggin_, (of Brandy) a Quarter of a Pint.

_A Noble_, Six and eight-pence. _He has brought a Noble to Nine Pence_,
of one that has reduced his Fortune.

_Noise_, used either of Harmonious or confused Sounds, _Noise of
Thunder_, _or of a Mill_, _Noise of the Hounds_, _a Noise of Fiddles, of
Trumpets and Drums, a Noise of Swords, or clashing_; _make a Noise Tom_,
Hot Pudding-Pies.

_Non-con_, one that don’t conform to the Church of _England_.

_Nonjurors_, Clergymen and others (Officers in the Army, Navy, _&c._)
That refus’d to take the Oaths to King _WILLIAM_ and Queen _MARY_, and
were turn’d out of their Livings and Employments.

_Nooz’d_, or _caught in a Nooze_, married; also Hanged.

_Nose-gent_, c. a Nun. _As plain as the Nose in your Face_, of a fair
mark that cannot be hid. _He has a good Nose_, of a Smell-Feast. _He
holds up his Nose_, of one that is Haughty, and carries his Head high.
_He is led by the Nose_, of one that is easily imposed upon. _You make a
Bridge of his Nose_, when you pass your next Neighbor in Drinking, or
one is preferr’d over another’s Head. _Follow your Nose_, said in a jeer
to those that know not the way, and are bid to Smell it out, as we say to
Smell a Post.

_Nub_, c. the Neck.

_Nubbing_, c. Hanging.

_Nubbing-cheat_, c. the Gallows.

_Nubbing-Cove_, c. the Hangman.

_Nubbing-ken_, c. the Sessions-house.

_Nug_, a Word of Love, as, _my Dear Nug_, my Dear Love.

_Nugging-Dress_, an odd or particular way, out of the Fashion.

_Numms_, c. a Sham, or Collar, Shirt, to hide the other when Dirty.

_Num-skul_, a Foolish Person.

_Nut-crackers_, c. a Pillory. _The Cull lookt through the Nut-crackers_,
the Rogue stood in the Pillory.


O

_Oaf_, a Wise-acre, a Ninny or Fool, _Oafish_ Silly.

_Oak_, _an Oak_, c. a rich Man, of good Substance and Credit.

_Oats._ _One that has sown his wild Oats_, or having run out of all,
begins to take up and be more Staied.

_Oberon._ _King Oberon or little Oberon_, King of the Fairies.

_Office._ _His Office_, any Man’s ordinary Haunt, or Plying-place, be
it Tavern, Ale-house, Gaming-house or Bowling-green. _A cast of your
Office_, or a Touch of your Employment. _Be good in your Office_, a
Caveat to those that are apt to forget themselves in it.

_Ogles_, c. Eyes, _Rum Ogles_, c. fine, bright, clear, piercing Eyes.

_Ogling_, c. casting a sheep’s Eye at Handsom Women. _The Gentry mort has
rum Ogles_, c. that Lady has charming black Eyes.

_Old-Coney_, after the first Year.

_Old-dog-at-it_, good or expert.

_Old-dog-at-common-prayer_, a Poor Hackney that cou’d Read, but not
Preach well.

_Old Harry_, a Composition used by Vintners, when they bedevil their
Wines.

_Old-Mr-Gory_, c. a piece of Gold.

_Old Nick_, the Devil.

_Old Mob_, a noted Hawker.

_Old-Toast_, a brisk old Fellow. _A pleasant Old Cuff_, a frolicksom old
Fellow.

_Oliver’s Skull_, a Chamber-pot.

_Olli-Compolli_, c. the by-name of one of the principal Rogues of the
Canting Crew.

_One in Ten_, a Parson.

_One of my Cosens_, a Wench.

_Open-Arse_, a Medlar; also a Lewd Woman.

_Open House_, or Open Doors, free for all Comers or Goers.

_Open-handed, in Spending_, oppos’d to close-fisted. _Open in Speech_, to
reserv’d. _Open-Sea_, when there is a free Trade, oppos’d to a _Sea shut_
up in War, by Pirates, Privateers or Embargo’s of Ships.

_Opiniator_, an Assuming positive Fellow, an obstinate self-conceited
Coxcomb.

_Orator to a Mountebank_, the Doctor’s Decoy who in conjunction with Jack
Pudding, amuses, diverts and draws in the Patients.

_Otter_, an Amphibious Creature, betwixt a Beast and a Fish, a great
destroyer of Fish, affording much sport in Hunting. _Otter watcheth_,
Lodgeth. _Vent the Otter_, Dislodge him. _An Otter whineth_, makes
a noise at Rutting time. _Hunteth for his Kind_, the Term for their
Copulation.

_Over-vert_, all manner of High Woods.

_Over-sight_, has two contrary Significations under one Sound, for
an Oversight is either the Care or Charge of, or Inspection into any
Affair, or else an Oversight Imports a Slip or Error committed in it, for
want of due Care and Circumspection. _Over-shoes over Boots_, or to go
Through-stitch. _Overdo_, double Diligence.

_Oven_, _The Mother had never lookt for her Daughter in the Oven, if she
had not been there her self before, or, she muses as she uses_.

_Out-at-heels_, or _Elbows_, in a declining Condition, going down the
Wind.

_Out-run the Constable_, to Spend more than is Got, or Run out of an
Estate, to run Riot.

_Outside_, that is the Outside, or utmost Rate.

_Owlers_, those who privately in the Night carry Wool to the Sea-Coasts,
near _Rumney-Marsh_ in _Kent_, and some Creeks in _Sussex_, &c. and Ship
it off for _France_ against Law.

_Oyl of Barley_, strong Drink.

_Ox-house_. _He must go through the Ox-house to Bed_, of an old Fellow
that Marries a young Woman. _The black Ox has not trod upon his Foot_, of
one that has not been Pinch’d with Want, or been Hard put to it.


P

_Pack_, a Fardel or Bundle. _Pack of Knaves_, _the worst of all the
Pack_, or a Knave in Grain. _Pack of Juries_, _Packing of Cards_, _Pick
a Pack_, _Pack up your Nawls and be gone_, Packing of Parties and
Elections. _A common Pack-horse_, a Hackney or common Drudge, one made a
Slave of.

_Pad_, c. the High Way, and a Robber thereon; also a Bundle. _Rum Pad_,
c. a daring or stout Highway-man. _Paddington-Fair_, c. an Execution of
Malefactors at _Tyburn_; also a real Fair at the Village of that Name,
near that Place. _Goes upon the Pad_, or a _Padding_, c. Robbs upon
the Highway. _A Pad_, an easy Pacing Horse. _Padds_, worn by the Women
to save their Sides from being Cut or Mark’d with the Strings of their
Petty-coats.

_Pageant_, a thing Drest up and set out to make a Show. _A Piece of
Pageantry_, a thing that makes a Figure in a Show or Play, as Play-house
Kings and Generals Strut and Stalk upon the Stage.

_Pain_, _not in Pain_, not in Care or Concern.

_Painter_, the Rope that lies in the Ship’s Long-boat, or Barge, alwaies
ready to Fasten her, or Hale her on Shoar. _I’ll Cut your Painter
for ye_, I’ll prevent ye doing me any Mischief; the Tar-Cant, when
they Quarrel one with another. _What pleases the Painter_, when any
Representation in the Productions of his or any Art is unaccountable, and
so is to be resolv’d purely into the good Pleasure of the Artist.

_Pale of the Church_, in or out of the Church’s Enclosure.

_Pall’d_, Flat, Dispirited, or Dead Drink.

_Pallet_, a little Bed; also the Receiver of the Painter’s Colours
mingled, as the Shells are of his several Colours unmingled; also one
half of the Pale in Heraldry.

_Palm_, the Attire of a Buck.

_Paltry Fellow_, a sorry, base, mean, contemptible Varlet.

_Palliards_, c. the Seventh Rank of the Canting Crew, whose Fathers were
Born Beggers, and who themselves follow the same Trade, with Sham Sores,
making a hideous Noise, Pretending grievous Pain, do extort Charity.

_Pam_, the Knave of Clubbs.

  _Pamper’d_, { _Priest_ } High-Fead.
              { _Horse_  }

_Panam_, c. Bread.

_Pantas_, a Disease in Hawks.

_Panter_, c. a Hart.

_Pantry_, Buttery.

_Pantler_, Butler.

_Paper-Buildings_, slight, Wooden, or old.

_Paper-Skul_, foolish, soft, silly.

_Paper-Wars_, Letter-combats.

_Papers_, Writings, or Deeds.

_Paplar_, c. Milk-pottage.

_Par_, Gold and Silver at a like Proportion.

_Parasite_, a Trencher-Friend, a meer Wheedle.

_Parell_, Whites of Eggs, Bay-Salt, Milk and Conduit-Water beat together,
and poured into a Vessel of Wine to Cure its Fretting, in order to Fine
it, and make it Drink up.

_Parie_, to put By a Thrust or Blow.

_Parings_, c. the Clippings of Money.

_Parlous_, or _Perillous Man_, a notable, shrew’d Fellow.

_Parsimonious_, Near, Niggardly, Pinching, Stingy.

_Pass_, a Way, Lane, River, Leave; also condition. _What a Sad Pass
things are come to?_ In what an ill State they are. _That Shamm wont
Pass_, that Trick won’t take. _Do the Waters Pass well?_ much in use at
the Wells, do they Move as they ought. _To Passe upon one_, to top upon
him, or impose upon him; also a Term at Billiards, when the Ball goes
through the Court or Porch, it is said to pass.

_Passage_, a Camp-Game, with three Dice, Doublets, making up Ten or more,
to _Pass_ or Win, any other Chances lose.

_Pass-bank_, the Stock or Fund thereto belonging; also the playing Place
Cut out in the Ground almost Cock-pit waies.

_Pat_, apposite, or to the purpose.

_Patering_, the Maundring or pert Replies of Servants. _Patering of
Prayers_, Muttering of them, from the thick Repeating of so many Paters
or Pater-nosters. _No Penny, no Pater-nosters_ no Pay, no Prayers.

_Patrico_, c. or _Pater-cove_, c. the Fifeteenth Rank of the Canting
Tribe, stroling Priests that Marry under a Hedge without Gospel or
Common-prayer Book, the Couple standing on each side a Dead Beast, are
bid to Live together till Death them do’s Part, so shaking Hands, the
Wedding is ended; also any Minister, or Parson.

_Pateepan_, a little Pye, or small Pasty.

_Patrole_, the Rounds.

_Paume_, when a Die or Piece of Money is hid in the Hand, to secure the
Game, or Wager. _He Paumes it_, he Cheats, or Plaies Foul.

_Paw_, a Hand.

_Pawn._ _To Pawn any Body_, to steal away and leave him or them to Pay
the Reckoning.

_Pay through the Nose_, Excessively, or with Extortion.

_Peak_, c. any kind of Lace.

_Pearls_, the little Knobs on the Bur (which see) of a Stag.

_Peck_, c. Meat.

_Peckidge_, c. Meat. _Rum Peck_, c. good Eating. _The Gentry Cove tipt
us rum Peck and rum Gutlers, till we were all Bowsy, and snapt all the
Flickers_, the Gentleman gave us so much good Victuals, and Canary, that
we were all Damn’d Drunk, and broke all the drinking Glasses.

_Peculiars_, Plants, Animals and Fossiles, proper and particular to some
one Country, and rarely if ever found in others, as English Scurvy-grass,
Sarsa, Sassafras and Guajacum, all West _Indian_ Druggs; and so for
Animals, English Maistiffs, Irish Greyhounds, Barnacles, and _Soland_
Geese peculiar to _Scotland_, as Puffins, to the Isle of _Man_; also
Parishes exempt from other Ordinaries, and peculiarly belonging to the
See of _Canterbury_.

_Peculiar_, c. a Mistress; also particular, private, proper.

_Pedant_, a meer Scholar, a School-master, a Man of one kind of Learning
or Business, out of which he is good for nothing.

_Pedantry_, a Learning and Skill of one Colour.

_Ped_, a Basket.

_Pedlars_, Scotch Merchants; also English Retailers of Goods, that stroll
from Town to Town.

_Pedlars-French_, a sort of Gibrish or made Language, easy to be Learnt
and Understood, used by Gypsies, &c. Also the Beggers _Cant_.

_Peeking Fellow_, a meer Sneaks, one that peeps in every Hole and Corner;
also a thin, weasel-faced Fellow.

_Peeper_, c. a Looking-glass. _Track the Dancers, and pike with the
Peepers_, c. whip up the Stairs, and trip off with the Looking-glass.

_Peepers_, c. Eyes.

_Peepy_, c. _Peeping_, c. Drowsy, Sleepy. _As the Cull Peeps let’s Mill
him_, c. when the Man is a Sleep, let’s Kill him.

_Peery_, c. fearful, shy, sly. _The Cull’s Peery_, c. the Rogue’s afraid
to venture.

_Peeter_, c. a Portmantle or Cloak-bag. _Bite the Peeter_, c. to whip off
the Cloak-bag. _Biter of Peeters_, c. one that makes a Trade of whipping
Boxes and Trunks from behind a Coach or out of a Waggon, or off a Horse’s
Back.

_Pea-goose_, a silly Creature.

_Peg at Cocks_, to throw at them at Shrovetide.

_Gon to Pegtrantums_, Dead.

_Pel-mel_, helter-skelter.

_Pelt_, a Heat or Chafe. _What a Pelt you are in?_ what a Chafe your in?
Also the Dead Body of any Fowl the Hawk has killd.

_Pelts_, Beast Skinns.

_Pelting-village_, Blind, Obscure.

_Penelope’s Web_, to do and undo.

_Pennance-bord_, c. a Pillory.

_Pennites_, that Faction of Quakers that follow most and are in the
Interest of _William Pen_, the chief Proprietor and Governor of
_Pensylvania_, a Country lying betwixt Forty and Forty five Degrees of
Latitude, in _America_, much improv’d, and like to florish.

_Penny-worth._ _I’ll fetch my Pennyworth out of him_, or make him earn
what he cost me.

_Penny-white_, said of her, to whom Fortune has been kinder than Nature.
_Penny-wise and Pound-foolish_, Sparing in a little and Lavish in a
great Deal, _save at the Spiggot and let it out at the Bung-hole_. _A
Penny-worth for one’s Penny_, for what is worth one’s Money. _To get a
Penny_, to endeaver to Live; _to turn and winde the Penny_, to make to
most of one’s Money, or Lay it out at the best Advantage, _Pennyless_,
poor, sharp, bare of Money.

_Penurious_, pinching, hard, parsimonious, little.

_Pentice Nab_, a very broad-brm’d Hat.

_Pepper’d off_, Damnably Clapt; or Poxt. _Pepper-proof_, not Clapt or
Poxt.

_Pericranium_, the Head or Skull.

_Perking_, the late D. of M. also any pert forward silly Fellow. _To Perk
up_, to hold up the Head after Drooping.

_Periwinkle_, a Perruque or Periwig; also the same as _Pinpatches_.

_Pestilent-fine_, Tearing-fine.

_Pet_, a Fret. _To be in a Pet_, or out of Humor.

_Peter Lug_, _Who is Peter Lug?_ Who let’s the Glass stand at his Door?

_Petrify_, to turn to Stone.

_Petrification_, Concretions, either such as are hardned into Stone, by
exposing them to Air, as Coral; or by casting them into Cold, petrifying
Waters, as Wood.

_Pettycoat-Pensioner_, a Gallant, or one Maintain’d for secret Service.

_Phanatics_, Dissenters from the Church of _England_.

_Pharoah_, very strong Mault-Drink.

_Phenix-men_, the same as _Fire-drakes_.

_Philadelphians_, a new Sect of Enthusiasts pretenders to Brotherly Love,
_&c._

_Philistines_, Serjeants Bailiffs and their Crew; also Drunkards. _I fell
among the Philistines_, I chopt upon a knot of Drunken Fellows.

_Phis_, for Physiognomy, Face or Aspect.

_Picking_, little Stealing, Pilfering, petty Larceny.

_Pickthank_, a Talebearer, or an Insinuator by any means to curry Favor.

_Pickaroon_, a very small Privateer; also a shabby poor Fellow.

_Pickled_, very Arch or Waggish. _In Pickle_, Poxt. _Rodds in Pickle, or
revenge in Lavender._

_Pig_, c. Sixpence. _The Cull tipt me a Pig_, c. the Man gave me Sixpence.

_Pig of the Sounder_, see Wild Boar.

_Pigsnie_, a word of Love.

_Pig-widgeon_, a silly Fellow.

_Pike_, c. to run away, flee, quit, or leave the Place; also to Die. _As
he Pikes_, c. he walks or goes. _Pike on the been_, c. run away as fast
as you can. _Piked off_, c. run away, fled, broke; also Dead. To _pass
the Pikes_, to be out of Danger.

_Pillau_, a Hen and Rice Boil’d, a Turkish Dish, but now in use in
_England_, _France_ and _Holland_.

_Pillory_, a Baker, also a Punishment mostly heretofore for Beggers, now
for Perjury, Forgery and suborned Persons.

_Pimp_, the same as Cock-bawd.

_Pimp-whisking_, a Top Trader that way; also a little mean-spirited,
narrow-soul’d Fellow.

_Pimlico_, a noted Cake-house formerly, but now converted into a
Bowlinggreen, of good report at _Hogsden_ near _London_.

_Pin_, a small Vessel containing Four Gallons and a half, or the Eighth
part of a Barrel. _To Pin himself upon you_, or to Hang on. _To Pin ones
Faith on another’s Sleeve_, or take all upon Trust, for Gospel that he
saies. _Not a Pin to chuse_, when there is little or no difference. _Upon
a merry Pin_, or in a pleasant Mood. _Nick the Pin_, to Drink fairly.

_Pimginnit_, a large, red, angry Pimple.

_Pinch_, to Steal, or Slily convey any thing away. _To Pinch_, to Cut the
Measures of Ale, Beer, _&c._ _To Pinch on the Parson’s side_, or Sharp
him of his Tythes.

_At Pinch_, upon a Push or Exigence.

_Pinch-gut-hall_, a noted House at _Milend_, so Nick-nam’d by the
_Tarrs_, who were half Starved in an _East-India_ Voiage, by their then
Commander, who Built (at his return) that famous Fabrick, and (as they
say) with what he Pinch’d out of their Bellies.

_Pinch-gut-money_, allow’d by the King to the Seamen, that Serve on Bord
the Navy Royal, when their Provision falls Short; also in long Voyages
when they are forced to Drink Water instead of Beer.

_Pinpatches_, a small Shel-fish very like a Snail, but less, Caught on
the Ouzes at low Tide, in Rivers near the Sea, and Sold cheap.

_Picquant_, a sharp Reflection; also a poynant Sawce.

_Pink’t_, Prickt with a Sword in a Rencounter or Duel. _He Pink’d his
Doublet_, he Run him Through.

_Piquet_, a game at Cards.

_Pit_, c. the hole under the Gallows into which those that Pay not the
Fee, _viz._ 6_s_ 8_d_, are cast and Buried.

_Pit-a pat_, or _Pintle de Pantledy_, sadly Scared, grievously put to it.

_Pitcher-bawd_, the poor Hack that runs of Errands to fetch Wenches or
Liquor. _Little Pitchers have large Ears_, Children may over-hear, and
discover Secrets. _The Pitcher do’s not go so often to the Well, but it
comes home Broke at last_, of him that after many lucky Adventures or
narrow Escapes, miscarries in the End.

_Pithy jest_, or Sentence, that couches a great deal in a little room.

_Pittance_, a small Largess or petty Gratuity.

_Placaert_, a Dutch Proclamation, or Order of the States.

_Plad_, Scotch striped Stuff.

_Plaint_ for _Complaint_, _he made his Plaint to me_, or made his
Complaint to me. Hence _Plaintiff_ and _Defendant_ at Law, for
Complainant and Defendant.

_Planks_, thrown out to save those that can Swim in a Wreck; also
Flooring.

_Plant_, c. to lay, place, or hide. _Plant your Whids and Stow them_, c.
be wary what you say or let slip.

_Plaister of hot Gutts_, one warm Belly clapt to another.

_Plate-fleet comes in_, when Money comes to Hand.

_Platter-fac’d-jade_, a very broad, ord’nary faced Woman.

_Plausible_, smooth, specious, Taking.

_Play it off_, to play Booty; also to throw away, at Gaming, so much and
no more. _He Plaies it off_, he Cheats.

_Pliant_, supple, flexible, ductile, manageable, Wax to every Thumb.

_Plodder_, a Porer in Records, Writings or Books, a dull Drudge, or hard
Student. _A Plodding Lawyer_, a Laborious Lawyer. _A Plodding Horse_, a
good Drudge or Pack-horse.

_Pluck the Ribond_, or _Pluck Sir O——n_, ring the Bell at the Tavern.

_Plump-in-the-pocket_, flush of Money.

_Plyer_, c. a Crutch.

_Poching_, a sly destroying of Game, with Dogs, Netts, Snares &c.
Contrary to the Laws; also an Egg Boyld in Water out of the Shell.

_Poke_, a Bag, Sack, or Pocket. _To buy a Pig in a Poke_, or unsight or
unseen. _To carry your Passions in your Pocket_, or smother your Passions.

_Poker_, one that conveys Coals (at _Newcastle_) in Sacks, on Horseback;
also a pointed Porr to raise the Fire, and a Sword.

_Polt on the Pate_, a good Rap there.

_Poltron_, a Coward.

_Ponyard_, a short Dagger or Stilletto.

_Porker_, c. a Sword.

_Porters_, Hirelings to carry Burthens, Beasts of Burthen, or else
Menial Servants set to Guard the Gates in a great Man’s House, of whom
Dr. _Donne_ said pleasantly, that he was ever next the Door, yet the
seldomest Abroad of any of the Family.

_Portable_, Pocketable.

_Portage_, Carriage of any thing, whether by Land or Water.

_Posse Mobilitatis_, the whole Rabble in a Body.

_Post_, Employment, Office, Station; also an advanced, or advantagious
piece of Ground: A Pillar in the Way or Street. _From Pillar to Post_,
from Constable to Constable.

_Pot-hooks_, Scrawls or bad Writing.

_Pot-valiant_, Drunk.

_Pot and Spit_, Boyl’d and Roast. _A little Pot is soon Hot_, or a little
Fellow soon made angry. _The Pot calls the Kettle black A——_, when one
accuses another of what he is as Deep in himself.

_Poulain_, a Bubo.

_Powder-monkey_, Boys planted at the Guns a Bord the Ship, to fetch
Gun-powder _&c._ in the Engagement.

_Powdring-Tub_, the pocky Hospital at _Kingsland_ near _London_.

_Poyson’d_, Big with Child.

_Poyson-pate_, red Hair’d.

_Prancer_, c. a Horse.

_Prancers-nab_, c. a Horse’s Head used in a Sham-Seal to such a Pass.

_Prancers-poll_, c. the same as before; also the Sign of the Nag’s Head.
_Mount the Prancer_, c. get on the Horse’s Back.

_Pranks_, Tricks.

_Pratts_, c. Buttocks; also a Tinder-box or Touch-box.

_Prating-cheat_, c. a Tongue.

_Prateroast_, a Talking Boy.

_Precarious_, what is Disputable and uncertain, as being purely at the
Pleasure and Courtesy of another.

_Precaution_, Forecast, or the Wisdom of Prevention, which is beyond
that of Remedy.

_Precipitate_, Rash, Headstrong, Unadvised, Inconsiderate, hurrying in
Business.

_Precisians_, Strait-laced, Squeemish, Foolishly Scrupulous.

_Preservatives_, Antidotes to keep off, or prevent Diseases.

_Priest-craft_, the Art of awing the People, managing their Consciences,
and diving into their Purses.

_Pretext_, Show, Colour, Pretence, or Excuse.

_Prey_, c. Money.

_Prick_, the first Head of a Fallow Deer; also a Skewer.

_Pricker_, a Huntsman on Horse Back.

_Pricketh_, the Footing of a Hare on the hard Highway, when it can be
perceived.

_Prickear’d Fellow_, a Crop, whose Ears are longer than his Hair.

_Prick louse_, a Taylor.

_Pricks_, decayed Wine, tending to Sower. _The Prick and Praise of
our Town_, that bears the Bell from all the Rest, in all Exercises, as
Wrestling, Running, Leaping, Vaulting, Pitching of the Barr, _&c._

_Priest-link’d_, Married.

_Priest-ridden_, wholly influenc’d and absolutely govern’d by that Tribe.

_Prig_, c. a Thief, a Cheat; also a Nice beauish, silly Fellow, is called
_a meer Prig_.

_Priggs_, c. the Ninth Rank of Canting Rogues, Thieves.

_Priggers_, c. Thieves.

_Prigging_, c. Riding; also Lying with a Woman.

_Prigstar_, c. a Rival in Love.

_Priggish_, c. Thievish.

_Prig-napper_, c. a Horse-Stealer; also a Thief-taker.

_Priggers of the Cacklers._ c. Poultry-Stealers.

_Priggers of Prancers_, c. the Sixth Order of the Canting Crew,
Horse-Stealers, who carry a Bridle in their Pockets, a small Pad Saddle
in their Breeches.

_Primero_, an old German Game at Cards.

_Prim_, a silly empty starcht Fellow.

_Princock_, a pert, forward Fellow.

_Princes-metal_, a mixt Metal, betwixt Brass and Copper, and of a mixt
Colour between both, not so Pale as the one, nor so Red as the other, the
late Invention of Prince _Rupert_.

_Prince Prig_, c. a King of the Gypsies; also a Top-Thief, or Receiver
General.

_Prinking_, nicely Dressing. _Prinkt up_, set up on the Cupboards-head
in their best Cloaths, or in State. Stiff-starched. _Mistress
Princum-Prancum_, such a one.

_Print_, the Treading of a Fox. _To set in Print_, with Mouth skrew’d up
and Neck Stretcht out.

_Prisme_, a Triangular Crystal-Glass or Fools Paradise, that by
refraction reflects imaginary Blew, Red, and Yellow Colours upon all
Objects seen through it; also any Saw-dust.

_Prittle-Prattle_, idle impertinent Chat.

_Proclamations_, _his Head is full of Proclamations_, much taken up to
little Purpose.

_Prog_, c. Meat. _Rum Prog_, c. nice Eating _The Cull tipt us Rum Prog_,
c. the Gentleman Treated us very High.

_Projectors_, Busybodies in new inventions and Discoveries, Virtuoso’s of
Fortune, or Traders in unsuccesful if not impracticable Whimms, who are
alwaies Digging where there is no more to be found.

_Proling_, Hunting or Searching about in quest of a Wench, or any Game.

_Property_, a meer Tool, or Implement, to serve a Turn, a Cat’s foot;
also a natural Quality or Talent, and the highest right a Man can have to
any thing, _Liberty and Property_, two Inestimable Jewells. To change the
Property, or give it another turn, with a new Dress, or the Disguise of a
Wig and a false Beard.

_Proud Bitch_, desirous of Copulation.

_Prying_ Fellow, that is very curious to enquire into other Men’s Secrets
and Affairs.

_Provender_, c. he from whom any Money is taken on the Highway.

_Puke_, to Spue.

_Pug_, _Pugnasty_, _a meer Pug_, a nasty Slut, a sorry Jade, of a Woman;
also a Monkey.

_Puling_, Sickly.

_Pummel_, the Hilt, Handle, or round Knob of a Sword, or Saddle; also to
Beat. I _Pummel’d his Sides for him_, I Beat him soundly.

_Pump_, to wheedle Secrets out of any one; Bailives, Serjeants,
Pick-pockets, _&c._ _Pumpt dry_, not a Word left to say.

_Pun_, to Play with Words and Sounds.

_Punch_, Brandy and Water, with Limes or Lemon-juice; also a thick short
Man. _Punch Nag_, a short, thick, fat, squat, strong Horse.

_Punch houses_, Bawdy-houses.

_Punchable_, old passable Money, _Anno_ 1695.

_Punk_, a little Whore.

_Puny_ Child, weak little _Puny Stomack_. _Puny Judge_, the Junior or
Youngest.

_Pure_, c. a Mistress.

_Purest-pure_, c. a Top-Mistress, or Fine Woman.

_Pupil-mongers_, Tutors at the Universities, that have many Pupils, and
make a Penny of them.

_Puritans_, _Puritanical_, those of the precise Cut, strait-laced
Precisians, _whining_ (as Osborn saies) _for a Sanctity God never yet
trusted out of Heaven_.

_Purl_, Worm-wood infus’d in Ale.

_Purl-Royal_, Canary with a dash of Wormwood.

_Pursenets_, c. Goods taken upon Trust by young Unthrifts at treble the
Value; also a little Purse.

_Purse-proud_, haughty because Rich.

_Pursy_, Fuggy, Fat.

_Pushers_, Canary-birds new Flown that cannot Feed themselves.

_Pushing School_, a Fencing School; also Bawdy-house. _At a Push_, at a
pinch or strait. _At Push of Pike_, at Defiance. _Push-pinn_, Childrens
Play. _To Push on one’s Fortune_, to advance, or run it up.

_Put._ _A Country-Put_, a silly, shallow-pated Fellow. _Put to it_,
Beset.


Q

_Quacking-cheat_, c. a Duck.

_Quack_, an Empirick, or meer pretender to Physic.

_Quaffing_, _Quaff off_, carousing, to carouse.

_Quag_, _Quagmire_, marshy moorish Ground.

_Quailing of the Stomack_, beginning to be qualmish or uneasy.

_Quail-pipe_, a Woman’s Tongue; also a Device to take the Birds of that
Name, which are fine food, the French esteem’d the best; tho’ both those
and the English are of a Currish Nature, and will beat themselves against
the Cage, sides and top, being with difficulty brought to Feed: Wheat is
usually given them, but Hempseed is a great deal better.

_Quaint_, curious, neat; also strange.

_Quaking cheat_, c. a Calf or a Sheep.

_Qualified_, Accomplisht, Statesman, Soldier, Scholar.

_Qualifications_, Accomplishments that render any of them Compleat; also
Conditions.

_Qually-Wines_, Turbulent and Foul.

_Qualm_, a Stomack-Fit; also Calmness, and the Cry of Ravens.

_Qualmish_, Crop-sick, queasy Stomackt.

_Quarrel-picker_, a Glazier; also a contentious Fellow, a Trouble Company.

_Quarron_, c. a Body.

_Quarte_, Nails of the Sword-Hand quite up.

_Quarting upon the streight Line_, keeping the Head and Shoulders very
much back from the Adversary’s Sword, when one thrusts with his own.

_Quash_, to Suppress, Annul, or Overthrow. _To Quash the indictment._

_Quean_, a Whore, or Slut. _A dirty Quean_, a very Puzzel or Slut.

_Queasy_ Stomacht, Crop-sick, Qualmish.

_Queen Elizabeth’s Pocket-pistol_, a Brass-Cannon of a prodigious Length
at _Dover-Castle_.

_Queere_, c. base, Roguish, naught. _How Queerely the Cull Touts?_ c. how
roguishly the Fellow looks.

_Queere Birds_, c. such as having got loose, return to their old Trade of
Roguing and Thieving.

_Queere-bluffer_, c. a sneaking, sharping, Cut-throat Ale-house or
Inn-keeper.

_Queere-bung_, c. an empty Purse.

_Queere-clout_, c. a sorry, coarse ord’nary or old Handkerchief, not
worth _Nimming_.

_Queere cole_, c. Clipt, Counterfeit, or Brass Money.

_Queere cole-maker_, c. a false-Coyner.

_Queere cole-fencer_, c. a Receiver and putter off false Money.

_Queere-cove_, c. a Rogue.

_Queere-cuffin_, c. a Justice of Peace; also a Churl.

_Queere-cull_, c. a Fop, or Fool, a Codshead; also a shabby poor Fellow.

_Queere-degen_, c. an Iron, Steel, or Brass-hilted Sword.

_Queere-diver_, c. a bungling Pick-pocket.

_Queere-doxy_, c. a jilting Jade, a sorry shabby Wench.

_Queere-drawers_, c. Yarn, coarse Worsted, ord’nary or old Stockings.

_Queere duke_, c. a poor decayed Gentleman; also a lean, thin, half
Starved Fellow.

_Queere fun_, c. a bungling Cheat or Trick.

_Queere-ken_, c. an ill House, or a Prison.

_Queere-mort_, c. a dirty Drab, a jilting Wench, a Pockey Jade.

_Queere-nab_, c. a Felt, Carolina, Cloth, or ord’nary Hat, not worth
whipping off a Man’s Head.

_Queere-kicks_, c. coarse, ord’nary or old Breeches.

_Queere-peepers_, c. old-fashion’d, ord’nary, black-fram’d, or common
Looking-glasses.

_Queere-prancer_, c. a Founder’d Jade, an ord’nary low-priz’d Horse.

_Queere-topping_, c. sorry Commodes or Head-dresses.

_Quibble_, to Trifle, or Pun. _Sir Quibble Queere_, a trifling silly
shatter-brain’d Fellow.

_Quidds_, c. Money. _Tip the Quidds_, c. can ye spend your Sixpence.

_Quietists_, a Numerous and considerable Sect amongst the Papists, being
against Oral and wholly for Mental Prayer, Whiggs, Popish Precisians, or
Puritans.

_Quipps_, Girds, Taunts, Jeers, _&c._

_Quirks_ in Law, Law-tricks or Subtilties.

_Quirks and Quillets_, Tricks and Devices.

_Quod_, c. Newgate; also any Prison, tho’ for Debt. _The Dab’s in the
Quod_, c. the poor Rogue is in Limbo.

_Quota_, c. Snack, Share, Part, Proportion or Dividend. _Tip me my
Quota_, c. give me my Part of the Winnings, Booty, Plunder, _&c._


R

_Rabbet-suckers_, c. young Unthrifts taking up Goods upon Tick at
excessive rates.

_Rabbet_, the first Year.

_Rabbits_, Wooden Kanns to Drink out of, once used on the Roads, now,
almost laid by.

_Rabble_, the Mob.

_Racket_, a Noise or Bustle; also Tennis-play. _What a Racket those Ramps
keep?_ What a busel these rude Children make?

_Racking of Wines_, Drawing them off their Lees into fresh Vessels.

_Rack-rent_, strain’d to the utmost Value. The Knights of _Cales_,
Gentlemen of _Wales_, and Lairds of the _North Country_, a Yeoman of
_Kent_, at Rack-rent, will buy ’em all Three. _To lye at Rack and
Manger_, to live hard.

_Rag_, c. a Farthing. _Not a Rag left_, c. I have Lost or Spent, all my
Money.

_Ragou_, a Relishing Bit, with a high Sawce.

_Ragamuffin_, a Tatterdemallion.

_Rag-water_, a common sort of Strong-waters.

_Rake_, _Rake Hell_, _Rake-shame_, a Lewd Spark of Deboshee, one that has
not yet Sowed his Wild Oats, _Rakish_, tending to, or leaning towards
that Extravagant way, of Life. _Rake_, when the Hawk flies out too far
from the Fowls; also so much of the Ships Hull as overhangs both Ends of
the Keel; and to Trot a Horse gently.

_Ralph-Spooner_, a Fool.

_Raillery_, Drolling. _To Railly_, or Droll. _A Railleur_, or Droll.

_Rally_, to Unite or embody broken Troops.

_Rammish_, Rank.

_Ramp_, a Tomrig, or rude Girl. _To Ramp_, to Play rude Horse-Play.

_Rampant_, uppish, overbold, over-pert, over-lusty. _A Lyon Rampant_, i.
e. rearing up his Forefeet.

_Rangle_, when Gravel is given to a Hawk, to bring her to a Stomack.

_Ranging_, c. intriguing, and enjoying many Women.

_Rank_, rammish, strong-scented, as all the Petids, either Vegetables
or Animals, as Garlick, Assafœtida, Polecats, Foxes, Goats, _&c._ And
whatever is Stale, Corrupt, or Tainted, and Stinks with long or careless
Keeping. _A Rank Lie_, a lewd or flat Lie. _A Rank Knaive_, an errant
base Knave. _A Rank Whore_, an errant Whore.

_Rank-rider_, c. a Highway-man; also a Jockey.

_Rank-wink’d_, Hawk, that is a slow Fligher.

_Rant_, to Talk Big, High, or Boast much.

_Ranters_, Extravagants, Unthritts, Lewd Sparks; also of the Family of
Love.

_Rantipole_, a rude wild Boy or Girl.

_Rap_, to Swop or Exchange a Horse or Goods; also a Polt on the Pate, and
a hard Knocking at a Door.

_Rapparies_, Wild Irish Robbers, and Out-laws.

_Rapper_, a swinging great Lie.

_Raree-show-men_, poor _Savoyards_ strolling up and down with portable
Boxes of Puppet-shews at their Backs; in short, Pedlars of Puppets.

_Rascal_, a base, vile Fellow, a Rogue.

_Rascal-Deer_, lean, poor, _an-lying Deer_.

_Rat_, a Drunken Man or Woman taken up by the _Watch_, and carried by the
Constable to the Counter. _To smell a Rat_, to suspect a Trick.

_Rattler_, c. a Coach.

_Rattling-cove_, c. a Coach-man.

_Rattling Mumpers_, c. such Beggers as Ply Coaches. _To Rattle_, c. to
move off, or be gone. _We’ll take Rattle_, c. we must not tarry, but whip
away.

_Rattling_, the Noise of Coaches and Carts; as also of Armour, or of
Hail, or Thunder.

_Rattle-pate_, a Hot, Maggot-pated Fellow. _I Rattled him_, I Rated him
roundly, and told him his own.

_Rattleth_, the Noise a Goat maketh at Rutting time.

_Ravilliac_, any Assasin.

_Raw-head and Bloody-bones_, a Bull-begger or Scare-child.

_Rayn-deer_, a Beast like a _Hart_, but has his Head fuller of Antlers.

_Ready_, c. _Ready and Rhino_, c. Money in Possession.

_Rebel-rout_, the Rabble, running Riot.

_Reaking_, smoking or piping hot as Pies out of the Oven, Iron out of
the Forge, or Blood from a warm Wound. Hence perhaps the _Reak_, or
_Reaking_, i. e. Smoak of the Clouds. _I’ll Reak my Spite on him_, I’ll
be Revenged on him.

_Rear the Boar_, Dislodge him.

_Rebus’s_, Words or Sentences that are the same backwards as forwards.

_Recheat_, a Lesson blown on the Horn.

_Recorder_, a musical instrument; also a Law-Officer or Magistrate in
Cities and Corporations, their Mouth, or Spokesman.

_Recreant_, a Poltron, or Coward, one that eats his Words, or unsaies
what he said.

_Recruits_, c. Money (Expected.) _Have you rais’d the Recruits_, c. is
the Money come in?

_Red-fustian_, Clarret or red Port-Wine.

_Red letter-man_, a Roman-catholic.

_Red-rag_, a Tongue. _Your Red rag will never lie still_, your Tongue
will ne’re be quiet.

_Red shank_, c. a Duck.

_Refugies_, French and Vaudois Protestants, forced to quit their own and
fly into others’ Countries to have the Excercise of their Religion.

_Refreshed_, either as the Air is with Winds, when it Blows a Fresh Gale;
or artificially with the motion of Fanns, or opening the Windows to Fann
a close Room; or as Wines are with Snow and Ice; or by casting a new
Gloss, on what is worn out, Withered, or Decayed, in Bodies Artificial,
as Embroidery by Burnishing, or of Pictures by Varnishing, _&c._

_Rellif_, Copulation of Hares.

_Remember Parson Malham_, (Norfolk) Pray Drink about Sir.

_Regraters_, Fore-stallers in Markets.

_Repartee_, a sudden smart Reply.

_Republican_, a Common-wealths-man.

_Reserve_, a Store or Hoard to have recourse to, upon a Push or
particular Exigence; a Nest-Egg.

_Respost_, having given a Thrust, to Receive one from the Adversary,
before he has recover’d his Body.

_Resty_, Head-strong, Wayward, Unruly, Masterless.

_Retailers_, Parcel-traders or Dealers, petty Merchants, Hucksters,
Chandlers, Pedlars, _&c._ _In Retail_, in Parcel or small Sum, oppos’d
to what goes in Tale or Sum at Large.

_Retainers_, a Great Man’s Followers or Servants, attending him
(heretofore) in Blew Coats and Badges, which were the Ancient Liveries,
tho’ little more remains of it at present, save what is left among the
Water-men. Hence the Word _Retinue_, or Train of Attendance.

_Revers’d_, c. a Man set (by Bullies) on his Head, and his Money turn’d
out of his Breeches.

_Reward_, what is given the Hounds, or Beagles by the Hands of the
Hunts-man or others, after they have finished their Chase, by the Death
of what they pursu’d.

_Rhino_, c. ready Money.

_Rhinocerical_, c. full of Money. _The Cull is Rhinocerical_, c. the Fop
is full of Money.

_Rib_, or _Ribroasting_, a Dry-basting.

_Ribbin_, c. Money. _The Ribbin runs thick_, c. his Breeches are well
lined with Money. _The Ribbin runs thin_, c. he has but little Cash about
him.

_Richess_, (of Marterns) a Company.

_Rich-face_, a Red-face.

_Ridg-cully_, c. a Goldsmith.

_Riff-raff_, the Rabble or Scum of the People, Tagrag and Long-tail.

_Ridge_, or _row of Hills_, extended in a Line.

_Ridicule_, to Railly or turn any thing to a Jest. _To turn it all to
Ridicule_, to make a Mock of it.

_Rigging_, c. Cloaths.

_I’ll Unrig the Bloss_, c. I will Strip the Wench.

_Rum Rigging_, c. fine Cloaths. _The Cull has Rum Rigging, let’s Ding
him, and Mill him, and Pike_, c. the Man has very good Cloths, let us
Knock him Down, Rob him, and Scour off.

_Rill_, a Rivulet, or small River.

_Ring_, c. Money extorted by Rogues on the High-way, or by Gentlemen
Beggers. _A Ring_, a Concourse of People for Wrestling, Cudgel-playing,
_&c._ _A Ring of Hills_, a round Circle of Hills.

_Ring-walks_, the Dew-rounds made by Huntsmen, when they go drawing in
their Springs at Hart-Hunting.

_Ripe_, ready, come to maturity. _Matters are not Ripe_, not ready, or
come to Perfection.

_Riveted_, or _Rooted_ Customs, or Habits; inveterate or confirmed
Diseases.

_Roam_, to wander far and wide from Home.

_Roberds-men_, c. the third (old) Rank of the Canting Crew, mighty
Thieves, like _Robin-hood_.

_Rochester-portion_, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave.

_Roe._ _A Fair Roe-buck_, the fifth Year; _a Roe-buck of the first Head_,
the fourth Year; _a Hemuse_, the third Year; _a Gyrle_, the second Year;
_a Kid_, the first Year; _a Roe Beddeth_, Lodgeth; _a Roe Belloweth_,
maketh a Noise at Rutting time.

_Roger_, c. a Portmantle, a Goose; also a Man’s Yard.

_Rogues_, c. the fourth Order of Canters. _A Rogue in Grain_, a very
great Rogue. _A Great-he-rogue_, a sturdy swinging Rogue.

_Romance_, a feigned pleasant History. _To Romance_, to lie pleasantly,
to Stretch in Discourse.

_Romboyles_, c. Watch and Ward.

_Romboyl’d_, c. sought after with a Warrant.

_Romer_, a drinking Glass; also wider.

_Rook_, c. a Cheat, a Knave. _To Rook_, c. to Cheat or play the Knave.

_Rope._ _Upon the High-ropes_, Cock-a-hoop. _Give him Rope enough and
he’ll Hang himself_, he’ll Decoy himself within his own Destiny.

_Rosy-gills_, c. Sanguine or fresh-colour’d.

_Rost-meat-cloths_, Holiday-cloths. _You cannot fare well, but you must
cry Rost-meat_, you can’t meet with good Chear, but you must tell Tales.
_To give one Rost-meat, and Beat him with the Spit_, to do one a Curtesy,
and Twit or Upbraid him with it. _To rule the Rost_, to be Master, or
Paramount. _Roasted_, Arrested. _I’ll Roast the Dab_, I will Arrest the
Rascal.

_Rot-gut_, very small or thin Beer.

_Rovers_, Pirates, Wanderers, Vagabonds. _To Shoot at Rovers_, at Random.
_To Rove about_, to wander idly up and down.

_Rough_, Unpolisht, Unmannerly, Uncouth. _To lie Rough_, in one’s Clothes
all Night.

_Round-dealing_, Plain, Honest Dealing.

_Round-summ_, a Lusty-Summ.

_Round-heads_, the Parliamentarian Party in the great Rebellion, that
begun 1641.

_Rout_, (of Wolves) a Company.

_Rouse_, (the Buck) Dislodge him.

_Rawland-for-an-Oliver_, to give as good as he brought.

_Roysters_, c. rude, Roaring Rogues.

_Rub_, c. to Run away. _A Rub_, an Impediment, Obstacle, Hinderance,
Stop, or Difficulty. _Rub on_, to Live indifferently. _Rub’d off_, c.
Broke, and run away. _Rub through the World_, to Live Tollerably well in
it.

_Rubbers_, Two (and sometimes Three) Games to make up; also a Rencounter
with drawn Sword, and Reflections made upon any one.

_Rub-rub_, us’d on Greens when the Bowl Flees too fast, to have it
forbear, if Words wou’d do it.

_Rub-up_, or refresh the Memory.

_Rub-up_, or Scower Armour, _&c._

_Rubs us to the Whit_, c. sends us to Newgate.

_Ruby-face_, very red.

_Ruck_, a Bumble, or Heap.

_Rud_, a small Fish with a forked Tail, between which and the Roach,
there is much about the same difference, as between the Herring and the
Pilchard.

_Ruff_, an old-fashioned double Band; also a noted Bird, and a Fish,
Pope, like a small Pearch, and when the Hawk hits the Prey, and yet not
Trusses it.

_Ruffin_, c. the Devil; also a Justice of Peace, and also an Assasin.

_Rufflers_, c. the first Rank of Canters; also notorious Rogues. _To
Ruffle_, to disorder any thing.

_Ruff-mans_, c. the Woods or Bushes.

_Ruff-peck_, c. Bacon. _As the Ruffin nab the Cuffin queere, and let the
Harmanbeck Trime with his Kinchins about his Colquarron_, c. let the
Devil take Justice, and let the Constable Hang with his Children about
his Neck.

_Ruffter-hood_, a plain and easy Leather-hood worn by a Hawk, when first
drawn.

_Rug._ _It’s all Rug_, c. the Game is secured.

_Rum_, c. gallant, Fine, Rich, best or excellent; also a West-Indian
Drink stronger than Brandy, drawn from Dreggs of Sugar for the most part,
yet sometimes from Fruits, and Rows of Fish; best when old, much us’d in
Punch.

_Rumly_, c. bravely, cleaverly, delicately, &c.

_Rum-booze_, c. Wine; also very good or strong Drink.

_Rum-boozing-Welts_, c. bunches of Grapes.

_Rum-beck_, c. any Justice of the Peace.

_Rum-bob_, c. a young Prentice; also a sharp, sly Trick, and a pretty
short Wig.

_Rum-bite_, c. a cleaver Cheat, a neat Trick.

_Rum-bleating cheat_, c. a very fat Weather.

_Rum-blower_, c. a very Handsom Mistress, kept by a particular Man.

_Rum-bluffer_, c. a jolly Host, Inn-keeper, or Victualler.

_Rum-bughar_, c. a very Pretty and Valuable Dog.

_Rum-bung_, c. a full Purse.

_Rum-bubber_, c. a cleaver or dextrous Fellow at Stealing Silver-Tankards
(formerly) from Publick Houses.

_Rum-cod_, c. a good Purse of Gold, or round Summ of Money.

_Rum cove_, c. a great Rogue.

_Rum-cul_, c. a rich Fool, that can be easily _Bit_, or Cheated by any
body; also one that is very generous and kind to a Mistress, and as

_Rum-chub_, c. which is (among the Butchers) one that is easily perswaded
to believe what they say of the Goodness, and also to give them an
extraod’nary Price for their Meat, a very ignorant Market-man or Woman,
that Laies out a great deal of Money with, and is _Bit_ by them.

_Rum-clout_, c. a Silk, fine Cambrick, or Holland Handkerchief.

_Rum-cole_, c. new Money, or Medals, curiously Coyn’d.

_Rum-dropper_, c. a Vintner.

_Rum-duke_, c. a jolly handsom Man. _Rum-dutchess_, c. a jolly handsom
Woman. _Rum-dukes_, c. the boldest or stoutest Fellows (lately) amongst
the _Alsatians_, _Minters_, _Savoyards_, &c. Sent for to remove and guard
the Goods of such Bankrupts as intended to take Sanctuary in those Places.

_Rum-doxy_, c. a Beautiful Woman, or light Lady.

_Rum-degen_, c. a Silver-hilted or inlaid Sword.

_Rum-dell_, c. as _Rumdoxy_.

_Rum-diver_, c. an compleat, or cleaver Pick-pocket.

_Rum-drawers_, c. Silk Stockings, or very fine Worsted Hose.

_Rum-dubber_, c. an experienc’d or expert Picker of Locks.

_Rumford-Lyon_, a Calf.

_Rum-fun_, c. a cleaver Cheat, or sharp Trick.

_Rum-file_, c. as _Rum-diver_.

_Rum-gutlers_, c. Canary-Wine.

_Rum-glymmar_, c. King or Chief of the Link-boies.

_Rum-ghelt_, c. as _Rum-cole_.

_Rum-hopper_, c. a Drawer. _Rum-hopper, tip us presently a Boozing-cheat
of Rum-gutlers_, c. Drawer fill us presently a Bottle of the best Canary.

_Rum-kicks_, c. Silver or Gold Brocade Breeches, or very rich with Gold
or Silver Galoon.

_Rum-mawn’d_, c. one that Counterfeits himself a Fool.

_Rum-mort_, c. a Queen or great Lady.

_Rum-nab_, c. a Beaver, or very good Hat.

_Rum-ned_, c. a very silly Fellow.

_Rum-nantz_, c. true French Brandy.

_Rum-pad_, c. the Highway.

_Rum-padders_, c. the better sort of Highway-men, well Mounted and Armed.

_Rum-peepers_, c. a Silver Looking-glass.

_Rump-and-Kidney Men_, c. Fidlers that Play at Feasts, Fairs, Weddings,
_&c._ And Live chiefly on the Remnants of Victuals.

_Rumbling_, the rolling of Thunder, motion of a Wheel-barrow, or the
noise in the Gutts.

_Rum-prancer_, c. a very beautiful Horse.

_Rum-quidds_, c. a great Booty, or large Snack.

_Rum-ruff peck_, c. Westphalia-Ham.

_Rum-squeeze_, c. much Wine or good Liquor given among the Fidlers.

_Rum-snitch_, c. a good fillip on the Nose.

_Rum-tol_, c. as Rum degen, the newest Cant of the two.

_Rum-tilter_, c. as _Rumtol_.

_Rum-topping_, c. a rich commode or Head-dress.

_Rum-ville_, c. _London_.

_Rum-wiper_, c. as _Rum-clout_.

_Run-ryot_, to turn Spark, and run out of all; also when Hounds run at a
whole Herd of Deer.

_Running-stationers_, Hawkers, or those that cry News and Books about the
Streets.

_Runt_, a little, short, truss Man or Beast.

_Runts_, Canary-Birds above three Years old.

_Runner_, c. as _Budge_; also a Galley, or nimble Vessel, to make quick
Voyages, as also to escape Privateers, Pirates, _&c._

_Rup_, a filthy Boil, or Swelling on the Rump of Poultry, Corrupting the
whole Body, Cured with Salt and Water.

_Rustic_, a clownish Country Fellow.

_Rustygutts_, an old blunt Fellow.

_Rutt_, Copulation (of Deer.)


S

_Sack_, c. a Pocket. _Dive into his Sack_, c. to Pick his Pocket.

_Sails_, Hawk’s Wings; also Windmill-wings. _How you Sail about?_ How you
Santer about?

_Salamander_, a Bomb-vessel; also a certain Creature (said) to Live in
the Fire, and a Stone (lately) found in _Pensylvania_ full of Cotton,
which will not (as a modern Author affirms) consume in the Fire; and a
red-hot Iron to light Tobacco with.

_Sales-men_, Brokers who sell Cattel for the Graziers to the Butchers,
before, and at the Beast-Market; also Sellers of ready-made Cloaths.

_Salesman’s-dog_, the same as _Barker_.

_Sally_, a fit of Passion, or Humor.

_Salmon_, c. the Beggers Sacrament or Oath.

_Salt_, Lecherous, Proud. _To come after with Salt and Spoons_, of one
that is none of the Hastings.

_Salt-cel_, a Rope’s end used to Drub the Boies and Sailors on board of
Ship.

_Salvages_, Barbarous People, Inhabiting near the Sea-Coasts in the
Maritim Counties, who make a Prey of what the Sea has (in Pity) spared,
Living upon the Spoil of Shipwrecks.

_Samlets_, so called the Spring following after they are Spawn’d, and
tho’ then but a little bigger than a Minnow, will (as Authors say) grow
to be a Salmon in as short a time as a Goslin will to be a Goose.

_Sandy-pate_, one red-hair’d.

_Sap-pate_, a Fool.

_Saunter_, to loiter Idly, a Term borrowed from those Religious
Counterfeits, who under the colour of Pilgrimages, to the _Holy Land_,
us’d to get many Charities, crying still, _Sainct terre, Sainct terre_,
having nothing but the Holy Land in their Mouths, tho’ they stay’d
alwaies at Home.

_Saucy_, impudent, bold. _More sauce than Pig_, _Your Sauce-Pan runs
over_, you are exceeding bold.

_Sawny_, a Fool. _He’s a meer Sawny_, he is very soft, tho’ (in Scotch)
it is only for Alexander.

_Scab_, a sorry Wench, or Scoundril-Fellow.

_Scamper_, c. to run away, or Scowre off, either from Justice, as
Thieves, Debtors, Criminals, that are pursued; or from ill fortune, as
Soldiers that are repulst or worsted.

_Scandalous_, c. a Periwig.

_Scandal-proof_, a thorough pao’d _Alsatian_, or _Minter_, one harden’d
or past Shame.

_Shift the Scene_, call a new Cause, or change the Discourse.

_School-butter_, a Whipping. _I School’d him_, I chid him severely.

_School of Venus_, c. a Bawdy-house.

_Sconce_, _to build a large Sconce_, to run deep upon Tick, or Trust.

_Scotch-bobby_, a little sorry, scrubbed, low Horse of that Country.

_Scotch mist_, a sober, soaking Rain.

_Scoundrel_, a Hedge-bird or sorry Scab.

_Scoure_, c. to wear. _To Scoure the Cramp-rings_, c. to wear Boks.

_Scout_, c. a Watch.

_Scowre_, c. to run away or scamper. _Let us Scowre, or we shall be
Boned_, c. let us run away or we shall be Taken.

_Scowrers_, c. Drunkards, beating the Watch, breaking Windows, clearing
the Streets, &c.

_Scrip_, c. a shred or scrap of Paper. _As the Cully did freely blot the
Scrip, and sipt me 40 Hogs_, c. one enter’d into Bond with me for 40
Shillings.

_Scrub_, a Ragamuffin.

_Scrubado_, the Itch.

_Scrape all_, a Money-Scrivener: also a miserable Wretch, or griping
Fellow.

_Screw_, _to Screw one up_, to exact upon one, or Squeeze one in a
Bargain or Reckoning.

_Scud_, the course or motion of the Clouds, in Fleeting.

_Scud-away_, to Sail, Ride, or Run very fast.

_Scumm_, the Riff-Raff, or Tagrag and Long-tail. _Rake Hell and Shim the
Devil._

_Scut_, the Tail of a Hare or Coney.

_Scuttle_, to run away; also a square hole to go down through the Deck.

_Sealer_, c. one that gives Bonds and Judgments for Goods and Money.

_Season of Beasts_, a Hart or Buck begins at the end of Fencer-Month,
15 Days after Midsumer-day, and lasteth till Holyrood-day. The Fox till
Christmass, and lasteth till the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin. The
Hinde or Doe at Holyrood-day, till Candlemass. The Roe-buck at Easter,
till Michaelmas. The Roe at Michaelmas till Candlemass. The Hare at
Michaelmas, till the end of _February_. The Wolf from Christmas, till the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin. The Boar at Christmass, and continues
to the Purification of our Lady.

_Second-sighted_, such as (they say) can, and do see Spirits,
Apparitions, _&c._

_Secret_, _let into the secret_, c. when one is drawn in at
Horse-racing, Cock-fighting, Bowling, and other Sports or Games, and
_Bit_.

_Seeling_, when a Hawk first taken, is so blinded with a Thred run
through the Eye-lids, that she Seeth not, or very little, the better to
make her endure the Hood; also a sudden healing forced by the motion of
the Sea or Wind.

_Seraglio_, a Bawdy-house; also the Great Turk’s Palace.

_Seraglietto_, a lowsy, sorry Bawdy-house, a meer Dog-hole.

_Setters_, or _Setting-dogs_, they that draw in _Bubbles_, for old
Gamesters to Rook; also a Sergeant’s Yeoman, or Bailiff’s Follower, or
Second, and an Excize-Officer to prevent the Brewers defrauding the King.

_Sewet_, Deer’s Grease.

_Shabby_, in poor, sorry Rigging.

_Shabberoon_, a Ragamuffin.

_Shab’d-off_, sneakt, or slid away.

_Shaftsbury_, a Gallon-pot full of Wine, with a Cock.

_Shag-bag_, a poor, shabby Fellow.

_Shallow-pate_, a foolish silly, empty Fellow.

_Sham_, c. a Cheat, or Trick. _Cut a Sham_, c. to play a Rogue’s Trick.

_Shamble-legg’d_, one that goes wide, and shuffles his Feet about, _Shake
your Shambles_ haste, begon.

_Shameless_, a bold forward Blade.

_Shanks_, Leggs. _There’s Shanks_, there’s ill Leggs.

_Shanker_, a little Scab or Pox on the Nut or Glans of the Yard.

_Shappeau_, c. or _Shappo_, c. for _Chappeau_, a Hat, the newest Cant
_Nab_ being very old, and grown too common.

_Shapee_, said (often) to an ill-made Man. _Show your Shaper_, turn
about, march off, be gone. _Great in more Shapes_, great in more
Professions, or Capacities. _Great in all Shapes_, great in all the
Branches of any one, or more Professions: As, great in all the Parts or
Branches of the Law; (an universal Lawyer). Great in all the Parts or
Branches of Learning; (an universal Scholar).

_Shark_, c. a Sharper; also a Large voracious Fish.

_Sharper_, c. a Cheat, one that Lives by his Witts.

_Sharp_, subtil, ready, quick or nimble-witted, forward, of lively
Apprehension; also Poor and Needy.

_Sharpers-tools_, c. false Dice.

_Sharp-set_, very Hungry.

_Shaver_, a _Cunning_

_Shaver_, a subtil, smart Fellow. _He Shaves close_, he gripes, squeezes,
or extorts very severely.

_Shavings_, c. the Clippings of Money.

_She is with Cub_, when the Fox hath Young ones in her.

_She-napper_, c. a Woman Thief-catcher; also a Cock, (he) or Hen (she)
Bawd, a Procuress and Debaucher of young Virgins; a Maiden-head-jobber.

_Sheep-biter_, a poor, sorry, sneaking, ill-lookt Fellow.

_Sheepish_, (Fellow) bashful, peaking.

_Sheep’s-head_, a Fool, a Block-head.

_Sheep-shearers_, c. Cheats.

_Shie_, coy, squeamish, cold, or averse.

_Shock_, a Brunt. _To stand the Shock_, to bear the brunt.

_Shocking_, what is offensive, grating, grievous.

_Shop_, c. a prison.

_Shopt_, c. imprison’d.

_Shop-lift_, c. one that Steals under pretence of Cheap’ning.

_Shoe-makers-stocks_, pincht with strait Shoes. _No Man knows where the
Shoe pinches but he that wears it_, or another’s Cross like him that
bears it. _Who goes worse Shod than the Shoe-maker’s Wife?_ _One Shoe
will not fit all Feet_, Men are not all of a Size, nor all Conveniences
of a Last. _To throw an old Shoe after one_, or wish them good Luck in
their Business.

_Short-pots_, false, cheating Potts used at Ale-houses, and Brandy-shops.

_Shot_, _Shotlings_, large, lean Piggs bought to fatten. _To Pay one’s
Shot_, to Pay one’s Club or Proportion.

_Shot ’twixt Wind and Water_, Clapt, or Poxt.

_Shoulder-clapper_, c. a Sergeant or Bailiff.

_Shoulder-sham_, c. a Partner to a File.

_Shove the Tumbler_, c. to be Whipt at the Cart’s Tail.

_Shred_, a Tailer.

_Shrieketh_, the Noise a Badger makes at Rutting Time.

_Shrouds_, burying Cloths, (now) Woollen, (anciently) Linnen; also Steps
or Ladders (on board of Ship) to go up to the Topps.

_Shuffler_, a Bird like, but not so big as a Duck, having a broader Bill.

_Shuffling-Fellow_, a slippery, shifting, Fellow.

_Shurk_, c. a Sharper.

_Sice_, c. Six pence.

_Sickrel_, a puny, sickly Creature.

_Siege_, a Stool to set upon; also used by Physitians to their Patients.
_How many Sieges have you had?_ i. e. How many Stools have you had? Upon
taking a Purge _&c._

_Simkin_, a Fool.

_Simon_, c. Six-pence.

_Simples_, Follies, also Plants or Physical Herbs. _He must be cut of the
Simples_, Care must be taken to cure him of his Folly.

_Simpleton_, a silly Creature, or Tony.

_Single_, the Tail of a Hart, Buck or other Deer.

_Singler_, or _Sanglier_, a wild Boar after the _4th_ Year.

_Single-ten_, a very foolish, silly Fellow; also Nails of that size.

_Sir John_, the Country-Vicar or Parson.

_Sir Timothy_, one that Treats every Body, and Pays the Reckonings every
where.

_Six and eight-pence_, c. the usual Fee given, to carry back the Body of
the Executed Malefactor, to give it Christian Burial.

_Skew_, c. a Begger’s Wooden Dish. _To look a Skew_, or on one side.

_Skew-fisted_, awkward, ungainly.

_Skin-flint_, a griping, sharping, close-fisted Fellow.

_Skinker_, that fills the Glass or Cup. _Who Skinks?_ Who pours out the
Liquor.

_Skipper_, c. a Barn; also a Dutch Master of a Ship or Vessel.

_Skip-jacks_, c. youngsters that Ride the Horses for Sale.

_Skip-kennel_, a Foot-boy, or Laquais.

_Slam_, c. a Trick; also a Game entirely lost without getting one on that
side.

_Slat_, c. a Sheet.

_Slate_, c. a half Crown.

_Sleeping House_, without Shop, Ware-house; or Cellar, only for a private
Family.

_Sleeveless-errand_, such as Fools are sent on, the first of April.

_Sleeveless story_, a Tale of a Tub, or of a Cock and a Bull. _To laugh
in one’s Sleeves_, inwardly slyly.

_Slice_, when a Hawk _Muteth_ a great distance from her.

_Slippery Trick, or Fellow_, deceitful, as having two properties of Ice,
smooth and slippery.

_Slot_, the footing of a Hart.

_Slough_, a deep miry Hole.

_Slubber’d over_, Work slightly wrought, or huddled up in haste.

_Slubber-degullion_, a slovenly, dirty, nasty Fellow.

_Slug_, a drone, or dull Tool; also a Bullet, beat into another Shape.

_Slur_, c. a Cheat at Dice; also a slight Scandal or Affront.

_Sly-boots_, a seeming Silly, but subtil Fellow.

_Smack_, a Tang, or ill Taste.

_Smacking-cove_, c. a Coachman.

_Smart-money_, given by the King, when a Man in Land or Sea-Service has a
Leg Shot or Cut off, or is disabled.

_Smart_, witty, sharp; also pain.

_Smatterer_, one half-learned. _A Smattering._, a slight Tincture in any
Skill or Learning.

_Smeller_, c. a Nose.

_Smelling-cheat_, c. a Nose-gay; also an Orchard or Garden.

_Smelts_, c. half Guineas. _Tip me a Smelt_, c. Prithee lend me half a
Guinea.

_Smirk_, a finical, spiuce Fellow. _To Smirk_, to look pleasantly.

_Smiter_, c. an Arm.

_Smash_, c. to kick down Stairs. _The Chubbs, toute the Blosses, they
Smash and make them brush_, c. the Sharpers catch their Mistresses at the
Tavern, making merry without them. Kick them down Stairs, and force them
to rub off.

_Smock-fac’d_, fair Snout.

_Smoke_, to Smoke or Smell a Design. _It is smok’t_, c. it is made
Public, all have notice. _Smoke him, Smoke him again_, to affront a
Stranger at his coming in.

_Smoker_, a Vessel to Blind the Enemies, to make way for the _Machine_ to
Play; also a Tobacconist.

_Smoky_, c. Jealous. _No Smoke but there is some Fire_ as _no Reeds but
there is some Water_, of a thing that will out, because Smoke is a sign
of one, and Reeds or Rushes of the other.

_Smug_, a Black-smith; also neat and spruce.

_Smuglers_, c. those that Cheat the King of his Customs by private
Imports and Exports.

_Smutty_, Bawdy.

_Snack_, c. share or part, _to go Snacks_, c. to go halves or share
and share alike. _Tip me my Snack, or else I’ll Whiddle_, c. Give me my
share, or I’ll tell.

_Snaffle_, c. a Highwayman that has got Booty.

_Snaggs_, large Teeth; also Snails.

_Snappish_, (a Man) peevish, quarrelsom; (a Dog) apt to Bite.

_Snapt_, Taken, Caught.

_Sneak_, c. _goes upon the Sneak at Munns_, c. he privately gets into
Houses or Shops at Night, and Steals undiscover’d. _A Sneaking Budge_, c.
one that Robbs alone.

_Sneaker_, (of Punch) a small Bowl.

_Sneaking_, sheepish, or mean-spirited.

_Snearing_, flickering, fleering.

_Snickering_, Laughing in his Sleeve or privately.

_Snilch_, c. to Eye or See any Body. _The Cull Snilches_, c. the man Eyes
you or Sees you.

_Snitch_, c. _Snitchel_, c. a Filip on the Nose.

_Snite_, c. to Wipe, or Flap. _Snite his Snitch_, c. Wipe his Nose, or
give him a good Flap on the Face. _Sniting_, a Hawk’s Sneezing.

_Sniveling-Fellow_, a Whining Fellow.

_Snow-broth_, Snow-water.

_Snub_, to Check, or Rebuke.

_Snuff_, Pet; also Tobacco taken in Snush.

_Snuffle_, to Speak through the Nose from a Cold or worse.

_Snudge_, c. one that lurks under a Bed, to watch an opportunity to Rob
the House.

_Sock_, c. a Pocket; also to Beat. _Not a Rag in my Sock_, c. I han’t a
Farthing in my Pocket. _I’ll Sock ye_, c. I’ll Drub ye tightly.

_Socket-money_, Demanded and Spent upon Marriage.

_Soft_, Foolish.

_Sohoe_, _Seehoe_, said aloud at the starting a Hare.

_Soker_, a Toper, or Fuddle-cap. _An old Soker_, a true Pitcher-man. _To
set Soking_, to ply the Pot.

_Soldier’s-bottle_, a large one.

_Solomon_, c. the Mass.

           { _Apollo_, a Scholar.
           { _Mars_, Soldier.
  _Son of_ { _Venus_, a Lover of Women.
           { _Mercury_, a Wit.
           { _Parclement_, a Lawyer.

_Sooterkin_, a By-word upon the Dutch Women, from a Maggot, or Fancy,
that their using Stoves so much, Breeds a kind of Animal in their Wombs,
like a Mouse, which at their Delivery skips out.

_Soreth_, the Footings of a Hare in the open Field.

_Sorrel-pate_, red Hair’d.

_Sorter_, (at the Post Office) that puts or Digests the Letters into
Order or Method.

_Soul-driver_, a Parson. _He is a Soul_, or loves Brandy. _Of a Noble
Soul_, very generous. _A Narrow-Soul’d Fellow_, a poor-spirited, or
stingy Fellow.

_Souldiers-Mawn’d_, c. a Counterfeit Sore or Wound in the Left Arm.

_Sounder_, a Company of Swine, or wild-Boars.

_Soupe_, Broth, Porridge.

_Souse_. _Not a Souse_, not a Penny. (French Money)

_Sow’s baby_, a Pig.

_Sowse-crown_, a Fool.

_Sow-child_, a Female Child. _He has the wrong Sow by the Ear_, or is in
a wrong Box.

_Sowre_, Crabbed, Surly. Ill-conditioned.

_Soyl_, when any Deer is hard Hunted, and betakes himself to Swimming in
any River.

_Spangles_, c. ends of Gold or Silver.

_Spanish-gout_, the Pox.

_Spanish-money_, fair Words and Compliments.

_Spark_, a spruce, trim, gay Fellow. _A lewd Spark_, a Man of the Town,
or Debauchee.

_Sparring-blows_, the first Strokes to try the goodness of young Cocks
Heels; also those in a Battel before the Cocks come to Mouth it.

_Sparrow-mouth’d_, a Mouth o Heavenly wide, as Sir _P. Sidney_ calls it.

_Speckt-wiper_, c. a colour’d Handkerchief.

_Spider-catcher_, a Spindle for a Man.

_Spider-web_, the subtilties of Logic, which (as _Aristo_ the Chiote
said) tho’ artificial to sight, were yet of no Use.

_Spill_, a small Reward or gift of Money.

_Spindle-shankt_, very small-legg’d.

_Spirit-awky_, as _Kidnap_.

_Spiritual-flesh-broker_, a Parson.

_Spitter_, a red Male Hart of a Year old.

_Splenetic_, Melancholic.

_Split-fig_, a Grocer.

_Splitter-of-Causes_, a Lawyer.

_Split my windpipe_, a foolish kind of a Curse among the _Beaux_.

_Spraints_, the Excrements of an Otter.

_Spring a Partridge_, c. People drawn in, to be _Bit_. _To spring
Partridge’s_, to raise them. _A Springe_, a Snare, or Nooze to catch
Hares, as a Ginn is a Snare or Nooze to catch Birds.

_Spunge_, to drink at others Cost. _Spunging-house_, a By-prison. _A
Spunging Fellow_, one that lives upon the rest and Pays nothing.

_Squab_, a very fat, truss Person, a new Hatcht Chick; also a Couch.

_Squinte-fuego_, one that Squints very much.

_Squeek_, c. to discover, or impeach; also to cry out. _They Squeek beef
upon us_, c. cry out Highway-men or Thieves after us. _The Cull Squeeks_,
c. the Rogue Peaches.

_Squeeker_, c. a Barboy; also a Bastard, or any other child. _Stifle the
Squeeker_, c. to Murder the Child and throw it into a House of Office.

_Squawl_, to throw a wry; also to cry a loud.

_Squeemish_, nice.

_Squeeze_, to gripe or skrew hard.

_Squeezing of Wax_, being Bound for any Body; also sealing of Writings.

_Squire of Alsatia_, a Man of Fortune, drawn in, cheated, and ruin’d by
a pack of poor, lowsy, spunging, bold Fellows that liv’d (formerly) in
White-Fryers. _The Squire_, a Sir _Timothy Treat-all_; also a Sap-pate.
_Squirish_, foolish; also one that pretends to Pay all Reckonings, and is
not strong enough in the Pocket. _A fat Squire_, a rich Fool.

_Stag_, _Staggard_, see Hart.

_Stallion_, c. a Whore-Master; also a Stone-Horse kept to cover Mares.

_Stall-whimper_, c. a Bastard.

_Stalling_, c. making or ordaining.

_Stalling-ken_, c. a Broker’s Shop, or any House that receives
stolen-Goods.

  _Stale_ { _Jest_, old, dull.
          { _Maid_, at her last Prayers.

_Stam-flesh_, c. to Cant.

_Stammel_, a brawny, lusty, strapping Wench.

_Stamps_, c. Legs.

_Stampers_, c. Shoes; also Carriers.

_Starched_, affected, proud, stiff.

_Start_, (Drink) Brewers emptying several Barrels into a great Tub, and
thence conveying it through a Leather-pipe down the Cellar into the Butts.

_Starter_, c. a Question. _I am no Starter_, I shan’t flinch, or cry to
go Home.

_Start the Hare_, put her up.

_Statues_, either Images in Brass or Stone, or Men without motion.

_Steenkirk_, a Muslin-neckcloath carelessly put on, first, at the Battel
of _Steenkirk_, afterwards a Fashion for both Sexes.

_Steppony_, a Decoction of Raisins of the Sun, and Lemons in
Conduit-water, sweetned with Sugar and Bottled up.

_Stern_, the Tail of a Wolf; also the hind part of a Ship.

_Stick flamms_, c. a pair of Gloves.

_Stickle-bag_, a very small prickly Fish, without Scales, a choice Bait
for a Trout. _A great Stickler_, a zealous Man in the Cause or Interest
he espouses. _It Sticks in his Stomach_, he resents it.

_Stiff_, _Stiff-rump_, proud, stately.

_Sting-bum_, a Niggard.

_Stingo_, humming, strong Liquor.

_Stingy_, covetous, closed-fisted, sneaking.

_Stitch_, a Tayler.

_Stitch oack_, very strong Ale.

_Stock-jobbing_, a sharp, cunning cheating Trade of Buying and Selling
Shares of Stock in East India, Guinea and other Companies; also in the
Bank, Exchequer, _&c._

_Stock-drawers_, c. Stockings.

  _Stone_ { _Dead_, quite.
          { _Doublet_, a Prison.

_Stop-hole Abbey_, c. the Nick-name of the chief Rendezvouz of the
Canting Crew of _Gypsies_, _Beggers_, _Cheats_, _Thieves_, _&c. Stop my
Vitals_, a silly Curse in use among the _Beaux_.

_Stoter_, c. a great Blow. _Stoter him_, c. or _tip him a Stoter_, c.
settle him, give him a swinging Blow.

_Stout_, very strong, Malt-Drink.

_Stow_, c. you have said enough. _Stow you bene Cove_, c. hold your Peace
good Fellow. _Stow your Whidds and Plant ’em; for the Cove of the Ken can
cant ’em_, Take care what you say, for the Man of the House understands
you; also to hoard Treasure, or lay up Corn in Granaries or Drink in
Cellars. Hence Stoward, or Steward.

_Strain-hard_, to ly heartily.

_Strait-lac’d_, precise, squeemish, puritanical, nice.

_Straping_, c. lying with a Wench.

_Strapping-Lass_, a swinging two-handed Woman.

_Stress of weather_, foul weather at Sea. _At a Stress_, at a pinch.

_Stretching_, hanging. _He’ll Stretch for it_, he’ll be Hang’d. _He
Stretcht hard_, told a whisking Ly.

_Stretcher_, the piece of Wood that lies cross the Boat, where on the
Water-man rests his Feet.

_Strike_, c. to Beg, to Rob; also to borrow Money. _Strike all the
Cheats_, c. Rob all you meet. _Strike the Cull_, c. Beg of that
Gentleman. _Strike the Cly_, c. get that Fellow’s Money from him. _He has
Struck the Quidds_, c. he has got the _Cole_ from him. _He Strikes every
Body_, c. he borrows Money every where, he runs in every one’s Debt. _A
Strike_, (of _Corn_) a Bushel.

_Strip_, c. to Rob or _Gut_ a House, to unrig any Body, or to _Bite_
them of their Money. _Strip the Ken_, c. to _Gut_ the House. _Strip the
Table_, c. to Winn all the Money on the Place. _Stripts_, poor, Naked.
_We have Stript the Cull_, c. We have got all the Fool’s Money. _The
Cove’s Stript_, c. the Rogue has not a _Jack_ left to help himself.

_Strommel_, c. Straw.

_Strowlers_, c. Vagabonds, Itinerants, Men of no settled Abode, of
a Precarious Life, Wanderers of Fortune, such as, Gypsies, Beggers,
Pedlers, Hawkers, Mountebanks, Fidlers, Country-Players, Rope-dancers,
Juglers, Tumblers, showers of Tricks, and Raree-show-men.

_Strowling-morts_, c. pretending to be Widows, sometimes Travel the
Countries, making Laces upon Ewes, Beggers-tape, _&c._ Are light
Finger’d, Subtil, Hypocritical, Cruel, and often dangerous to meet,
especially when a _Ruffler_ is with them.

_Study_, a Closet of Books. _In a brown Study_, musing, pensive, careful.

_Strum_, c. a Periwig. _Rum-strum_, c. a long Wig; also a handsom Wench,
or Strumpet.

_Stuff_, Nonsense, idle, ridiculous, impertinent Talk.

_Stuling-ken_, c. as _Stalling-ken_, c.

_Stum_, the Flower of fermenting Wine, used by Vintners, when their Wine
is down or flat, to make it Drink up and brisk; also when they Brew, to
make their mixtures, (by putting them into a new Ferment) all of one
Taste. _Stumm’d Wines are very unwholesom, and may be discover’d, by a
white Froth round the sides of the Glass._

_Stubble-it_, c. hold your Tongue.

_Sturdy-beggers_, c. the fifth and last of the most ancient Order of
Canters.

_Sub-beau_, or _Demibeau_, a would-be fine.

_Sub-bois_, Maples, Birch, Sallow, and Willow.

_Suck_, c. Wine or strong Drink. _This is rum Suck_, c. it is excellent
Tipple. _We’ll go and Suck our Faces, but if they toute us, we’ll take
rattle and brush_, c. let’s go to Drink and be merry, but if we be Smelt,
by the People of the House, we must Scower off. _He loves to Suck his
Face_, he delights in Drinking.

_Suckey_, c. drunkish, maudlin, half Seas o’er.

_Suit and Cloak_, good store of Brandy or any agreable Liquor, let down
Gutter-lane.

_Sun burnt_, having many Male Children.

_Sunny-bank_, a good, rousing Winter-Fire.

_Superstitious-Pies_, Minc’d, or Christmas-Pies, so Nick-nam’d by the
_Puritans_, or _Precisians_, tho’ they can Eat em; but affecting to be
singular, make them a Month or six Weeks before Christmas, or the Feast
of Christ.

_Supernaculum_, not so much as a Drop left to be poured upon the
Thumb-nail, so cleaverly was the Liquor tipt off.

_Supoueb_, c. an Hostess or Landlady.

_Surtout_, a loose, great, or riding Coat.

_Sutler_, c. he that Pockets up, Gloves, Knives, Handkerchiefs, Snuff and
Tobacco-boxes, and all the lesser Moveables; also a Scullion or Huckster,
one that follows an Army, to sell Meat, Drink, _&c._

_Swadlers_, c. the tenth Order of the Canting Tribe. _To Swaddle_, to
Beat lustily with a Cane or Cable’s end. _I’ll Swaddle your Hide_, I’ll
bang your Back.

_Swag_, c. a Shop. _Rum Swag_, c. full of rich Goods.

_Swagger_, to vapour or bounce.

_Swallow_, (Falsities for Truths) to believe them.

_Sweets_, the Dreggs of Sugar used by Vintners, to allay the undue
fermenting or fretting of their Wine.

_Sweetners_, c. Guinea-Droppers, Cheats Sharpers. _To Sweeten_, c. to
decoy, draw in, and _Bite_. _To be Sweet upon_, c. to coakse, wheedle,
entice or allure.

_Swig-men_, c. the 13th Rank of the Canting Crew, carrying small
Habberdashery-Wares about, pretending to sell them to colour their
Roguery. _A hearty Swig_, a lusty Draught. _To Swig it off_, to Drink it
all up.

_Swill-belly_, a great Drinker.

_Swimmer_, a Counterfeit (old) Coyn.

             { _Clap_,   }
  _Swinging_ { _Lye_,    } a very great one.
             { _Fellow_, }

I _Swing’d him off_, I layd on and beat him well-favoredly. _He is
swing’d off_, damnably Clapt.

_Swinish_, (fellow) raking, greedy, gluttonous, covetous.

_Swabbers_, the Ace of Hearts, Knave of Clubs, Ace and Duce of Trumps;
also the Sorriest Sea-Men put to Wash and clean the Ship.

_Swop_, to barter or Truck.


T

_Tackle_, c. a Mistress; also good Cloths. _The Cull has tipt his Tackle
Rum rigging_, c. or, _has Tipt his Bloss Rum-tackle_, c. the keeping
Coxcomb has given his Mistress very fine Cloths.

_Taffy_, a Welshman or David. _Taffy’s Day_, the first of March.

_Tables_, a Game. _Turn the tables_, make it your own Case.

_Take the Culls in_, c. Seize the Men, in order to Rob them.

_Take-time_, never to thrust but with advantage. _Very taking_,
acceptable, agreeable, or becoming. _It Takes well_, or, _the Town Takes
it_, the Play pleas’d, or was acted with Applause, or the Book Sells
well. _No doubt but it will Take_, no question but it will sell.

_Talent_, the same with Capacity, Genius, Inclination or Ability; also
375_l._ in Silver, and 4500_l._ in Gold. _His Talent does not lye that
way_, he has no Genius for it, or his Head does not lean to it.

_Tale-tellers_, a sort of Servants in use with the great Men in
_Ireland_, to Lull them a sleep with Tales and Stories of a Cock and a
Bull, _&c._ _I tell you my Tale, and my Tales-man_, or Author.

_Tall boy_, a Pottle or two Quart-pot full of Wine.

_Talons_, or _Pounces_, a Bird’s Claws as Fangs are Beast’s Claws.

_Tally-men_, Brokers that let out Cloths at moderate Rates to wear per
Week, Month, or Year.

_Tame-fellow_, tractable, easy, manageable.

_Tamper_, to practise upon one.

_Tant_, _Tantest_, Mast of a Ship or Man, Tall, Tallest.

_Tantivy-boies_, high-Flyers, or High-flown Church-men, in opposition, to
the moderate Church-men; or Latitudinarians a lower sort of Flyers, like
Batts, between Church-men and Dissenters.

_Taplash_, Wretched, sorry Drink, or Hog-wash.

_Tappeth_, see, _Beateth_.

_Tariff_, a Book of Rates or Customs; also another of the Current Coin.

_Tarnish_, to Fade.

_Tar_, _Tarpaulin_, a Seaman; also a piece of Canvas (tarr’d) laid over
the Hatches to keep out Wet.

_Tar-terms_, proper Sea-Phrases, or Words.

_Tart dame_, sharp, quick.

_Tartar_, a sharper. _To catch a Tartar_, in stead of catching, to be
catcht in a Trap.

_Tatter-de-mallion_, c. a ragged, tatter’d Begger, sometimes half Naked,
with design to move Charity, having better Cloths at Home. _In Tatters_,
in Raggs. _Tatter’d and Torn_, rent and torn.

_Tattler_, c. an Alarm, or Striking Watch, or (indeed) any.

_Tatts_, c. false Dice.

_Tat-monger_, c. a Sharper, or Cheat, using false Dice.

  _Tatling_ { _Fellow_,   } prating, impertinent.
            { or _Woman_, }

_Taunts_, Girds, Quips, or Jeers. _To Taunt_, to Jeer or Flout.

_Taudry_, garish, gawdy, with Lace or mismatched and staring Colours: A
Term borrow’d from those times when they Trickt and Bedeckt the Shrines
and Altars of the Saints, as being at vye with each other upon that
occasion. The Votaries of St. _Audrey_ (an Isle of _Ely_ Saint) exceeding
all the rest in the Dress and Equipage of her Altar, it grew into a
Nay-word, upon any thing very Gawdy, that it was all Taudry, as much as
to say all St. _Audrey_.

_Tayle_, c. a Sword.

_Tayle-drawers_, c. Sword-stealers. _He drew the Cull’s Tayle rumly_, c.
he whipt away the Gentleman’s Sword cleverly.

_Teague-land_, Ireland.

_Teague-landers_, Irishmen.

_Tears of the Tankard_, Drops of the good Liquor that fall beside.

_Tegg_, see _Doe_.

_Temperade_, an East-Indian-dish, now in use in _England_, being a Fowl
Fricasied, with high Sauce, Blancht Almonds and Rice.

_Temperament_, an Expedient or Medium; also a due proportion of the four
Humors.

_Temple-pickling_, the Pumping of Bailives, Bumms, Setters, Pick-pockets,
&c.

_Tender-parnel_, a very nicely Educated creature, apt to catch Cold upon
the least blast of Wind.

_Terce_, the Nails of the Sword-hand quite down.

_Tercel-gentle_, c. a Knight or Gentleman of a good Estate; also any rich
Man.

_Terra-firma_, an Estate in Land; also a Continent. _Has the Cull any
Terra Firma?_ Has the Fool any Land?

_That That_ or _There_, to a Hare.

_Thwack_, to Beat with a Stick or Cudgel.

_The Dragon upon St. George_, c. the Woman uppermost.

_Thief-takers_, who make a Trade of helping People (for a gratuity) to
their lost Goods and sometimes for Interest or Envy snaping the Rogues
themselves; being usually in fee with them, and acquainted with their
Haunts.

_Thorn-back_, an old Maid; also a well known Fish, said to be exceeding
Provocative.

_Thorough-cough_, farting at the same time.

_Thorough-passage_, in at one Ear, and out at t’other.

_Thorough-stitch_, over Shoes, over Boots.

_The Three-legged-stool_, Tyburn.

_Three-threads_, half common Ale, and the rest Stout or Double Beer.

_Threpps_, c. Three-pence.

_Thrumms_, c. Threepence. _Tip me Thrumms_, c. Lend me Three-pence.

_Thummikins_, a Punishment (in _Scotland_) by hard Squeezing or Pressing
of the Thumbs to extort Confession, which Stretches them prodigiously and
is very painful. In Camps, and on board of Ships, lighted Matches are
clapt between the Fingers to the same intent.

_Tib_, a young Lass.

_Tib of the Buttery_, c. a Goose.

_Tickrum_, c. a Licence. _To run a tick_, to go on the Score, or a trust.

_Tickle-pitcher_, a Toss-pot, or Pot-companion.

_Tiffing_, c. lying with a Wench.

_Tilter_, a Sword, _to tilt_, to fight with Rapier, or pushing Swords,
_run a tilt_, a swift Pursuit, also Drink made to run faster.

_Tint for tant_, hit for hit, and dash for dash.

_Tip_, c. to give or lend; also Drink and a draught. _Tip your Lour_, or
_Cole or I’ll Mill ye_, c. give me your Money or I’ll kill ye. _Tip the
Culls a Sock, for they are sawcy_, c. Knock down the Men for resisting.
_Tip the Cole to Adam Tiler_, c. give your Pick-pocket Money presently
to your running Comrade. _Tip the Mish_, c. give me the Shirt. _Tip me
a Hog_, c. lend me a Shilling. _Tip it all off_, Drink it all off at a
Draught. _Don’t spoil his Tip_, don’t baulk his Draught. _A Tub of good
Tip_, (for Tipple) a Cask of strong Drink. _To Tip off_, to Dye.

_Tipler_, a Fuddle-cap or Toss-pot.

_Tipsy_, a’most Drunk.

_Tiring_, Dressing; also when a Leg or Pinion of a Pullet, Pigeon, _&c._
is given to a Hawk to pluck at. _Tiring-room_, a Dressing-Room. _A
Tire-woman_, one that teaches to Dress in the Hair, when in Fashion, and
when out, to cut the Hair, and Dress the Head.

_Tit-bit_, a fine Snack, or choice Morsel.

_Tit-tat_, the aiming of Children to go at first.

_Tittle-tattle_, foolish, idle, impertinent Talk.

_Titter_, to Laugh at a Feather.

_Titter-totter_, who is upon the Reel, at every jog, or Blast of Wind.

_Toge_, c. a Coat.

_Togemans_, c. a Gown or Cloak. _I have Bit the Togemans_, c. I have
Stole the Cloak. _’Tis a Rum-togemans_, ’tis a good Camlet-Cloak, _Let’s
nim it_, c. let’s whip it off.

_Tokens_, the Plague, also Presents from one to another, and Farthings.
_Not a Token left_, not one Farthing remaining. _Tom-fool’s-token_, Money.

_Tol_, _Toledo_, c. a Sword. _Bite the Tol_, c. to Steal the Sword.

_A Rum-tol_, c. a Silver-hilted Sword. _A Queer-tol_, c. a Brass or Steel
hilted or ord’nary Sword.

_Tom-boy_, a Ramp, or _Tomrig_.

_Tom of Bedlam_, c. the same as _Abram-man_.

_Tom conney_, c. very silly Fellow.

_Tom rig_, a Ramp.

_Tom-thumb_, a Dwarf or diminitive Fellow. _Come by Tom Long the
Carrier_, of what is very late, or long a coming.

_Tongue-pad_, a smooth, Glib-tongued, insinuating Fellow.

_Tony_, a silly Fellow, or Ninny. _A meer Tony_, or Simpleton.

_Tool_, an Implement fit for any Turn, the Creature of any Cause or
Faction; a meer Property or Cat’s Foot.

_Top_, c. to Cheat, or Trick any one; also to insult. _What do you Top
upon me?_ c. do you stick a little Wax to the Dice to keep them together,
to get the Chance, you wou’d have? _He thought to have to Topt upon me_,
c. he design’d to have Put upon me, Sharpt me, Bullied me, or Affronted
me.

_Tope_, to Drink. _An old Toper_, a staunch Drunkard. _To Tope it about,
or Dust it about_, to Drink briskly about.

_Top-diver_, a Lover of Women. _An old Top-diver_, one that has Lov’d
_Old-hat_ in his time.

_Top-heavy_, Drunk.

_Topping-fellow_, who has reacht the Pitch and greatest Eminence in any
Art; the Master, and the Cock of his Profession.

_Topping cheat_, c. the Gallows.

_Topping cove_, c. the Hangman.

_Torch-cul_, the same as _Bum-fodder_.

_Torcoth_, a Fish having a red Belly, found only in the Pool _Sinperis_,
in _Carnarvanshire_.

_Tories_, Zealous Sticklers for the Prerogative and Rights of the Crown,
in behalf of the Monarchy; also Irish-thieves, or _Rapparies_.

_Tost_, to name or begin a new Health. _Who Tost’s now?_ Who Christens
the Health? _An old Tost_, a pert pleasant old Fellow.

_Totty-headed_, Giddy-headed, Hare-brain’d.

_Tout_, c. to look out Sharp, to be upon one’s Guard. _Who Touts?_ c.
who looks out sharp? _Tout the Culls_, c. Eye those Folks which way they
take. _Do you Bulk and I’ll File_, c. if you’ll jostle him, I will Pick
his Pocket.

_Touting-ken_, c. a Tavern or Ale-house Bar.

_Tourn_, Copulation of Roes.

_Tower-hill-play_, a slap on the Face and a kick on the Breech.

_Town-bull_, one that rides all the Women he meets.

_Tower_, a Woman’s false Hair on their Fore-heads. _Towring Thoughts_,
Ambitious Aspiring. _To Tower_, to sore on High. _They have been round
the Tower with it_, c. that Piece of Money has been Clipt.

_Trace_, the Footing of a Hare in the Snow.

_Track_, c. to go.

_Track up the Dancers_, c. whip up the Stairs.

_Tract_, the footing of a Boar.

_Train_, a Hawk’s or Peacock’s Tail; also Attendants or Retinue.

_Trajoning_, when a Roe crosses and doubles.

_Transnear_, c. to come up with any body.

_Translators_, Sellers of old Shoes and Boots, between Shoe-makers and
Coblers; also that turn or Translate one Language into another.

_Transmogrify_, to alter, or new vamp.

_Tranter_, the same as _Crocker_.

_Trapan_, c. he that draws in or wheedles a _Cull_, and _Bites_ him.
_Trapan’d_, c. Sharpt, ensnar’d.

_Trapes_, a dangling Slattern.

_Trassing_, when the Hawk raiseth any Fowl aloft, and soaring with it, at
length descendeth with it to the Ground.

_Tree the Martern_, Dislodge him.

_Treewins_, c. Three-pence.

_Trigry-mate_, an idle She-Companion.

_Trib_, c. a Prison. _He is in Trib_, for _Tribulation_, c. he is layd by
the Heels, or in a great deal of Trouble.

_Trim_, Dress. In _a sad Trim_, Dirty, Undrest. _A Trim-Lad_, a spruce,
neat, well trickt Man.

_Trimmer_, a moderate Man, betwixt _Whig_ and _Tory_, between Prerogative
and Property. _To Trim_, to hold fair with both sides. _Trim the Boat_,
poise it. _Trim of the Ship_, that way she goes best.

_Trimming_, c. Cheating People of their Money.

_Trine_, c. to Hang; also Tyburn. _Trining_, c. Hanging.

_Trinkets_, Porringers, and also any little odd thing, Toies and Trifles.

_Tringum-Trangum_, a Whim, or Maggot.

_Tripolin_, Chalk, nick-nam’d and us’d by the _French_ Perfumers as
_Alabaster_ is by the _English_.

_Trip_, a short Voyage or Journey; also an Error of the Tongue, or Pen, a
stumble, a false step, a miscarriage, or a Bastard.

_Troateth_, see _Growneth_

_Trotters_, Feet, usually Sheeps. _Shake your Trotters_, troop off, be
gone. _An old Trot_, a sorry base old Woman. _A Dog Trot_, a pretty Pace.

_Troll-away_, bowl away, or trundle away.

_Troll-about_, saunter, loiter, wander about.

_Trolly-lolly_, coarse Lace once much in fashion, now worn only by the
meaner sort.

_Trollop_. _A great Trollop_, a lusty coarse Ramp or Tomrig.

_Trooper_, c. a half Crown.

_Trounc’d_, troubled, Cast in Law, Punisht. _I’ll Trounce the Rogue_,
I’ll hamper him.

_Truck_, to swop or barter.

_Trug_, a dirty Puzzel, an ord’nary sorry Woman; also the third part of
a Bushel, and a Tray for Milk.

_Trull_, c. a Whore; also a Tinker’s travelling Wife or Wench, and to
trundle.

_Trumpery_, old Ware, old Stuff, as old Hatts, Boots, Shoes, _&c._ Trash
and Trumpery. _For want of good Company, welcome Trumpery._

_Trundlers_, c. Pease.

_Trunk_, c. a Nose; also the body of a Tree, or Man, without Head, Arms
or Leggs. _How fares your old Trunk?_ c. Does your Nose stand fast?

_Trusty-Trojan_, or _Trusty-Trout_, a sure Friend or Confident.

_Tuck’t_, Hang’d.

_Tumbler_, c. a Cart. _To shove the Tumbler_, c. to be Whipt at the
Cart’s Tail; also one that Decoys, or draws others into Play, and one
that shows Tricks with and without a Hoop; a low Silver Cup to Drink out
of, and a Coney Dog.

_Tup_, Copulation of Ram and Ewe. _Venison out of Tup-park_, Mutton.

_Turk_, any cruel hard-hearted Man.

_Turky-Merchants_, drivers of Turkies.

_Turkish-shore_, Lambeth, Southwark and Roderhith-side of the Water.

_Turkish Treatment_, very sharp or ill dealing in Business.

_Turn-coat_, he that quits one and embraces another Party.

_Turnep-pate_, White or Fair-hair’d.

_Twang_, a smack or ill Taste.

_Tweak_, _in a Tweak_, in a heavy taking, much-vext, or very angry.

_Twelver_, c. a Shilling.

_Twist_, half Tea, half Coffee; also a Bough, and to Eat. _To Twist
lustily_, to Feed like a Farmer.

_Twit_, to hit in the Teeth.

_Twitter_, to Laugh much with little Noise; also to Tremble.


V

_Vagaries_, wild Rambles, extravagant Frolicks.

_Vagrant_, a wandring Rogue, a strolling Vagabond.

_Vain_, Fond.

_Vain-glorious_, or _Ostentatious Man_, one that Pisses more than he
Drinks.

_Valet_, a Servant.

_Vamp_, c. to Pawn any thing; also a Sock. _I’ll Vamp and tip you the
Gole_, c. I’ll Pawn my Cloths, but I’ll raise the Money for you. _To
Vamp_, to new Dress, Licker, Refresh, or Rub up old Hatts, Boots, Shoes,
_&c._

_Vampers_, c. Stockings.

_Varlets_, Rogues, Rascals, _&c._ now tho’ formerly Yeomans Servants.

_Vaudois_, Inhabitants of the Vallies in _Piedmont_, Subject to the Duke
of _Savoy_, fam’d for their frequent Rencounters with and Defeating of
French Parties, intercepting their Provisions, _&c._

_Vault_, an arched Cellar, and House of Office. _She goes to the Vault_,
when a Hare (which is very seldom) takes the Ground like a Coney.

_Vaulting-School_, c. a Bawdy-house; also an Academy where Vaulting, and
other Manly Exercises are Taught.

_Vauntlay_, Hounds or Beagles set in readiness, expecting the Chace to
come by, and then cast off before the rest come in.

_Velvet_, c. a Tongue. _Tip the Velvet_, c. to Tongue a Woman.

_Venary_, or _Venery_, Hunting or Chasing Beasts and Birds of Venery, as,
the Hart, the Hind, the Hare, Boar and Wolf, the Pheasant, the Partridge,
_&c._

_Venison_, whatsoever Beast of the Forest is for the food of Man.

_Vent_, the fundament of Poultry and Fish; also a Bung-hole in a Vessel.

_Vent the Otter_, see _Otter_.

_Vessels_, several Pipes and Conveyances in the body, of the Blood, Seed,
Serum, or Urine, as the Bloud-vessels, Lymphæ-ducts, Spermatick Vessels,
Urinary Vessels, _&c._ Also Kitchin-Utensils, as Pots, Pans, _&c._ And of
other Offices, as Brewing, Washing Churning Vessels, _&c._

_View_, the Treading of a Buck or Fallow Deer.

_Vinegar_, c. a Cloak.

_Virago_, a masculine Woman, or a great two-handed Female.

_Virtuoso_, an experimental Philosopher, a Trader in new Inventions and
Discoveries, a Projecter in Philosophy.

_Unharbour the Hart_, see _Hart_.

_Unitarians_, a numerous Sect holding one God without plurality or
distinction of Persons.

_Unkennel the Fox_, Dislodge him.

_Unrig’d_, Stript, Undrest, and Ships that are laid up. _Unrig the Drab_,
c. to pull all the Whore’s Cloths off.

_Untwisted_, Undone, Ruin’d.

_Unwasht-bawdry_, Rant, errant fulsom Bawdry.

_Uphils_, high Dice.

_Vouchers_, c. that put off False Money for Sham-coyners; also one that
Warrants Gagers or under Officers Accompts, either at the Excize-Office,
or else where.

_Uppish_, rampant, crowing, full of Money. _He is very Uppish_, well
lined in the Fob; also brisk.

_Upright-men_, c. the second Rank of the Canting Tribes, having sole
right to the first night’s Lodging with the _Dells_. _Go Upright_, said
by Taylers and Shoemakers, to their Servants, when any Money is given to
make them Drink and signifies, bring it all out in Drink, tho’ the Donor
intended less and expects Change or some return of Money.

_Upstarts_, new rais’d to Honour.

_Urchin_, a little sorry Fellow; also a Hedgehog.

_Urines_, Netts to catch Hawks.

_Urinal of the Planets_, _Ireland_, with us, because of its frequent and
great Rains, as _Heidelberg, and Cologn_ in _Germany_, have the same Name
upon the same Account; also a Chamber-pot, or Glass.

_Utopia_, Fairy-Land, a new Atlantis, or Isle of Pines.


W

_Waddle_, to go like a Duck.

_Wag_. _Waggish_, Arch, Gamesom, Pleasant.

_Wag-Tail_, a light Woman.

_Wallowish_, a malkish, ill Taste.

_Wap_, c. to Lie with a Man. _If she won’t wap for a Winne, let her trine
for a Make_, c. If she won’t Lie with a Man for a Penny, let her Hang for
a Half-penny. _Mort wap-apace_ c. a Woman of Experience, or very expert
at the Sport.

_Wapper-eyed_, that has Sore or running Eyes.

_Warm_, welllined or flush in the Pocket.

_Warming-pan_, an old fashion’d large Watch. _A Scotch Warming-pan_, a
She-bed-fellow.

_Warren_, c. he that is Security for Goods taken up, on Credit, by
Extravagant young Gentlemen; also a Boarding-school and a Bawdy-house.

_Wash_, After-wort; also Paint for Faces.

_Waspish_, peevish.

_Water-Pad_, c. one that Robbs Ships in the Thames.

_Wattles_, Ears; also Sheep-folds.

_Weak_, Silly, half witted.

_Welsh-Camp_, a Field betwixt Lambs-Conduit and Grays Inn-lane, where the
Mob got together in great numbers, doing great mischief.

_Welsh-fiddle_, the Itch.

_Westminster-Wedding_, a Whore and a Rogue Married together.

_Wet-Quaker_, a Drunkard of that Sect.

_Wheadle_, c. a Sharper. _To cut a Wheadle_, c. to Decoy, by Fawning and
Insinuation.

_Wheel-band in the Nick_, regular Drinking over the left Thumb.

_When we enter’d the Ken, we loapt up the Dancers, and Fagotted all
there_, c. when we got into the House, we whipt up Stairs and Bound all
the People there.

_Wheatgear_, a Bird smaller than a Dottrel, choice _Peck_.

_Whether-go-ye_, a Wife.

_Whet_, a Draught or Sup to encourage the Appetite.

_Whet-stones-park_, a Lane betwixt Holborn and Lincolns-Inn-fields, fam’d
for a Nest of Wenches, now de-park’d.

_Whids_, c. Words.

_Whiddle_, c. to tell, or discover. He Whiddles, c. he Peaches. _He
Whiddles the whole Scrap_, c. he discovers all he knows. _The Cull
has Whiddled, because we wou’dn’t tip him a Snack_, c. the Dog has
discover’d, because we didn’t give him a share. _They Whiddle beef, and
we must Brush_, c. they cry out Thieves, we are Pursued, and must Fly.

_Whiddler_, c. a Peacher (or rather Impeacher) of his Gang.

_Whiggs_, the Republicans or Common-wealths-men, under the Name of
Patriots, and Lovers of Property; originally the Field-conventiclers in
the West of _Scotland_.

_Whiggish_, Factious, Seditious, Restless, Uneasy.

_Whig-land_, Scotland.

_Whip-shire_, Yorkshire.

_Whipster_, a sharp, or subtil Fellow.

_Whip off_, c. to Steal, to Drink cleaverly, to Snatch, and to run away.
_Whipt through the Lungs_, run through the Body with a Sword. _Whipt in
at the Glaze_, c. got in at the Window.

_Whim_, a Maggot.

_Whimsical_, Maggotish.

_Whimper_, a low, or small Cry. _What a Whimpering you keep?_

_Whindle_, a low or feigned Crying.

_Whineth_, see _Otter_. _To Whine_, to cry squeekingly, as at
Conventicles.

_Whinyard_, a Sword.

_Whipper-snapper_, a very small but sprightly Boy.

_Whip-Jacks_, c. the tenth Order of the Canting Crew; Counterfeit
Mariners Begging with false Passes, pretending Shipwrecks, great Losses
at Sea, _&c._ narrow escapes; telling dismal Stories, having learnt
_Tar-terms_ on purpose, but are meer Cheats.

_Whirlegigs_, Testicles.

_Whisk_, a little inconsiderable, impertinent Fellow.

_Whisker_, a great Lie.

_Whiskins_, c. shallow, brown Bowls to Drink out of.

_Whistle_, a derisory Term for the Throat. _Wet your Whistle_, to Liquor
your Throat.

_Whit_, c. Newgate. _As five Rum-padders, are Rub’d in the Dark man’s out
of the Whit, and are pik’d in to the Deuseaville_, c. five Highway-men in
the Night broke Newgate, and are gone into the Countrey.

_White-liver’d_, Cowardly; also Pale Visag’d.

_White-wool_, c. Silver.

_White-chappel-portion_, two torn Smocks, and what Nature gave.

_Whow-ball_, a Milk-maid.

_Whur_, the rising or fluttering of Partridge or Pheasant.

_Wicket_, c. a Casement, also a little Door. _As toute through the
Wicket, and see where a Cully pikes with his Gentry-mort, whose Munns are
the Rummest I ever touted before_ c. look through the Casement and see
where the Man walks with a Gentlewoman, whose Face is the fairest I have
ever seen.

_Wicher-Cully_, c. a Silver-smith.

_Wide_, when the Biass of the Bowl holds not enough.

_Widows-Weeds_, Mourning Cloths. _A Grass-Widow_, one that pretends to
have been Married, but never was, yet has Children.

_Whores-kitling_, a Bastard.

_Whore-son_, a Bastard.

_Wild-boar_, the fourth Year, at which Age or a little before he leaveth
the _Sounder_, and is called a _Singler_, or _Sanglier_, _Hogsteer_,
the third Year; _Hog_, the second Year; _Pig of the Sounder_, the first
Year. _A Boar coucheth_, Lodgeth; _Rear the Boar_, Dislodge him. _A Boar
freemeth_, maketh a noise at rutting Time.

_Wild-Rogues_, c. the fifth Order of Canters, such as are train’d up
from Children to _Nim_ Buttons off Coats, to creep in at Cellar and
Shop-Windows, and to slip in at Doors behind People, also that have been
whipt, Burnt in the fist and often in Prison for Roguery.

_Wiles_, Engins to take Deer; also Tricks Intrigues.

_Wily_, cunning crafty, intriguing.

_Willing-Tit_, a little Horse that Travels chearfully.

_Willow_, c. Poor, and of no Reputation.

_Wind-fall_, a great Fortune fallen unexpectedly by the Death of a
Friend, or Wood fell by high Winds, _&c._

_Wind-mills in the Head_, empty Projects. _He’ll go as near the Wind as
another_, live as thrifty and wary as any one.

_Win_, c. a Penny. _To Win_, c. to Steal. _Won_, c. Stolen. _The Cull
has won a couple of Rum glimsticks_, c. the Rogue has Stole a pair of
Silver-Candlesticks.

_Windy-fellow_, without Sense or Reason.

_Wink_, c. a Signal or Intimation. _He tipt the Wink_, c. he gave the
Sign or Signal.

_Wipe_, c. a Blow; also a Reflection. _He tipt him a rum Wipe_, c. he
gave him a swinging Blow. _I gave him a Wipe_, I spoke something that cut
him, or gaul’d him. _He Wipt his Nose_, c. he gull’d him.

_Wiper_, c. a Handkerchief. _Nim the Wiper_ c. to Steal the Handkerchief.

_Wiper-drawer_, c. a Handkerchief Stealer. _He drew a broad, narrow, cam,
or Speckt Wiper_, c. he Pickt-pockets of a broad, or narrow, Ghenting,
Cambrick, or Colour’d Handkerchief.

_Wire-draw_, c. a Fetch or Trick to wheedle in _Bubbles_; also to screw,
over-reach, or deal hard with. _Wire-drawn_, c. so serv’d, or treated.

_Wise Man of Gotham_, a Fool.

_Witcher_, c. Silver.

_Witcher-bubber_, c. a Silver-bowl. _The Cull is pik’d with the
Witcher-bubber_, c. the Rogue is marched off with the Silver-Bowl.

_Witcher-tilter_, c. a Silver-hilted Sword. _He has bit_, or _drawn the
Witcher-tilter_, c. he has Stole the Silver-hilted Sword.

_Within the Sword_, from the Sword to the Right Hand.

_Without the Sword_, all the Man’s-Body above the Sword.

The _Witt_, c. Newgate.

_Woman of the Town_, a Lewd, common Prostitute.

_Womble te-cropt_, see _Crop-sick_.

_Wooden-ruff_, c. a Pillory, the Stocks at the other end. _Hudibras_. _He
wore the Wooden-ruff_, c. he stood in the Pillory.

_Wood-pecker_, c. a Bystander that bets; also a bird of that Name. _In a
Wood_, at a loss.

_Wooly-crown_, a Fool. _Your Wits are a Wool-gathering_, _are in a Wild
goose-chace_.

_Word-pecker_, one that play’s with Words.

_Worm’d out of_, Rookt, Cheated, Trickt.

_Wreath_, the Tail of a Boar; also a Torce between the Mantle and the
Crest.


X

_Xantippe_, a Scold; also the froward Wife of _Socrates_.


Y

_Yarmouth-Capon_, Red Herring.

_Yarmouth-Coach_, a sorry low Cart to ride on, drawn by one Horse.

_Yarmouth-Pie_, made of Herrings, highly Spic’d, and Presented by the
City of _Norwich_, (upon the forfeiture of their Charter) annually to the
King.

_Yarum_, c. Milk.

_Yea and Nay-Men_, Quakers.

_Yearn_, when Beagles bark and cry at their Game.

_Yellow_, Jealous.

_Yellow-boy_, c. Piece of Gold of any Coin.

_Yeoman of the Mouth_, an Officer belonging to his Majestie’s Pantry.

_Yoak’d_, Married.

_Yorkshire-Tike_, a Yorkshire manner of Man.


Z

_Zany_, a Mountebanks Merry-Andrew, or Jester, to distinguish him from a
Lord’s Fool.

_Zuche_, a wither’d or dry Stock or Stub of a Tree.


FINIS.




Transcriber’s Note


It’s fair to say that the typesetting of this book was _bad_, and it has
taken some cleanup to produce a usable e-text. Corrected without further
note:

  Erroneous or omitted punctuation
  Word spacing
  Turned type (u for n, w for m, b for d, etc)
  Broken type (v for y, n for h, etc)
  Type substitutions that are easy to make in error (c for e, i for l,
        P for F, etc)
  Missing letters, if there was a clear gap indicating that one should
        have been there and it was also obvious what the letter should
        be
  Repeated words

List of changes made to the text:

  Entry _Academy_, “Genteleman” changed to “Gentleman” (Gentleman-like
        Exercises)
  Entry _Birds of a Feather_, “Brids” changed to “Birds” (To kill two
        Birds)
  Entry _Bone_, “or any other Goal” changed to “or any other Gaol”
  Entry _Bowsingken_, “Dink” changed to “Drink” (Strong Drink)
  Entry _Box_, “alse” changed to “false” (made false steps)
  Entry _Case_, “don” changed to “done” (there’s no good to be done)
  Entry _Chop-houses_, “boy’d” changed to “boyl’d” (boyl’d and roast
        Mutton)
  Entry _Cloy_, “Hankerchief” changed to “Handkerchief” (Steal the
        Handkerchief)
  Entry _Common Women_, “Sreets” changed to “Streets” (Plyers in the
        Streets)
  Entry _Coarse_, “he” changed to “the” (Course of the Moon)
  Entry _Dead-men_, “Tarvern” changed to “Tavern” (on a Tavern-table)
  Entry _Dells_, “off” changed to “of” (any of the Fraternity)
  Entry _Dig the Badger_, “dislodg” changed to “dislodge” (dislodge him)
  Entry _Domerars_, “Tougus” changed to “Tongues” (had their Tongues
        cut out)
  Entry _Domerars_, “Toungs” also changed to “Tongues” (the tip of
        their Tongues)
  Entry _Dragg’d_, “Precints” changed to “Precincts” (Precincts of the
        Inns of Court)
  Entry _Fair Speech_, “Spech” changed to “Speech” (You have made a
        Fair Speech)
  Entry _Fetids_, “Vegetabes” changed to “Vegetables” (Vegetables, or
        Animals)
  Entry _Fussocks_, “Flusom” changed to “Fulsom” (a Fulsom, Fat,
        Strapping Woman)
  Entry _Glib_, “o Kub” changed to “a Rub” (Smooth, without a Rub.)
  Entry _Gypsies_, “promicuously” changed to “promiscuously” (Living
        promiscuously)
  Entry _Hackum_, “a c.” changed to “a” (a Fighting Fellow)
  Entry _Jarke-men_, “Countefeit” changed to “Counterfeit” (who make
        Counterfeit Licences)
  Entry _Lord_, “coorked” changed to “crooked” (crooked, deformed, or
        ill-shapen)
  Entry _Louse-land_, “Scoth” changed to “Scotch” (A Scotch Louse-trap)
  Entry _Mab_, “carelesly” changed to “carelessly” (Drest carelessly,
        like a Slattern)
  Entry _Nask_, “Bridewel” changed to “Bridewell” (c. the Bridewell in
        Tuttle-Fields)
  Entry _Palliards_, “Seaventh” changed to “Seventh” (the Seventh Rank)
  Entry _Pedlars_, “Scoth” changed to “Scotch” (Scotch Merchants)
  Entry _Pentice Nab_, “brm’d” changed to “brim’d” (a very broad-brim’d
        Hat)
  Entry _Platter-fac’d-jade_, “vere” changed to “very” (a very broad,
        ord’nary faced Woman)
  Entry _Play it off_, “thorw” changed to “throw” (to throw away, at
        Gaming)
  Entry _Quietists_, “Paryer” changed to “Prayer” (wholly for Mental
        Prayer)
  Entry _Rub_, “Tolleraly” changed to “Tollerably” (to Live Tollerably)
  Entry _Salt-cel_, “baord” changed to “board” (Sailors on board)
  Entry _Scotch-bobby_, “Conutry” changed to “Country” (Horse of that
        Country)
  Entry _Stingy_, “covetuos” changed to “covetous” (covetous,
        closed-fisted)
  Entry _Tat-monger_, “fase” changed to “false” (using false Dice)
  Entry _Torcoth_, “on-” changed to “only” (found only in the Pool)
  Entry _Transnear_ was printed _Tansnear_, obviously wrong from
        alphabetical ordering
  Entry _Tup_, “Eve” changed to “Ewe” (Copulation of Ram and Ewe)
  Entry _Whistle_, “Troat” changed to “Throat” (to Liquor your Throat)

Where there was any doubt whatsoever, the original word has been left as
printed, even if it appears not to make any sense.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A NEW DICTIONARY OF THE TERMS ANCIENT AND MODERN OF THE CANTING CREW IN ITS SEVERAL TRIBES OF GYPSIES, BEGGERS, THIEVES, CHEATS, &C. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


