The Project Gutenberg eBook of Lion yarn book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Lion yarn book
        Describing latest creations in worsted work

Author: Lion Brand Yarn

Release date: June 14, 2025 [eBook #76300]

Language: English

Original publication: Unknown: Lion Yarn Co, 1920

Credits: Richard Tonsing, Aaron Adrignola, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LION YARN BOOK ***





                             Lion Yarn Book


[Illustration:
The LION YARN MILL
Where Lion Brand Yarns are manufactured from raw to finished product

_The Mark of Quality and Full Weight_

Describing Latest Creations
In Worsted Work]




                            Copyright, 1920,
                                   By
                           The Lion Yarn Co.




[Illustration:

  =Skating Set=
]

                             Directions for
                              SKATING SET

                     Sweater, With Scarf Attached.


                       Materials for Sweater Set:

  =7 Hanks Black LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 2 Hanks Tango Orange LION
  BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Hank Green LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Hank Red
  LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Amber Knitting Needles No. 9; 1 Pair
  Amber Knitting Needles No. 6; 1 Crochet Hook No. 5.=

=Note=: When joining colors where the work is purled and knitted, knit
first four sts., also knit the four that were purled, taking up sts. at
back of needle, continue doing this to end of row, knit four, purl four,
as directed.

With bk. yarn and No. 6 knitting needles cast on 90 stitches, kt. four,
purl four, for 10 inches.

The following is how the colors are arranged:

Black—Kt. 4, purl 4 for 15 rows.

Tango Orange: 4 rows.

Black: 1 row.

Green: 1 row.

Red: 4 rows.

Black: 1 row.

T. O.: 4 rows.

Black: 12 rows.

T. O.: 1 row.

Black: 4 rows.

T. O.: 1 row.

Black: 8 rows.

Work of kt. 4, purl 4, should now measure 10 inches; change to No. 9
needle and kt. in plain garter st. for 10 more inches (42 ribs) cast on
65 sts. on each side, for sleeves. Kt. on these 220 sts. for 6 inches
(or 26 ribs); now kt. and slip 100 sts. onto a large safety pin, bind
off 20 sts. for back of neck. Continue ktg. on the other 100 sts. for 3
ribs, then cast on 6 sts. at front of neck. Kt. on these 106 sts. for 6
more inches (or 26 ribs).

Bind off 65 sts. for sleeves, continue ktg. sts. left on needle, adding
one st. every row, at front side only, until 56 sts. are on needle. Pass
these onto large safety pin. Take sts. off safety pin on shoulder and
kt. other front to correspond. When other 56 sts. are reached put all
stitches on one needle (112 in all), kt. until front measures same as
back and bind off.

=For Cuffs=: With bk. yarn pick up 50 sts. at end of sleeve. Kt. 7 ribs,
then 1 rib T.O., 1 rib bk., 1 rib gr., 1 rib bk., 1 rib red, 1 rib bk.,
1 rib T.O., 3 ribs bk., 4 ribs T.O., and bind off. Sew up sweater, both
sides, and sleeves, turn cuff over on right side of sweater.

=For Sleeves=: With bk. yarn and crochet hook, chain 3 (always chain one
to turn).

1st row: One s. c. in each st., taking up both loops. Increase 1 st. at
end of each row, on one side only until 18 sts. are worked, then
decrease at same side increases were made until but 13 sts. are left,
work on these for 14 rows, then again decrease until 5 sts. are left.
Break off yarn.

For border: 1 row bk., 1 row gr., 1 row red, 1 row T.O. Sew to each side
of sweater at neck. Join the lower part of reveres neatly. Finish with
crochet button.

=For Scarf=: With No. 9 needles and T.O., cast on 6 sts., increase 1 st.
at end of each needle until 40 sts. are on needle, blending colors at
each end of scarf, same as on sweater. Kt. on these 40 sts. for 18
inches. Now kt. 15 sts., bind off 10 sts., then kt. 15 more, to end of
row. Turn, kt. 15 sts. cast on 10 sts., kt. other 15 to end of row. Kt.
back and forth until scarf measures 50 inches from point to point. Bind
off, finish with tassel of T.O., sew scarf to back of neck, shoulder to
shoulder, slip one end through opening made, when scarf is to be worn
snug to neck.

=Dickey=: Cast on 3 sts. Increase 1 st. at end of every row, until 36
sts. are on needle. Bind off. Attach to sweater with snaps. Dickey can
be omitted if desired.

=Sash=: With crochet hook and tango orange chain 6, 1 st. in each st.
until sash measures 58 inches; finish with tassel.




[Illustration:

  =New Ruffle Sweater and Tam=
]

                             Directions for
                     THE NEW RUFFLE SWEATER AND TAM


                               Materials:

  =10 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 10;
  1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 5.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on No. 10 needles 150 sts., k. popcorn st. for 8 inches.
Change to No. 5 needles, decrease to 80 sts. and k. until back measures
18 inches from bottom. Add on 65 sts. at each end for sleeves and k. for
5 inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: K. 95 sts., bind off the next 20 sts. for neck. Slip the 95
sts. just knitted on a spare needle; on the remaining 95 sts. k. one
front after the following directions: K. 4 ribs or 8 rows, then add 1
st. at neck end every other rib until the sleeve is finished, having as
many ribs on front of sleeve as there are on back. Bind off the 65 sts.
added on for sleeve and k. for 2 inches more, still increasing at front.
Slip these sts. on a spare needle. Take the first 95 sts. from spare
needle and k. the same.

Now take all sts. on needle and k. until as long as back. Change to No.
10 needles and increase to 150 sts. and work popcorn st. for 8 inches,
bind off.

=Cuffs=: Pick up sts. with No. 10 needles and increase on each st., work
popcorn st. for 5 inches, bind off.

Finish neck with ribbon holes for ribbon.


                             POPCORN STITCH

First Row—Knit.

Second Row—Purl.

Third Row—Knit the first st., then k. 2 sts. together throughout the
entire row.

Fourth Row—* Knit 1 st., k. a st. on the thread between the sts., repeat
from star across row.

Repeat these 4 rows for the popcorn st.


                           DIRECTIONS FOR TAM


                               Materials:

  =4 Skeins LION BRAND SHETLAND Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

Ch. 3 sts., turn, skip 1 st., and 6 s. c. in next st.

Second Row—2 s. c. in each st.

Third Row—* 1 s. c. in 1 s. c., 2 s. c. in next st., repeat from star,
having 6 mitres of 2 s. c. with 1 s. c. between each mitre in round.

Fourth Row—* 1 s. c. in each of 2 sts., 2 s. c. in next st., repeat from
star to end of round.

Repeat fourth round, having 1 more s. c. between each of the 6 mitres of
2 s. c. in each round until top 14 inches across. Then 4 inches with 1
s. c. in each st. This finishes top.

=Band=: 1 s. c. and skip 1 s. c. and 1 s. c. in next st. Repeat all
around. Then 1 s. c. in each st. until band measures 4 inches, or width
required.

Make pompom and sew on top of tam.




[Illustration:

  =Monk’s Collar Pull-over=
]

                             Directions for
                        MONK’S COLLAR PULL-OVER


                               Materials:

             =10 Balls Turquoise Vicuna Yarn.=
             =4 Balls Black Vicuna Yarn.=
             =1 Pair Ivory or Amber Knitting Pins, No. 5.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: With black wool cast on 80 sts. Knit 8 ribs or 16 rows. Change
to blue wool. K. 2, p. 2 for 10 rows.

=Next Row=—* With black wool purl 1 row, knit 1 row. With blue wool knit
2, purl 2 for 10 rows. Repeat from star these 12 rows until there are 6
groups of purling with blue wool.

* Finishing with black. Knit 10 ribs with blue wool. With black p. 1
row, k. 1 row. Repeat from star these 12 rows until there are 5 groups
of blue knitting. This finishes back.

=Front=: Knit 30 sts. Bind off 20 sts. for neck, and on the remaining 30
sts. knit 1 front, following directions: Slip the first 30 sts. on a
thread and tie. Knit 4 ribs, increase 1 st. every other row until neck
is open as far as required. Take sts. from thread and make the other
side the same. Now take all sts. together on needle and work front as
long as back to the purling. Purl same as back. Bind off.

=Sleeves=: Pick up 50 sts. around arm hole. * Knit 10 ribs blue.

Black same as body. Repeat from star until there are 3 groups of blue.
Decrease 1 st. every 4th rib till sleeve is required length.

=Cuff=: K. 2, p. 2 for 3 inches with blue wool. Change to black and knit
4 ribs. Change to blue and knit 3 ribs. Change to black and knit 8 ribs.
Bind off.

=Collar=: Cast on 24 sts. with black wool and knit even until piece fits
neck; sew on and collar will roll.

Sew up side and sleeves.




[Illustration:

  =Popcorn Stitch Sweater=
]

                             Directions for
                          POPCORN ST. SWEATER


                               Materials:

                  =10 Sk. Lion Brand Shetland Floss.=
                  =1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 10.=
                  =1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 5.=


                              Directions:

=Popcorn Stitch=: Cast on an uneven number of stitches and knit one row.

Second Row—Purl.

Third Row—Knit the first st., * knit 2 together; repeat from star across
row.

Fourth Row—* Knit 1, knit a st. on the thread between the sts.; repeat
from star across row; repeat from 2nd row to 4th row for popcorn st.

=Back=: Cast on 149 sts. on No. 10 needles and knit popcorn st. for 8
inches. Change to No. 5 needles and decrease to 89 sts. by knitting the
first 4 sts., then 2 sts. together until the last 4 sts. Now knit
popcorn st. until sweater from bottom measures 18 inches. Add 65 sts. on
at each end for sleeves and knit for 6 inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: Knit 99 sts., and the next 21 sts. bind off for neck. Slip the
99 sts. just knitted on a spare needle and on the remaining 99 sts. knit
one front after the following directions: Knit one inch, then increase 1
st. on each row of purling at neck end until sleeve is finished. Work
the same amount of rows on front of sleeve as there are on back. Bind
off 65 sts. that were added on for sleeve and knit on the remaining sts.
until front is as long as back down to ruffle. Slip these sts. on a
spare needle and take the other sts. from spare needle and work the same
as front just finished. Now take all sts. on needle and increase back to
the 149 sts. Change to No. 10 needles and knit for 8 inches bind off.

=Collar=: With same color floss as sweater is knitted cast on 15 sts.
Knit plain until piece fits around neck of sweater bind off. With
contrasting color pick up sts. on long end of collar and knit for 2
inches bind off. With contrasting color pick up sts. on end of collar
and knit until piece is long enough to fit down to the ruffle. Make the
other side the same; bind off. Sew on sweater and fasten down at each
end to sweater.

=Cuffs=: With No. 5 needles pick up sts. on end of sleeve and increase
one st. in every other st. on first row only. Change to No. 10 needles
and knit popcorn st. for 5 inches; bind off.




[Illustration:

  =Misses’ Filet Slip-on=

  (See Diagram No. 109)
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 109=
]

                             Directions for
                         MISSES’ FILET SLIP-ON


                               Materials:

  =10 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 2 or No. 3.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Ch. 94 sts. and work 92 d. c. on ch.

Second Row—46M.

Third and Fourth Rows—46M.

Then follow diagram for pattern. Then work all rows of 46M until the
back measures 17 inches from bottom of sweater.

Add a ch. of 80 sts. at each end for sleeves. Work 38M on ch. for
sleeves, then work until sleeves measure 5½ inches. This finishes back.

=Front=: Work 55M, ch. 5, turn. Work 3 rows of 55M, then add 1M every
other row until the sleeve is finished. Then work until there are 27M in
row. Make the other side the same. Join the two sides together and
follow diagram reversed for front.

=Collar=: Ch. 35 sts., work all d. c. on ch.

Second Row—1B, 13M, 1B. Repeat this row until collar fits neck of
sweater. Finish outside edge with a picot edge, fasten off, and sew on
sweater.

=Cuffs=: Fasten wool on end of sleeve and work * 1M in space, 2M in next
space, repeat from star across row.

Second Row—1M in each space. Repeat this row for 4 inches. Then 1 row of
2 d. c. in each space. Finish with a picot edge and fringe.

=Sash=: Ch. 25 sts., work 1B, 5M, 1B on ch. Repeat this row until sash
is required length. Finish with fringe.




[Illustration:

  =Auto Scarf=
]

                             Directions for
                               AUTO SCARF


                               Materials:

  =5 Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 3 or No. 4.=


                              Directions:

Make a ch. 20 inches long, work star st. on ch. for 1 row, and 1 row of
s. c. back.

Repeat these two rows for the entire scarf.

Scarf should measure 60 inches long.

Then work on each end of scarf with contrasting color for 3 inches,
making scarf 66 inches long.

=Belt=: Make a ch. 2½ inches wide and work star st. same as scarf for 44
inches. Work buttonholes on each end.


                              Star Stitch

First Row—Skip 1 ch. and draw up a loop in each of the next 5 sts., yarn
over, and draw through the 6 loops on hook. Ch. 1, draw a loop through
the eye formed by the ch. just made, draw a loop through the back of
last loop of star just made, draw a loop through same ch. where the last
loop of previous star was made, draw a loop through each of the next 2
ch. sts., yarn over, and draw through the 6 loops on hook, ch. 1. Repeat
from star to end of row, ch. 1, turn.

Second Row—1 s. c. in top and eye of st., making 2 s. c. to a star st.,
ch. 3, turn.

Third Row—Draw a loop through the 1st and 2d ch. sts. just made, and 1
in each of the first 2 s. c. sts., having 5 loops on hook, yarn over,
and draw through all 5 loops on hook, * ch. 1, draw a loop through the
eye formed by the ch. just made, draw a loop through the back of last
loop of star just made, draw a loop through the next 2 s. c. sts., yarn
over, and draw through the 5 loops on hook. Repeat from star to the end
of row.

Repeat these 3 rows for scarf.




[Illustration:

  =Ladies’ Cloak=
]

                             Directions for
                             LADIES’ CLOAK


                               Materials:

  =6 Hanks of LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 5.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 100 sts., knit in garter st. for 3 inches.

Next Row—K. 5, p. 5 for 5 rows.

Next Row—P. 5, k. 5 for 5 rows. Repeat these 10 rows for 4 inches,
forming the block st. pattern. Then knit garter st. until piece measures
34 inches, slip these sts. on a spare needle.

=Side=: Cast on 100 sts., and repeat above directions, slip these sts.
on a spare needle.

Make the other side the same. Now take all sts. on one needle and narrow
after the following directions: K. 2 sts. together all across row, knit
5 ribs even, narrow again, knit 5 ribs even, bind off.

=Collar=: Cast on with contrasting yarn 50 sts. and knit in garter st.
until collar measures 1 yd. or length required. Bind off, fold in half,
and sew on cape, leaving both ends even. Fold back and sew on snappers
on bottom end.




[Illustration:

  =Sleeveless Tuxedo=
]

                             Directions for
                           SLEEVELESS TUXEDO


                               Materials:

  =7 Balls Robin Egg Blue Vicuna Yarn; 5 Balls White Vicuna Yarn.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 84 sts.

First Row—Knit 1 row.

Second Row—Knit * 5 sts., purl 1 st. Repeat from star, ending row with 5
k.

Repeat these two rows for pattern for sweater.

Knit pattern for 7 inches. Decrease 1 st. at each end of needle every
other row until there are 76 sts. on needle. Knit until back measures 20
inches.

=Front=: Knit 27 sts., bind off 22 sts. for neck. Slip the first 27 sts.
on a thread and tie. Knit on the remaining 27 sts. for 3 ribs or 6 rows.

Increase 1 st. every 4th rib until there are 53 sts. on needle.

Knit even until front is as long as back. Bind off.

Take the 27 sts. off thread and make the other front the same.

=Band=: With white wool cast on 20 sts. and knit straight until band
fits all around sweater. Sew on and fasten back at bottom with fringe.
Sew up sweater, leaving enough for armholes open.

=Fringe=: On bottom of sweater make the fringe 5 inches long.

=Sash=: Cast on 15 sts. and knit for length required.

=Fringe=: On sash 2 inches long.

Crochet around armholes with white wool and a s. c.

=Straps=: Ch. 20 sts. and a s. c. on each side of ch. Sew on side of
sweater.




[Illustration:

  =Ladies’ Sweater with Girdle=
]

                             Directions for
                      LADIES’ SWEATER WITH GIRDLE

                                Size 38


                               Materials:

  =16 Balls of Coronet Vicuna; Color, Shadow Lawn; 3 Balls of Same;
  Color, Leather; 1 Pair of Amber or Bone Knitting Needles, No. 7; 1
  Bone Crochet Hook, No. 4; 1 Steel Hook, No. 2. For Buttons and Caps on
  Tassels: 6 Button Molds, Ball Shape.=


                              Directions:

With green yarn cast on 88 sts., knit 8 ridges plain. Knit 4 needles in
ribbing of 4 plain and 4 purl. Knit the next 4 needles in same ribbing,
but alternate the plain to the purl and the purl to the plain, thereby
forming the block pattern. Continue in this manner in block pattern
until there are 4 sets of blocks, then knit plain for 57 ridges,
decreasing 1 st. at the beginning and end of every 8th ridge for 6
times, so that only 76 sts. will remain on needle. Cast on 50 sts. on
each side of work for sleeves. Knit 22 ridges on these 176 sts. The work
now reaches to the neck. Knit 79 sts. and put on a safety pin, bind off
18 for neck, and knit one ridge on the other 79 sts. Then add one st. in
every ridge at front for V neck for 20 ridges. When sleeves are 44
ridges wide in all bind off the 50 sts. of sleeve and knit on the
remaining 49 sts. for 57 ridges, at the same time increasing 1 st. at
under-arm side of work in every 8th ridge for 6 times. There will then
be 55 sts. on needle. Knit the 4 blocks in pattern like on back, then
the 8 plain ridges. Bind off loosely, and take other 79 sts. off pin at
neck, and work second front in same manner. Sew up under-arm and sleeve
seams.


                      Ladies’ Sweater with Girdle

=Cuff=: Pick up 36 sts. on sleeve by taking 2 sts. together now and
then. Knit 4 inches in ribbing of 2 plain and 2 purl. Now fasten
“leather” yarn and knit 5 ridges, then 3 ridges green, 5 ridges leather,
3 green, 5 ridges leather. Bind off.

=Collar=: With “leather” yarn cast on 3 sts., knit, increasing 1 st. at
one side of work only in every ridge until there are 26 sts. on needle.
Now knit 90 ridges on these 26 sts., then decrease 1 st. at the uneven
side of collar in every ridge until but 3 remain. Bind off. Finish
around uneven side of collar with a row of single crochet from point to
point. Sew to neck.

=Girdle=: With green yarn cast on 3 sts., knit, increasing 1 st. at one
side of work only in every ridge until there are 16 sts. on needle, then
knit plain for 76 ridges. Now cast on 28 sts. on one side of work, and,
having 44 sts. in all, knit 22 ridges. Bind off the 28 sts. that were
cast on and continue knitting on the other 16 sts. for 76 ridges. Reduce
to a point by decreasing 1 st. in every ridge, at one side only, until 3
sts. remain. Bind off and finish with row of single crochet all around
girdle.

=Crochet Caps on Tassels=: With steel hook chain 3 and join in a ring.
Work 6 single crochet in ring. In next round work 2 single crochet in
each st., having 12 in all. Now work round and round, having 1 st. in
each st., until cap is one inch in length. Make a tassel by winding yarn
over a 4-inch card board until the desired thickness is obtained. Cut
and tie in center, and slip cap over tassel, tie to girdle.

Finish fronts of sweater with a row of single crochet, working button
loops at left side by beginning at collar, chain 5 very tight, skip 3
ridges, work 9 single crochet in succession, and work two more button
loops in same manner. Work one row of single crochet over this row.

=Buttons=: With steel hook chain 3 and join in ring. Work 6 single
crochet in ring. In second round work 2 single crochet in each st.
Continue working 1 st. in each of the 12 sts. until work covers the
mold. Make 6 buttons.




[Illustration:

  =Filet Scarf=

  (See Diagram No. 105)
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 105=
]

                             Directions for
                              FILET SCARF


                               Materials:

  =8 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 3 or No. 4.=


                              Directions:

Make a ch. 24 inches long.

Then work diagram; this should measure 15 inches when design is
finished. Now work all rows of meshes until work measures 28 inches,
then work diagram reversed for the other end of scarf.

Scarf when finished should measure about 58 inches.

Finish end of scarf with fringe.




[Illustration:

  =Ladies’ Filet Tuxedo Sweater=

  (See two diagrams No. 112)
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 112=
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 112=
]

                             Directions for
                      LADIES’ FILET TUXEDO SWEATER


                               Materials:

  =10 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 2 or No. 3.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Ch. 107 sts., work 104 d. c. on ch., turn.

Second Row—52M on d. c., 4 more rows of 52M. Then follow diagram. Now
work all rows of meshes until back measures 19 inches, add a ch. of 100
sts. on at each end for sleeves; work 48M on each ch., having 148M in
row, work for 5 inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: Work 68M, turn. Work 4 rows of 68M, then add 1M at neck end
until there are 24M in row. This finishes sleeve.

Next Row—Leave 48M and work on the remaining meshes for one front after
following directions: 4B, 20M until front is as long as back, including
the working of small rose on bottom.

=Band=: Ch. 31 sts., work 1B, 1M, 1B, 1M, 1B, 1M, 1B, 1M, 1B on ch.

Second Row—1M, 1B, 5M, 1B, 1M.

Third Row—1B, 1M, 1B, 3M, 1B, 1M, 1B. Repeat these 2 rows until the band
fits neck.

=Cuffs=: With colored floss work 1 s. c. in each space on end of sleeve,
then 8 rows of d. c. Change to white floss and work cuff to match band.

=Sash=: Ch. 18 sts., work d. c. on ch., then work as many rows of d. c.
as length required. Make tassels and sew on ends.




[Illustration:

  =Filet Sweater Coat and Tam o’Shanter=

  (See Diagram No. 119)
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 119=
]

                             Directions for
                  FILET SWEATER COAT and TAM O’SHANTER


                               Materials:

  =12 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Ch. 114 sts., work d. c. on ch. Follow diagram.

Then work all meshes until the back measures 18 inches. Add on a ch. of
95 sts. at each end for sleeves, and work 45M on ch., having 145M in
row; now work meshes for 6 inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: Work 66M, 1B, turn. Work 3 more rows the same, then add 1M
towards front every other row until 14M have been added on. Work the
front straight, always working 1B at front edge till down to the pattern
then work diagram, only 1 pattern.

=Cuffs=: Work all d. c. on end of sleeves, then 2M, * 3B, 1M, and repeat
from star.

Second Row—2M, 1B, * 3M, 1B, 1M, 1B. Repeat from star.

Third Row—1M, 3B, 1M, * 5B, 1M. Repeat from star.

Fourth Row—Same as second row.

Fifth Row—Same as third row.

Sixth Row—All d. c.

=Belt=: Ch. 25, work 1B, 5M, 1B on ch. Repeat this for length required.

=Collar=: Ch. 50 sts, work 46 d. c. on ch.

Second Row—1B, 17M, 1B. Work this row for 8 inches, then decrease 1M
every other row at inside end until 1B remains.

Sew on the uneven edge to sweater.


                   Directions for Filet Tam O’Shanter


                               Materials:

  =2 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

Ch. 3 sts., turn, work 14 sts. in first st., ch. 3, turn.

Second Row—2 d. c. in each d. c., having 28 d. c. in round.

Third Row—* 1M in first d. c., 2M in next d. c. Repeat from star all
around row.

Fourth Row—* 1M in first 2 d. c., 2M in the next d. c. Repeat from star.

Repeat this row, only having more single M between the doubles, until
the cap measures 14 inches across top.

=Band=: 2 s. c. in each M.

Second Row—* 1 s. c. in 1 st., skip 1 st., repeat from star around.

Third Row—* 1 s. c. in the first 6 sts., skip 1 st., repeat from star.

Work 1 s. c. in each st. until band is 4 inches wide.




[Illustration:

  =Novelty Ruffled Pull-over=
]

                             Directions for
                        NOVELTY RUFFLE PULL-OVER


                               Materials:

  =4 Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Needles, No. 7; 1 Pair
  Needles, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 150 sts. Knit 2 rows.

Third Row—K. 1 st. wool over needle twice, * k. 1, wool over needle
twice. Repeat from star across row.

Fourth Row—K. 1 st., * drop the wool over needle and knit the next st.
Repeat from star across row. Then knit 4 rows plain. Repeat the last 5
rows for pattern. Knit pattern for 8 inches. Change to No. 4 needles,
narrow to 80 sts. in row. Then k. 2, p. 2 for 4 inches. Now repeat
pattern until back measures 18 inches. Add 55 sts. on at each end for
sleeves and knit pattern for 5 inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: Knit 85 sts. Bind off 20 sts. for neck, and slip the 85 sts.
just knitted on a spare needle; on the remaining 85 sts. knit 1 front
after the following directions: Knit 1 inch, increase 1 st. every other
row at neck end until sleeve is finished. Bind off the 55 sts. added on
for sleeve, and knit for 2 inches more. Slip these sts. on a spare
needle and take the other 85 sts. and work this side the same. Now take
all sts. on one needle and knit down to the purling. K. 2, p. 2 for 4
inches. Change to No. 7 needles, increase to 150 sts. and knit pattern
for 8 inches same as back. Bind off.

=Cuffs=: With No. 4 needles pick up sts. on end of sleeve and knit the
pattern for 4 inches. Bind off. Work the cuff loosely.

=Ribbon Holes=: Fasten yarn at neck and ch. 5, yarn over needle, pull
through 2 loops, yarn over, skip one space, and draw loop through next
space, pull through 2 loops each time until there is 1 loop on needle,
yarn over, and pick up the 2 loops in center of st. just made, and pull
through 2 loops each time. Ch. 4 and fasten back in top of st. Repeat
all around neck of sweater. Fasten off and sew up sweater.




[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 110=
]

[Illustration:

  =Ladies’ Filet and Knitted Sweater=

  (See Diagram No. 110 on previous page)
]

                             Directions for
                   LADIES’ FILET AND KNITTED SWEATER


                               Materials:

  =3 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 3 or
  No. 4.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Cast on knitting needles 84 sts., k. 2, p. 2 for 8 inches, bind
off.

With crochet hook work one row of 10 d. c. and 1M.

Second Row—37M, then follow diagram for back.

=Front=: Work 9M, 1B, ch. 3 sts., turn.

Work 7 rows the same, then add 1M; there are 12M, 1B in row. Work the
other side the same. Add a ch. of 30 sts. at neck end and follow diagram
for front.

Change to knitting needles and decrease to 84 sts.; k. 2, p. 2 for 8
inches.

Sew up the purling only and finish around neck and armholes with a
picot.


                               Picot Edge

Ch. 8 sts., fasten back in 6th st., ch. 2, fasten in next space. Repeat
this all around neck and armholes.




[Illustration:

  =Ladies’ Russian Filet Sweater=

  (See Diagram No. 107)
]

[Illustration:

  Diagram No. 107
]

                             Directions for
                     LADIES’ RUSSIAN FILET SWEATER


                               Materials:

  =10 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 2 or No. 3.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Make a ch. of 200 sts., work the diagram on ch., then rows of
meshes until ruffle measures 8 inches.

=Belt=: Work a s. c. in each space; this draws ruffle in.

Next Row—1 d. c. in each s. c. Repeat this row for 7 times for belt.

Next Row—Work 1M, * skip 1 d. c., make 2M in next d. c., 1M in next d.
c. Repeat from star across row.

Next Row—1M all across row. Now work rows of M until back measures 18
inches from bottom. Then decrease M to 38M in row. This forms yoke. Add
a ch. of 100 sts. on each end for sleeves, and work 48M on each ch.
Continue rows of M until sleeves measure 6 inches. This finishes back.

=Left Front=: Work 58M, 1B, 1M, 1B, ch. 5, and turn.

Second Row—1M, 1B, 1M, 1B, 57M. Repeat these 2 rows until sleeve is
finished, then work on front only until down to the belt, working border
on front edge. Fasten off. Leave 11M for neck and on the remaining Ms
work right front.

=Right Front=: Work the same as left front until sleeve is finished,
then add a ch. of 30 sts. at neck end, and on ch. work in next row 1B,
1M; work 3 more rows the same. Then work border down front only until
belt is reached. Join and work belt same as back; then increase 1M in
every other M until there are the same amount of Ms on front as on back;
follow directions same as back ruffle.

=Cuffs=: Work 2M in each space. Then work 3 rows of M.

One row of d. c.

One row of M.

One row of d. c.

Finish with picot.




[Illustration:

  =Novelty Sweater=
]

                             Directions for
                            NOVELTY SWEATER


                               Materials:

      =No. 5 and No. 2 Knitting Needles.=
      =No. 3 Crochet Needle.=
      =Three-quarter lb. Lion Brand Shetland floss or Lady Alice.=


                              Directions:

With No. 5 Needles—Cast on 135 stitches; * knit 1 row, purl 1 row, knit
1 s. and then 2 together all the way across; knit 1, knit dropped s.
between and repeat; knit 2 rows *. This completes pattern. Knit 12
patterns. Narrow every other stitch till you have 88 stitches on needle.

On No. 2 Needles—Knit 4, purl 4 for 1½ inches.

On No. 5 Needles—Knit 30 ribs plain; cast on 50 stitches at each end for
sleeves; knit 26 ribs plain; knit 80 stitches, take off on extra needle;
bind off 28 stitches for neck. On remaining 80 stitches make front.

=Front=: Knit two rows of pattern; cast on 20 stitches toward front;
knit 26 ribs plain; bind off 50 stitches for sleeve; knit 30 ribs; knit
4, purl 4 for 1½ inches on No. 2 needles.

On No. 5 Needles—Knit 1 row plain; knit 1 row widening every other
stitch until you have 135 stitches on needle; knit 12 patterns and bind
off; knit other front to match.

With No. 2 Needles—Pick up stitches at bottom of sleeve; knit 1, purl 1
for 1½ inches.

No. 5 Needles—Knit 10 patterns; bind off, finish with crocheted edge;
knit other sleeve to match.

=Collar=: Pick up stitches on inside of neck; knit 12 ribs plain; 6
patterns for ruffle; bind off; finish with crocheted edge.

=For Vest=: Pick up stitches from turn of collar to waist line; knit 3
rows of pattern at each side; finish with crocheted edge, loops and
buttons.

=Crochet Edge=: With No. 3 needle single crochet on right side. Chain 1,
turn and on wrong side * single crochet in front of first stitch; double
crochet in back of second stitch; * repeat.




[Illustration:

  =Man’s Knitted Coat Sweater=
]

                             Directions for
                       MAN’S KNITTED COAT SWEATER

                               Size 38–40

               Pattern for Sweater Is Knit One, Purl One
                           Throughout Sweater


                               Materials:

              =6 Hanks Lion Brand Heather Knitting Yarn.=
              =1 Pr. Knitting Needles No. 3.=
              =1 Pr. Steel Knitting Needles No. 14.=


                              Directions:

Cast on 132 sts. for back, follow pattern and k. 26 inches. This
finishes back of sweater.

=Front=: Knit 42 sts., bind off 48 sts. for neck, slip the 42 sts. just
knitted on a spare needle and on the remaining 42 sts. knit one front
after the following directions and the other to correspond knit
following pattern for one inch then add on one st. towards front every
other row until there are 64 sts. on needle, now add 15 sts. at armhole
having 79 sts. on needle.

Knit following pattern for 14 inches from under-arm. Now starting from
front work pocket lap with an extra ball of yarn and steel needles cast
on 34 sts. and knit 8 ridges.

Knit following pattern on 20 sts., then slip the next 34 sts. on a spare
needle and in their place knit in rib of knit one purl one the sts. from
pocket lap. Knit following pattern on remaining sts. on needle knit
following pattern until side seam is the same length as side seam on
back, bind off loosely. Then knit in rib of knit one, purl one on the 31
sts. on spare needle for pocket for 5 inches, bind off. Sew to inside of
sweater. Sew side seams together.

=Sleeves=: Cast on 121 sts., knit in rib of knit one, purl one for 2
inches, then decrease by knitting 3 sts. together on each end of needle
every 6th row until 12 sts. have been decreased on each side and there
are 93 sts. on needle; knit following pattern for 3 inches, then
decrease by knitting 3 sts. together at each end of needle every 6th row
until there are 85 sts. on needle. Knit following pattern until sleeves
are required length or 18 inches. Narrow and knit turnover cuff for 5
inches. Bind off.

=Band=: Cast on steel needles 14 sts. and knit in ridges for 42 inches.
Now start buttonholes, knit 5 sts., bind off 4 sts. and knit 5 sts. Next
row cast on the 4 sts. that were bound off in row before and repeat
buttonholes 4 inches apart. Sew band on sweater and face bands with
ribbon.




[Illustration:

  =Man’s Crocheted Vest=
]

                             Directions for
                          MAN’S CROCHETED VEST


                               Materials:

                  =3 Hanks Lion Brand Knitting Yarn.=
                  =1 Crochet Hook No. 1.=


                              Directions:

Front of Vest—Make a ch. of 5 sts.

First Row—1 s. c. in each of the 4 sts. of ch., ch. 1 and turn.

Second Row—1 s. c. in each of 2 sts. and 2 s. c. in last 2 sts., ch. 3
and turn.

Third Row—1 s. c. in each st., 2 s. c. in the last st., ch. 1 and turn.

Fourth Row—Like 3rd row; but ch. 3 and turn.

Fifth Row—1 s. c. in each st., 2 s. c. in last ch. 1 and turn.

Sixth Row—1 s. c. in each st. 2 s. c. in last st. ch. 3 and turn. Repeat
the last two rows, always having the ch. of 3 on the same end all the
time, until there are 54 sts. in row. Now work straight for 14 rows,
make place for pocket; work 20 s. c., ch. 18 sts., skip 16 sts. and work
to end of row.

Now work 32 rows working 18 s. c. on the ch. of 18. Make another pocket
starting from front end, work 14 s. c. ch. 16, skip 14 sts. and work to
end of row. Work 4 more rows straight.

Now start and decrease one st. at armhole and one st. at front edge
every row for 8 rows. Work front edge straight, but decrease one st.
every other row at armhole until there are 24 sts. in row. Now work 40
rows straight; this finishes one front. Work the other front to
correspond omitting the top pocket.

=Back=: Make a ch. of 64 sts., work s. c. on ch. Work straight until
side seam is as long as the side seam on front: now decrease the same as
you have decreased the front on both ends. Work 10 rows straight, then
increase one st. every row until there are 58 sts. in row. The next 6
rows straight. This finishes back. Sew up side seams and shoulders.

=Bands=: Bands around front and sleeves are worked from the wrong side,
so the wrong side of the s. c. st. is used for the border working 10
rows all around vest increasing at the corners by putting 2 s. c. in one
st. On left side of vest make buttonholes, then 4 rows of s. c., finish
with a slip st. all around vest.

Band around sleeves 7 rows of s. c. and finish with a slip st. Bind band
with ribbon and sew on buttons.

Band on pockets 4 rows of s. c. on small pocket and 5 rows on large
pockets. Finish inside of pockets with 18 rows of s. c.; sew up on wrong
side.

=Buttonholes=: Start from top of vest, work 5 s. c. ch. 4, skip 3 sts.,
work 14 s. c., ch. 4, skip 3 sts. and repeat from start to bottom of
vest. On the next row add the 3 sts. on the ch. of 4. This makes the
buttonholes.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Slip-on=

  (6 to 8 years)
]

                             Directions for
                            CHILD’S SLIP-ON

                              6 to 8 years


                               Materials:

  =3 Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 66 sts., k. 3, p. 3 for 8 inches. Then garter (or rib)
sts. until sweater measures 14 inches from bottom. Add 55 sts. at each
end for sleeves. Knit until sleeve measures 4 inches. This finishes
back.

=Front=: Knit 80 sts., bind off the next 16 sts. for neck, slip the 80
sts. just knitted on a spare needle, and on the remaining 80 sts. knit
one front after the following directions: Knit 4 ribs or 8 rows, then
add 1 st. at the neck end every other row until there are as many ribs
on front of sleeve as on the back. Bind off 55 sts. that were added for
sleeve, knit 2 inches more, still increasing at front. Slip these sts.
on a spare needle, take the first 80 sts. from needle, and knit the
same.

Now take all the sts. on needle, knit as long as back down to the
purling. On last row decrease to 66 sts., then k. 3, p. 3 for 8 inches,
bind off.

=Collar=: Cast on 50 sts. with white yarn, knit in garter st. for 1
inch, change to color yarn and knit 3 ribs, change to white yarn, knit 3
inches, then all colored until collar is 6 inches long. Knit 17 sts.,
bind off 16 sts., and on the remaining 17 sts. knit after the following
directions: Knit 4 ribs, then decrease 1 st. at neck end every other row
until 4 sts. are left. Bind off. Make the other side the same. Sew on
sweater.

=Cuffs=: Pick up sts. on end of sleeve, k. 3, p. 3 for 3 inches, bind
off.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Open Sweater=
]

                             Directions for
                          CHILD’S OPEN SWEATER

                              6 to 8 years


                               Materials:

  =3½ Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 70 sts., k. 2 inches in garter (or rib) st.

Next Row—Purl all sts. across row.

Then k. 1 inch in garter st.

Next Row—Purl all sts. across row.

Then k. garter st. until sweater measures 14 inches from bottom. Cast on
55 sts. at each end for sleeves. Knit for 4½ inches more. This finishes
back.

=Front=: Knit 80 sts., bind off the next 20 sts. for neck, slip the 80
sts. just knitted on a spare needle, and on the remaining 80 sts. k. one
front after the following directions: Knit 4 ribs or 8 rows, add 20 sts.
on at neck end, and knit until sleeve has as many ribs on in front as in
the back. Bind off the 55 sts. added on for sleeve, knit on the
remaining sts. for one front, knit down to the row of purling, then work
the same as back. Take the other 80 sts. from spare needle, knit same as
first front.

=Collar=: White Yarn. Pick up all sts. on neck and front of sweater and
knit for 5 inches. Change to color yarn, knit 1 inch; change to white
yarn, knit 1 inch. Bind off.

=Cuffs=: With colored yarn pick up sts. on end of sleeve, k. 2, p. 2 for
3 inches. Change to white yarn, decrease on first row, then knit in
garter st. for 3 inches, bind off.

=Sash=: Cast on 15 sts., knit the length required: trim with tassels.

=Straps=: Cast on 20 sts., knit for 3 ribs or 6 rows. Bind off. Sew on
sides of sweater.

=Buttonholes=: Crochet loops on right side of sweater about 4 inches
apart.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Tuxedo Sweater=

  (10 to 12 years)
]

                             Directions for
                         CHILD’S TUXEDO SWEATER


10 to 12 years


                               Materials:

  =4½ Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 90 sts., knit 10 rows or 5 ribs in plain garter st.

Next Row—K. 5, p. 5 for 5 rows.

Next Row—P. 5, k. 5 for 5 rows. This forms the block st. Work the block
st. for 3 inches, then garter st. until sweater measures 21 inches. This
finishes back.

=Front=: Knit 36 sts., bind off 18 sts. for neck, slip the 36 sts. just
knitted on a spare needle, and on the remaining 36 sts. knit one front
after the following directions: Knit 8 rows or 4 ribs. On next row
increase 1 st. at neck end and every other row hereafter until 10 sts.
have been added on, then knit even until front is as long as back,
including block st. on the bottom. Work the other front the same.

=Sleeves=: Pick up 60 sts. around armhole and knit for 6 inches. Now
shape sleeve by decreasing 1 st. at each end of needle every fourth rib
until sleeve measures 15 inches.

=Cuff=: Knit 2, purl 2 for 3 inches. Change to color yarn and narrow on
first row only, then knit garter st. for 3 inches, bind off.

=Band=: Cast on 27 sts. and k. 8, * p. 5, k. 5; repeat from star to end
of row.

Second Row—K. 5, p. 5, ending row with p. 8. Repeat these 2 rows until
band fits all around sweater, bind off, and sew on sweater, leaving
openings for belt.

=Belt=: Cast on 18 sts. and knit the length required, working
buttonholes on one end.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Norfolk Sweater=
]

                             Directions for
                        CHILD’S NORFOLK SWEATER

                              8-Year Size


                               Materials:

             =2 Hanks Lion Brand Knitting Worsted, Ecru.=
             =1 Hank Lion Brand Knitting Worsted, Reseda.=
             =1 Pr. No. 7 Bone Knitting Needles.=
             =1 Pr. No. 4 Bone Needles.=
             =1 Pr. No. 11 Steel Needles.=


                              Directions:

On No. 4 needles set up 70 stitches loosely with tan wool, and knit
plain for 1 inch. Change to large needles and knit pattern:

First Row—Knit 7, purl 7, knit 7, purl 7, knit 14, purl 7, knit 7, purl
7, knit 7.

Second Row—Purl 7, knit 7, purl 7, knit 7, purl 14, etc., reversing
pattern. Repeat these 2 rows until work measures 8 inches. With green
wool, No. 4 needles and with right side of work toward you, knit across
plain. Knit plain until green belt measures 2 inches. Then with right
side toward you and tan wool, knit 1 row plain. With large needles purl
7, knit 7, etc., and knit the 2 pattern rows for 10 inches, or until
whole work measures 20 inches. Then knit 7, purl 7, knit 7, purl 5, bind
off 18, purl 5, knit 7, purl 7, knit 7.

With steel needles knit shoulder plain for 2 inches. Now return to
pattern and add a stitch on neck side every 3rd row, adapting the new
sts. to the pattern. When 9 stitches have been added, making 35 in all,
slip these stitches on to a spare needle and knit the other side to
correspond. Join the work on one needle and knit until front from
shoulder measures 10 inches. With green wool knit belt and complete
front to correspond with back.

=Sleeve=: Pick up 52 stitches, 26 in each direction from shoulder. With
right side of shoulder toward you, knit 1 row across. Second row purl
all the way across. Continue these 2 rows until sleeve measures 7
inches. Decrease 1 stitch at each end of needle every 9 or 10 rows until
there are 40 stitches left. Continue sleeve pattern until sleeve
measures 14½ inches. With No. 4 bone needles knit 2, purl 2 for 1½
inches. With green wool knit plain for 2 inches and bind off.

=Collar=: Set up 5 stitches with green wool; knit 1 row plain. Add 1
stitch at each end of needle every other row until there are 27 stitches
on needle. Knit plain until collar measures 28 inches from point.
Decrease 1 stitch at each end of needle every other row until there are
5 stitches left. Bind off and sew to neck of sweater, leaving about 5½
inches of each end hanging over front of sweater. Crochet 2 medium-sized
buttons and sew one near outer edge of each side of collar about 9
inches from point. Along inner edge of each end of collar make a
crocheted loop to fit over buttons when ends of collar are crossed in
front.

The appearance of the “box pleats” and the sleeves will be improved if
they are ironed under a damp cloth before sewing up.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Golf Hose and Sailor Tam=
]

                             Directions for
                          CHILDREN’S GOLF HOSE


                               Materials:

           =One-quarter lb. White Lion Brand Knitting Yarn.=
           =One-quarter lb. Black Lion Brand Knitting Yarn.=
           =4 Steel Needles No. 14.=


                              Directions:

Cast on with black yarn 72 sts. 24 sts. on each of the 3 needles.

Knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows. White—knit 2, purl 1 for 3 rows. Black—knit
2, purl 1 for 2 rows. White—knit 2, purl 1 for 3 rows. Black—knit 2,
purl 1 for 2 rows. White—1 plain row.

First Row—Knit 4 white stitches, 1 black to end of row.

Second Row—4 white, 1 black to end of row.

Third Row—Knit 3 white, 2 black.

Fourth Row—2 white, 1 black.

Fifth Row—1 white, 1 black.

Sixth Row—2 white, 1 black.

Seventh Row—3 white, 1 black.

Eighth Row—4 white, 2 black.

Ninth Row—4 white, 2 black.

Black—knit 2, purl 2 for 2 rows; white—knit 2, purl 1 for 3 rows;
black—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows; white knit 2, purl 1 for 3 rows;
black—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows; white—knit 2, purl 1 for 3 rows;
black—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows; white—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows;
black—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows; white—knit 2, purl 1 for 2 rows; *
black—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row; white—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row;
black—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row; white—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row;
black—knit 3, purl 1 for 3 rows; white—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row;
black—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row; white—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row;
black—knit 3, purl 1 for 1 row; white—knit 3, purl 1 for 6 rows. Repeat
from * for 4 inches. Continue to work black and white down to the toe.
Decrease 2 sts. on each side of the purling on the back rib every 3 rows
for 10 times. Knit 3, purl 1 for 4 inches.

=Heel=: Work 26 sts. for 3 inches back and forth keeping the rib that
you decrease in center, having 2 bars on each side.

First Row—Slip 1, k. 12, k. 2 together, k. 1; turn.

Second Row—Slip 1, purl 3, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Third Row—Slip 1; knit 4; knit 2 together, knit 1; turn.

Fourth Row—Slip 1, purl 5, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Fifth Row—Slip 1, knit 6, knit 2 together, knit 1; turn.

Sixth Row—Slip 1, purl 7, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Seventh Row—Slip 1, knit 8, knit 2 together, knit 1; turn.

Eighth Row—Slip 1, purl 9, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Ninth Row—Slip 1, knit 10, knit 2 together, knit 1; turn.

Tenth Row—Slip 1, purl 11, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Eleventh Row—Slip 1, knit 12, knit 2 together, knit 1; turn.

Twelfth Row—Slip 1, purl 13, purl 2 together, purl 1; turn.

Thirteenth Row—Slip 1, purl 13, purl 2 together.

24 sts. will be left on the needle; knit these 24 sts. plain. With left
hand needle pick up 20 sts. on side of heel (this is known as first
needle), then rib the 30 front sts. and pick up 20 sts. on the other
side of heel or second needle (always rib the 30 front sts. and knit
plain the 26 sts. for bottom of foot). Work around for 3 inches on the
length desired, less 2 inches for toe.

=Toe=: Knit first row plain.

Second Row—* knit 22 sts. on bottom of foot plain, then decrease 2 sts.;
knit plain 32 stitches and decrease 2 sts.

Third Row—Knit plain.

Fourth Row—Knit plain.

Fifth Row—Repeat from * until you have 20 stitches on 2 needles, then
bind off.


                              SAILOR TAM.

  =One-quarter lb. Lion Brand Heather No. 3 Knitting Yarn; 1 oz.
  Turquoise Blue Knitting Yarn; 2 Needles, No. 5, Bone; 4 Needles, No.
  3, Bone.=

With heather wool and two needles No. 5 cast on 50 sts. measuring 10
inches, making a square.

With needles No. 3 pick up every st. around the square, 67 st. on each
of the 3 needles; knit plain for 13 rows.

First Row—Narrow 1 st. every 2 sts. and repeat to end of row.

Second Row—Knit 1 plain row.

Third Row—Narrow 1 st. every 1 st. and repeat to end of row.

With turquoise blue knit 2, purl 2 for 12 rows.

Knit 2 plain rows for the turn; knit 2, purl 2 for 12 rows cast off.
Large pom pom of turquoise blue place in center.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Knitted Snowman Cap, Sweater and Leggins=
]

                             Directions for
                        CHILD’S KNITTED SNOWMAN

                            3 to 5 year size

                          Cap—Sweater—Leggins


                                  CAP


                               Materials:

  =1 Hank White LION BRAND Knitting Worsted; 1 Pair Bone Knitting
  Needles, No. 4; 1 Pair Steel Knitting Needles, No. 12.=


                              Directions:

Cast on bone needles 130 sts.

First Row—K. 2, * p. 2, k. 2, repeat from * to end of row.

Second Row—P. 2, * k. 2, p. 2, repeat from * to end of row.

Third Row—K. 2, * p. 2, k. 2, repeat from * to end of row.

Fourth Row—Knit.

Repeat these 4 rows for pattern.

K. following pattern for 2 inches.

P. 3 rows.

Repeat pattern for 3 inches.

P. 3 rows.

Repeat pattern for 5½ inches.

Change to steel needles, repeat pattern for two inches, leave enough
worsted to draw through all sts., and sew firmly.

=Tassel=: With two threads of worsted ch. 15 sts. and make a tassel, sew
to chain, and sew chain to cap.




                             Directions for
                                SWEATER


                               Materials:

  =4 Hanks White LION BRAND Knitting Worsted; 1 Pair Bone Knitting
  Needles, No. 4; 1 Pair Steel Knitting Needles, No. 12.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 86 sts.

Knit 10 ridges.

Repeat 4 rows of pattern from cap.

K. pattern for 17 inches, slip 26 sts. on knitting needle, bind off 34
sts. for back of neck, and on other 26 sts. knit one front after the
following directions, and the other to correspond:

Knit the pattern for 1 inch, then increase 1 st. towards front every
other row until 4 sts. have been added, cast on 14 sts. at front; there
are 44 sts. on needle; the first 10 sts. down front of sweater are to be
knit plain. This will not be referred to again. Make buttonhole in fifth
row and 4 inches apart hereafter. K. following pattern until front is
same length as back, including the 10 ridges, bind off loosely, sew up
side seams, leaving about 11 inches for armhole.

=Sleeve=: Cast on 78 sts., k. following pattern for 3 inches, then k. 3
sts. together at each end of needle every tenth row until there are 56
sts. on needle, knit until sleeve is required length, change to steel
needles, knit 2 sts. together at intervals until there are 46 sts. on
needle, knit in rib of k. 1, p. 1 for 3½ inches for cuff, bind off
loosely, sew up sleeve and cuff.

=Collar=: With steel needles pick up 100 sts. around neck of sweater,
knit in rib of k. 1, p. 1 for 3½ inches, making buttonhole in fifth row,
bind off loosely. Finish fronts of sweater with ribbon, make
buttonholes, sew on buttons, sew sleeves seam to seam in sweater.

=Child’s Knitted Snowman Cap, Sweater and Leggins=




                             Directions for
                                LEGGINS


                               Materials:

  =3 Hanks White LION BRAND Knitting Worsted; 1 Pair Bone Knitting
  Needles, No. 4; 1 Pair Steel Knitting Needles, No. 12.=


                              Directions:

Knit in two sections, joined by a center seam.

Cast on bone needles 94 sts.

Knit in rib of k. 2, p. 2 for 6 rows.

Seventh Row—* P. 2, yarn over 3 times, n., repeat from *, ending row p.
2.

Knit in rib of k. 2, p. 2 for 2 inches, then repeat pattern from cap.

Knit following pattern for 3 inches; following pattern, k. to within 64
sts., turn, knit back, following pattern, turn, k., following pattern,
to within 69 sts., turn, knit back, following pattern; repeat, leaving 5
sts. more each time until 94 sts. are on needle.

Knit, following pattern, increasing 1 st. on starting of needle every
6th row until 10 sts. have been added, then increase 1 st. every other
row on starting of needle until 10 sts. have been added, having 114 sts.
on needle; the increasing must be all on one side. Knit, following
pattern, until back measures 9½ inches from start; knit, following
pattern, for 1 inch; then decrease 1 st. on each end of needle every 8th
row until there are 86 sts. on needle; then decrease 1 st. on each end
of needle every 6th row until there are 64 sts. on needle; knit,
following pattern, until inside seam measures 15 inches, or the required
length.

For heel, slip the first 16 sts. and the last 16 sts. off bone needle
onto steel needles, having 32 sts. on needle. Knit, following pattern,
for 16 rows; leave these sts. on needle until used to finish at bottom.

=Instep=: Pick 11 sts. on each side of the 16 rows just made; the 11
sts. on start and the 11 sts. on end of needle are knit plain; follow
pattern on 32 sts.

First Row—K. 11, follow pattern on 32 sts., k. 11.

Second Row—K. 9, n., follow pattern on 32 sts., n., k. 9.

Repeat these two rows, having 1 st. less on each end of needle every
other row until only the 32 sts. are left of pattern; knit, following
pattern, for 3½ inches, or length of instep; pick up about 16 sts. on
side of foot, having 32 sts. on front, 16 sts. on other side, 32 sts.
for heel, about 96 sts. on needle. Knit 3 ridges, bind off.

=Cord=: With two threads of worsted ch. about 130 sts. and sew tassel to
each end.

Sew up each leg seam and join the two sections by center seam, sew
elastic straps at bottom of foot, draw cord through space to tie.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Sleeveless Filet Slip-on and Cap=

  (See Diagram No. 106)
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram No. 106=
]

                             Directions for
                CHILD’S SLEEVELESS FILET SLIP-ON AND CAP

                              2 to 4 years


                               Materials:

  =3 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Hook, No. 3 or No. 2.=


                              Directions:

                      =M: Mesh.=      =B: Block.=

=Back=: Ch. 61 sts., work 29M on ch.

Second Row—1B, 8M, 5B, 1M, 5B, 8M, 1M.

Third Row—2B, 6M, 2B, 3M, 3B, 3M, 2B, 6M, 2B.

Fourth Row—1M, 1B, 6M, 1B, 1M, 2B, 5M, 2B, 1M, 1B, 6M, 1B, 1M.

Fifth Row—1M, 3B, 2M, 3B, 2M, 2B, 1M, 1B, 1M, 2B, 2M, 3B, 2M, 3B, 1M.

Sixth Row—3M, 4B, 5M, 2B, 1M, 2B, 5M, 4B, 3M.

Seventh Row—29M all across row.

Repeat seventh row 6 times more.

Fourteenth Row—Start to decrease 1M at each end of every row until there
are 23M in row. Then work diagram for chickens, then 7 more rows of M.
This finishes back.

=Front=: Work 6M, 1B, ch. 3, turn. Block is always at neck end.

Work 15 rows of 6M, 1B for shoulder. Make the other shoulder the same.
Add a ch. of 18 sts., or if work is tight add a ch. of 27 sts. On next
row work d. c. on ch. added at neck.

Next Row—23M. Then work the diagram for chickens. Start and add 1M at
each end until there are 23M in row; then work as long as back. Repeat
the first 7 rows backwards for bottom. Sew up sides and finish around
neck, armholes, and bottom with a picot edge.


                                  CAP

                       =1 Skein LION BRAND Floss.=

Ch. 3, join in a ring. 12 d. c. in ring.

Second Row—2M in first d. c., * 1M in next d. c., 2 in next d. c.,
repeat from star across row.

Third Row—Same as second row, only 1 more M between the double M.
Continue this until the cap fits top of head, then no more double M, all
single until size required.

=Scallops=: 4 d. c. in every other M.

Second Row—6 d. c. in the center of the 4 d. c. in first row, 2 d. c.
between the 4 d. c. Repeat across row.

Third Row—Turn work and work 6 d. c. in each space between the 4 d. c.
in first row. Finish top and bottom rows with a ch. of 4 in every other
d. c., fasten off.




[Illustration:

  =Child’s Slip-on and Tam=

  (10 to 12 years)
]

                             Directions for
                            CHILD’S SLIP-ON

                             10 to 12 years


                               Materials:

  =3 Hanks LION BRAND Knitting Yarn; 1 Pair Knitting Needles, No. 4.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 72 sts., k. 6, p. 6 for 6 rows.

Seventh Row—P. 6, k. 6 for 6 rows. This forms the block st. Work until
there are 5 inches of block st. Then garter (or rib) st. until sweater
measures 16 inches. Cast on 55 sts. at each end for sleeves, and knit
for 4 ½ inches more. This finishes back.

=Front=: Knit 81 sts., bind off the next 20 sts. for neck, slip the 81
sts. just knitted on a spare needle, and on the remaining 81 sts. knit
one front after the following directions: Knit 8 rows or 4 ribs, then
increase 1 st. every other row until sleeves are finished. Bind off the
55 sts. added on for sleeve, and knit, still increasing, for 4 inches
more; slip these sts. on a spare needle, and work the other side the
same.

Now take all sts. on needle, and knit as long as back down to the block
st. Finish bottom with 5 inches of block st., bind off.

=Collar=: White yarn, cast on 24 sts., work block pattern for 3½ inches,
then garter st. until collar fits neck of sweater. Work 3½ inches of
block st. on the other end, bind off.

=Cuffs=: With colored yarn pick up sts. on end of sleeve and k. 2, p. 2
for 2½ inches, change to white yarn and work block st. for 2½ inches,
bind off.


                             TAM O’SHANTER

Ch. 3 sts., join in a ring, 11 s. c. in ring.

Second Row—* 2 s. c. in first st., 1 s. c. in next st., repeat from
star.

Third Row—* 2 s. c. in first st., 1 s. c. in each of the next 2 sts.,
repeat from star.

Fourth Row—* 2 s. c. in the first st., 1 s. c. in each of the next 3
sts., repeat from star.

Continue in this way to increase in the same place every round (6
widenings) until there are 12 inches across top. Make 4 inches of s. c.
without widening. This finishes top of hat.

=Band=: Skip 1 st. all the way around. Then 1 s. c. in each st., or skip
1 st. each time again until band fits head required.

Work band for 3 inches.




[Illustration:

  =Baby Set in Filet Crochet—Cap, Jacket, Carriage Cover and Pillow=
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram for Pillow Top=
]

[Illustration:

  =Diagram for Carriage Cover=
]

                             Directions for
                       BABY SET IN FILET CROCHET

               Jacket, Cap, Pillow Top and Carriage Cover


                               Materials:

  =10 Skeins LION BRAND Shetland Floss; 1 Crochet Hook, No. 4.=


                              Directions:


                                 JACKET

Ch. 102 sts. and work 1B, 3M on ch., ending with 1B.

Second Row—1M, 1B all across, ending with 1M.

Third Row—2 M *; 1B, 3M, 1B. Repeat from star, ending row with 2M.

Fourth Row—42M. Repeat fourth row until jacket measures 10 inches. Add
on 35 ch. sts. at each end for sleeves, and work 17M on ch., 42M across
back, 17M on the other ch., having 76M in the row.

Next Row—22M, 3B, 4M, 3B, 4M, 3B, 4M, 3B, 4M, 3B, 22M.

Next Row—And 2 more rows the same.

Three rows of 76M. Then 3 rows same as the first 3 rows for sleeve. This
finishes back.

=Front=: Work 33M, turn.

Second and Third Rows—The same.

Fourth Row—1M, 3B, 4M, 3B, 22M. In next row start and add 1M every other
row hereafter; this will not be mentioned again. Three more rows of
meshes. Then repeat the 3 first rows. This finishes sleeve. Work on
remaining M for front until as long as back, following border on inside
edge and on bottom.

=Cuffs=: 1 s. c. in each space, then work 5 rows of d. c. and finish
with a scallop. Finish around neck and bottom of sweater with a scallop.


                                  CAP

Ch. 24 sts. and work rows of d. c. until piece measures 5 inches. Then
work 3M, 3B around three sides of piece just made. Three rows meshes.
Repeat these 6 rows for size required. 1 s. c. in each space on bottom
of cap; this will draw the cap in, then work scallop all around cap same
as jacket.


                               PILLOW TOP

Directions:

Follow directions from diagram. Then work border around sides, joining
the two pieces together.

=Border=: * 2 s. c. in 1 space, 2 s. c. in next space, ch. 8 sts., turn,
fasten in the 4th s. c., ch. 8, fasten in the last s. c., turn, 10 s. c.
in ch. of 8, 5 s. c. in next ch. of 8, ch. 8 sts. and turn, fasten in
4th s. c. in first loop, turn, 4 s. c. in ch. of 8, make a picot in next
st., 5 s. c.; in next loop 5 s. c., finishing the loop left unfinished.
Repeat from star all around sides.


                             CARRIAGE COVER

Follow directions from diagram. Work same border on cover same as on the
pillow top.




[Illustration:

  =Baby’s Sacque and Bonnet=
]

                             Directions for
                        BABY’S SACQUE AND BONNET

                        Instructions for Sacque


                               Materials:

  =3 Balls of LION BRAND Crochet Wool in White, Pink or Blue; 1 No. 2
  Bone or Amber Crochet Hook; 5 Yards of Ribbon for Rosettes.=


                              Directions:

Using crochet wool double, ch. 56 and work 1 row of s. c. Always ch. 1
at end of row before turning.

Second Row—* 1 s. c. in 1st st., 1 d. c. in next st., * and repeat
between stars to end of row. Repeat second row throughout the work,
being careful to have s. c. on top of s. c. and d. c. on top of d. c. of
row below, taking both threads of st. Work 28 rows, then ch. 33 at end
of row for length of sleeve. Work back on this and across to other side.
Ch. 33 at other end for other sleeve, and then work on this width for 17
rows. Starting at next row work only 49 sts., turn and work back and
forth on this width for 4 rows for shoulder section.

Then ch. 15 at neck end and work back and forth on this width for 13
rows. This completes sleeve width. Now drop 32 sts. at sleeve end and
continue working front until it measures 28 rows like the back, break
yarn and work other half of sleeve and front to correspond. Sew up
sleeve and under-arm seams, and work 9 rows of crazy st. along bottom of
sacque, and 5 rows of crazy st. around sleeve for turn-back cuff, also
work 1 row of crazy st. up the front of sacque to neck. Cr. beading
around neck, as follows: * 1 d. c., 1 ch., skip 1, * and repeat between
stars all around neck. Finish around neck with 2 rows of crazy st., trim
with ribbon rosettes as illustrated.


                        BABY’S POMPADOUR BONNET


                               Materials:

  =2 skeins of LION BRAND Pompadour Wool in White; 1 Skein of Pompadour
  Wool in Blue or Pink; 1 Bone or Amber Hook, No. 1; 2 Yards of 1½-inch
  Wide Ribbon to Trim.=


                              Directions:

Ch. 3 and join.

First Round—Make 7 s. c. in ring. Do not join as the work is done round
and round both threads of sts. below being taken up. The work must be
done firmly.

Second Round—2 s. c. in each st., having 14 s. c. in round (mark
starting point with a piece of wool to avoid mistake).

Third Round—2 s. c. in 1st st., 1 s. c. in next st., * 2 s. c. in next
st., 1 s. c. in next st., repeat from * around, having 7 widening
spaces.

Fourth Round—1 s. c. in the first 2 sts., * 2 s. c. in next st., 1 s. c.
into the next 2 sts., repeat from * to end of round. Continue working in
this way, always having 1 more s. c. between each widening and putting
the 2 s. c. in center of 2 s. c. of previous row. In this way keeping
the 7 widening spaces straight, until there are 23 s. c. between each
widening; now work 18 rows without widening; this completes crown.
Decrease by skipping every 4th st. for 2 rounds. Fasten colored yarn and
work 66 d. c. sts., ch. 3, turn and work 7 rows in all of 66 d. c. sts.
each, omitting the rest of round for neck. Work 8 rows of crazy st. for
turn-back and fasten this with rosette as illustrated. Finish back of
neck with shell of * 4 d. c. and 1 s. c., and repeat to other side of
cap.




[Illustration:

  =Baby’s Band=
]

                             Directions for
                              BABY’S BAND


                               Materials:

  =1 Skein LION BRAND 3-fold Saxony and ½ Skein Color for Border; No. 2
  Knitting Needles.=


                              Directions:

Cast on 60 stitches for back.

Knit 2, purl 2 for 2 inches.

Knit 26 ribs.

Narrow at each end for 5 ribs.

Knit 10 stitches, take off on spare needle, bind off 30 stitches.

Knit 10 stitches.

Knit 30 ribs on each strip.

Cast on 30 stitches. Widen 5 ribs and knit front same as back.

Finish with little crocheted edge around neck and armholes.




[Illustration:

  =Baby’s Coat and Cap=
]

                             Directions for
                          BABY’S COAT AND CAP


                               Materials:

  =5 Skeins 3-fold Saxony LION BRAND Yarn 1 Pair Amber Knitting Pins,
  No. 2; 1 Piece of No. 2 Satin Ribbon.=


                              Directions:

=Back=: Cast on 100 sts., knit 6 rows.

Next Row—Purl.

Next Row—K. 1 st., * throw wool over and k. 2 sts. together. Repeat from
star to end of row. Purl 1 row. Knit even for 1 inch.

Next Row—Purl.

Then make 1 row of ribbon holes. Knit in ribs until back measures 8
inches from bottom.

Next Row—Make ribbon hole same as bottom.

=Sleeves=: Add on 30 sts. for sleeves and knit 4 inches more; this
finishes back. Knit 72 sts., bind off 20 sts. for neck, and on remaining
72 sts. knit one front. Slip the first 72 sts. on a thread and tie.

=Front=: Knit 4 ribs for shoulder, then add on 1 st. every other row
until sleeve is finished. Bind off 30 sts. for sleeve.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes. Then knit even for 6 inches.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes, knit 1 inch.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes, knit 6 rows. Bind off. Make the other side
the same.

=Cuff=: Pick up sts. at bottom of sleeve and * k. 3 sts., then 2
together. Repeat from * to end of row.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes. Then knit 1 inch even.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes. Knit 6 rows even. Bind off. Sew up sides and
sleeves and finish around cuffs and jacket with 3 ch. sts. and 1 d. c.

=Cap=: Cast on 30 sts. and knit for 4 inches. Bind off. Pick up sts. on
bottom and two sides and knit for 2½ inches.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes same as on jacket.

Knit 1 inch even.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes, knit 6 rows. Bind off.

Pick up sts. on bottom of cap, * knit 2 sts., then 2 together. Repeat
from star across row on 1 row only.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes, knit 1 inch even, knit 1 inch.

Next Row—Make ribbon holes, knit 6 rows. Bind off. Trim with ribbon.




[Illustration:

  =Infant’s Three-Piece Set=
]

                             Directions for
                INFANT’S THREE-PIECE SET INFANT’S SACQUE


                               Materials:

  =3 Skeins Pink LION BRAND Saxony, 3-ply; 2 Skeins White Pompadour
  Wool; No. 2 Knitting Needles; No. 3 Crochet Needles.=


                              Directions:

Cast on 70 stitches with white wool. Knit 12 ribs. Then with pink wool
knit 38 ribs. Cast on 35 stitches at each end for sleeve. Knit 17 ribs.
Knit 60 stitches. Take off on spare needle. Bind off 20 stitches and on
remaining 60 stitches make front. Knit 4 ribs. Cast on 10 stitches
toward neck. Knit 17 ribs. Bind off 35 stitches for sleeve. Knit 38
ribs. Take off on spare needle. Knit second front to correspond.

=Border=: Pick up all stitches on front and across bottom, and with
white wool knit border. Knit plain down front. Turn corner by throwing
thread over needle. Knit 1 stitch, throw thread over needle. Knit plain.
Next row knit all stitches plain. Repeat until there are 12 ribs. Pick
up stitches on wrong side of cuffs, and knit 12 ribs plain.

=Collar=: Pick up stitches and knit 2 ribs plain. * Knit 5 stitches,
throw thread around needle. Knit 2 together, continue from * across row.
Knit 3 ribs plain. Bind off.

Crochet round neck and cuffs with single crochet on right side. Chain 1,
turn, and single crochet in front of first stitch, double crochet in
back of second stitch. Repeat across row.


                              INFANT’S CAP


                               Materials:

  =1 Skein Pink LION BRAND Saxony, 3-ply; ½ Skein White Pompadour Wool;
  No. 2 Needles.=


                              Directions:

Cast on 81 stitches with white wool. Knit 12 ribs. Then with pink wool
knit 27 ribs. Bind off 27 stitches on each end. On center knit 27 ribs.
Sew up. Finish with same crochet border as Bootee.


                            INFANT’S BOOTEES


                               Materials:

  =1 Skein of Pink and ½ Skein White LION BRAND 3-ply Saxony; Afghan
  Stitch; No. 3 Crochet Needle.=


                              Directions:

Cast on 4 stitches, crochet afghan stitch, widening at each end every
other row until there are 50 stitches on needle. Then narrow every other
row until there are 40 stitches on needle. Crochet 18 rows and sew up
back. Take up 12 stitches, in middle of front, crochet 12 rows. Crochet
12 rows, single crochet for foot with white. Narrowing last two rows at
middle of front and back. Finish top with white wool. Two rows single
crochet, 1 row double crochet, 2 rows single crochet, chain 1, turn, and
single crochet in front of stitch, 1 double crochet in back of stitch,
and repeat all across top.

[Illustration: LION BRAND YARNS TRADE MARK ARE THE BEST]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                           _LION BRAND YARNS_


      Run more yards to the pound because they are full 16 ounces

[Illustration: [LION BRAND]]

                                 “LION”
                              PANSY ZEPHYR
                         4 and 8 fold, 20 laps

                                 “LION”
                                 SAXONY
                         2, 3 & 4 fold, 16 laps

                                 “LION”
                            KNITTING WORSTED
                        4 oz. hanks, 5 lb. pkg.

                                 “LION”
                              SPANISH YARN
                             4 fold, 8 laps

                                 “LION”
                               GOLF YARN
                             8 fold, 8 laps

                                 “LION”
                             SHETLAND FLOSS
                                16 laps

                                 “LION”
                             SHETLAND WOOL
                                16 laps

                                 “LION”
                            LADY ALICE YARN
                                16 laps

                                 “LION”
                             POMPADOUR WOOL
                         16 laps, 8 oz. to box

                                 “LION”
                              SPLIT ZEPHYR
                            2 fold, 20 laps


                               LION BRAND

           They are the best made for the following reasons:

     They are made from SELECTED WOOLS.

     They are RE-REELED, insuring free running.

     They are 16 ounces to the pound, insuring more yardage.

     _They are put up in SKEINS, insuring elasticity and softness._


                 THE PRACTICAL KNITTER KNOWS THE VALUE OF

                              SKEINED YARNS

 It preserves the loftiness and adds to the wear and smooth appearance of
                               the garment.




[Illustration: [Logo]]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

    7 on and fasten back at bottom     on and fasten back at bottom
      with fringle. Sew up             with fringe. Sew up

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 ● Enclosed bold or blackletter font in =equals=.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LION YARN BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


