The Project Gutenberg eBook of The up-to-date sandwich book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The up-to-date sandwich book
        400 ways to make a sandwich

Author: Eva Greene Fuller

Release date: April 17, 2025 [eBook #75893]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: A. C. McClurg & Co, 1909

Credits: Hannah Wilson, A Marshall, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UP-TO-DATE SANDWICH BOOK ***


  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                   [Illustration: Decorative border]

                     THE UP-TO-DATE SANDWICH BOOK




                             THE UP-TO-DATE
                             SANDWICH BOOK

                               _400 Ways
                          to Make a Sandwich_

                                   By

                           EVA GREENE FULLER


                       [Illustration: colophon]


                                CHICAGO
                          A. C. McCLURG & CO.
                                  1909

                   [Illustration: Decorative border]




                               Copyright
                          A. C. McClurg & Co.
                                  1909


                       _Published October, 1909_


                            The Caslon Press
                                Chicago




                               CONTENTS


                                                                    Page

  Fish                                                                 7

  Egg                                                                 29

  Salad                                                               39

  Meat                                                                61

  Cheese                                                             101

  Nut                                                                125

  Sweet                                                              137

  Miscellaneous                                                      167

  Canapes                                                            173




                               FOREWORD


The first requisite in the preparation of good sandwiches is to have
perfect bread in suitable condition. Either white, brown, rye, or
entire wheat bread may be used, but it should be of close, even texture
and at least one day old.

Cream the butter with a wooden spoon and spread smoothly on the bread
before it is cut; after cutting remove the crust and avoid spreading
the butter or filling over the edge. When ready to serve, cut the
sandwiches either square, triangular, long, narrow, round, or crescent
shaped.

In making rolled bread sandwiches, cut off the crust of a loaf of fresh
bread and spread a thin layer of butter on one end of the loaf; cut
off this buttered end in as thin a slice as possible and spread with
the sandwich filling; roll up this slice and lay on a napkin; draw the
napkin firmly around the rolled bread and pin it. Put in a cool place
until ready to serve, then remove napkin and tie the sandwiches with
baby ribbon or fasten with a tooth pick.

French rolls may be used for picnics and out-of-door luncheons. Remove
from the top of each roll a piece of the crust the size of a silver
dollar, and with a spoon take out the centre. Fill the space with
highly seasoned chopped meat, fish, lobster, or crab, replace lid, wrap
in tissue paper, and serve with pickles or olives.

For very small, dainty sandwiches to be served at afternoon teas or
luncheons, the bread may be baked at home in pound baking powder cans.
These should be only half filled, and then allowed to rise before
baking. You then have a round slice without crust.

A garnish such as the following may be used: For meat sandwiches, use
pickles, olives, lettuce, watercress, parsley, and mint. For fish
sandwiches, use pickles, olives, cress, parsley, slices of lemon, and
hard-boiled egg. For cheese sandwiches, use pickles and olives. For
sweet sandwiches, use lettuce, maiden hair fern, smilax, berries,
flowers, and candied fruit.

To keep sandwiches fresh, if prepared an hour or two before serving,
wring out a napkin in cold water and cover the tray and keep in a cool
place or wrap in wax paper.




                                 FISH




                     THE UP-TO-DATE SANDWICH BOOK


                                 FISH


_OYSTER SANDWICH_

Chop raw oysters fine, add a dash of tabasco sauce, lemon juice, and
oil. Season with pepper and salt. Spread this on thinly cut slices of
white bread, with a lettuce leaf between.


_FRIED OYSTER SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a lettuce leaf
that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing. Place fried oysters on
lettuce leaf. Put slices together and garnish with a pickle.


_DEVILED OYSTER SANDWICH_

Cut slices of bread thin, remove crust, and toast. Cover a slice
with oysters, dust thickly with red pepper and spread lightly with
mayonnaise. Cover with another slice of toast. Garnish with a slice of
lemon.


_OYSTER LOAF SANDWICH_

Cut Vienna rolls into halves and spread lightly with butter; on one
half lay four fried oysters, cover with the other half of roll, and
serve with a pickle.


_OYSTER AND CAVIARE SANDWICH_

Butter thin slices of brown bread, cover one slice thinly with caviare
and on this lay two raw whole oysters; cover with another slice of
bread and garnish with slice of lemon.


_GRILL ROOM OYSTER SANDWICH_

Toast three slices of white bread and lightly butter. Place fried
oysters between the slices and dust lightly with pepper and salt. Cut
in strips and serve on a lettuce leaf. Remove contents of half an
orange peel and fill with chili sauce. Serve on the plate with the
sandwich.


_OYSTER SALAD SANDWICH_

Chop fine two stalks of celery and one medium sized cucumber; add one
cup of cold cooked oysters cut in pieces, mix with one-half cup of
cream dressing. Place on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread
with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_CAVIARE SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of buttered rye bread, spread caviare; on top of
that sprinkle a little finely chopped onion. Garnish top with a slice
of lemon.


_CAVIARE SANDWICH NO. 2_

To a can of caviare add the juice of half a lemon, and one teaspoonful
of olive oil. Mix well together until a paste is formed. Spread mixture
on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread or toast and cover with
another slice of bread.


_CAVIARE-LOBSTER SANDWICH_

Spread thinly buttered white bread with caviare, season with lemon
juice, and on top of this lay a little minced lobster. Cover with
another slice of buttered bread and place on a lettuce leaf.


_ROE SANDWICH_

Mix the yolks of three hard-boiled eggs with the roe of a salt herring.
Place the mixture between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.
Garnish with a slice of lemon.


_SHAD-ROE SANDWICH_

One set of shad-roe that has been cooked and pounded in a mortar, the
yolks of five hard-boiled eggs chopped very fine, two teaspoonfuls of
finely chopped capers, a dash of paprika, and two tablespoonfuls of
tabasco sauce. Mix and place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread.


_SHAD-ROE AND CUCUMBER SANDWICH_

Marinate one cup each of cucumber and cooked shad-roe, and a dash of
mayonnaise and place on a crisp lettuce leaf between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread.


_LOBSTER SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread lay a crisp lettuce
leaf; on top of that place shredded meat of a boiled lobster that has
been mixed with a little mayonnaise dressing. Cover with another slice
of bread and press together.


_LOBSTER SANDWICH NO. 2_

Cut the meat of a cold boiled lobster into dice. Sprinkle with a little
salt, red pepper, and a tablespoonful of tarragon vinegar. Add three
tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Place mixture on slices of lightly
buttered whole wheat or brown bread, cover with another slice of bread,
press the two together, remove the crusts, and cut into triangles.
Garnish with an olive.


_LOBSTER SANDWICH NO. 3_

Pound the meat of a medium sized lobster fine, add one tablespoonful of
the coral, dried and mashed smooth, the juice of half a lemon, a dash
of nutmeg, one-fourth teaspoonful of paprika, and two tablespoonfuls of
soft butter. Mix all to a smooth paste and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread.


_LOBSTER SANDWICH NO. 4_

Chop the meat of a medium sized lobster and a stalk of celery fine,
moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing, and place between thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a slice of lemon.


_LOBSTER SALAD SANDWICH_

Mix one cup of lobster meat with a little mayonnaise dressing. Marinate
crisp lettuce leaves and arrange on thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread; cover with lobster, and cover lobster with bread; sprinkle
lobster coral on top. Prepare just before serving.


_DUTCH LUNCH SANDWICH_

Take two square salted crackers and place on one two thin slices of
Bermuda onion, next a layer of sardines and squeeze a generous amount
of lemon juice over all; then put remaining cracker (buttered) on top.
Salmon may be substituted.


_LOBSTER AND MUSHROOM SANDWICH_

Cook one-half pound of mushrooms in a little butter until tender, then
add one small sliced onion, moisten with a little stock and let simmer
until done. Remove from the fire and chop fine; press through a sieve
and season with salt and pepper and a dash of tomato catsup. When cool,
add a little lobster meat pounded smooth, mix and spread on thin slices
of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with an olive.


_SARDINE SANDWICH_

Remove the skin and bones from two boxes of sardines, and pound the
meat to a paste. Add a teaspoonful of anchovy paste, a dash of salt
and red pepper, and rub in the yolks of six hard-boiled eggs, with two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil. Spread mixture on toasted bread. To be
eaten while toast is hot.


_SARDINE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Remove scales and bones from two boxes of sardines. Put the sardines
in a mortar with the yolks of five hard-boiled eggs. Pound fine; add
one tablespoonful of olive oil, the juice of one-half lemon, a pinch
of mustard, a dash of pepper and salt, two sprigs of finely chopped
watercress. When smoothly blended spread the mixture between thin
slices of lightly buttered white or graham bread.


_SARDINE SANDWICH NO. 3_

Remove scales and bones from two boxes of sardines. Four hard-boiled
eggs, chopped fine, the juice of one lemon, a dash of salt, red and
black pepper, a tablespoonful of melted butter, a sprig of parsley,
chopped fine. Stir to a paste and spread on lightly buttered white
bread with a lettuce leaf between.


_SARDINE SANDWICH NO. 4_

Remove skin and bones from the sardines and pound to a paste; season
with salt and cayenne pepper and a dash of lemon juice. Spread on thin
slices of lightly buttered white or rye bread; cover with another slice
of bread and garnish with a pickle.


_SARDINE SANDWICH NO. 5_

Pound eight boned and skinned sardines with two ounces of fresh butter,
a little salt and cayenne. Spread the mixture on slices of brown bread
lightly buttered, and over them lay a slice of skinned tomato. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper and a pinch of sugar. Add a few drops of lemon
juice. Form into sandwiches and cut into finger lengths.


_SARDINE AND CHEESE SANDWICH_

Equal parts of boned and skinned sardines and cream cheese mashed to a
pulp. Mix and place between thin slices of white or rye bread. Garnish
with a pickle.


_SARDINE CLUB SANDWICH_

Three slices of thinly cut white bread, toasted and buttered. Place a
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing on the lower
slice, and on top of that put slices of broiled breakfast bacon, then
put another slice of toast on top of that, with another lettuce leaf
followed by boneless and skinless sardines split open, topped by a
third slice of toasted bread. Garnish with slices of lemon cut very
thin and dipped in finely chopped parsley.


_SPANISH SANDWICH_

Cut slices of white bread rather thick and toast; trim off crusts and
lightly butter. Remove skin and bone from the sardines and lay them on
the toast. Sprinkle chopped olives over the sardines and the juice of a
quarter of a lemon. Cover with another slice of buttered toast. Serve
on a lettuce leaf.


_BROILED SARDINE SANDWICH_

Use sardines in oil, remove from can and put on a platter to drain off
oil. Toast thin slices of bread and cut in triangles or squares, and
butter while hot. Dip each sardine in cracker crumbs, put on a broiler
and broil over a coal fire first on one side, then the other. Lay two
broiled sardines on a piece of toast, cover with another slice, and
garnish with a slice of lemon. Serve as soon as made.


_AUSTRIAN SANDWICH_

Two cans of boned and skinned sardines, two balls of cottage cheese,
one small onion chopped fine, two tablespoonfuls of chopped parsley,
two tablespoonfuls of chopped mint, two tablespoonfuls of vinegar,
salt to taste, a dash of red pepper, the grated rind and juice of two
lemons; also use the oil from the sardines. Mix and beat thoroughly;
spread between thin slices of lightly buttered rye or brown bread.


_SALMON SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a crisp
lettuce leaf; on that put canned salmon that has been seasoned with
salt and pepper and a dash of lemon juice. Garnish with a slice of
lemon.


_SALMON SANDWICH NO. 2_

One can of salmon, two sticks of celery chopped fine, juice of half
a lemon, a dash of salt, and a teaspoonful of melted butter. Mix and
place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, cut in fancy
shapes. Garnish with a sprig of parsley.


_SALMON SANDWICH NO. 3_

One can of salmon, one small head of lettuce chopped fine. One
teaspoonful of melted butter, a dash of salt, and juice of half a
lemon. Mix and place between thin slices of buttered white bread.
Garnish with an olive.


_SALMON SANDWICH NO. 4_

Flake the salmon and moisten with mayonnaise dressing. Use as a filling
between thin slices of brown bread lightly buttered. Garnish with a
slice of lemon that has been dipped in finely chopped parsley.


_SALMON AND HAM SANDWICH_

One-half can of salmon, two slices of cold boiled ham, two sprigs of
watercress. Chop these together until fine, add a dash of lemon juice.
Place between thinly cut slices of buttered bread.


_PIMENTO SANDWICH_

Grind two small cans of pimentos with two cakes of Neufchatel cheese,
and season with a little salt. If the mixture is too dry add a little
oil of pimentos. Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.
Place two together and cut in fancy shapes.


_SHRIMP SANDWICH_

Minced cold shrimp, a celery stick chopped fine; add a little
mayonnaise dressing, a dash of salt. Mix and spread on thin slices of
rye bread lightly buttered. Press slices together and garnish with an
olive.


_SHRIMP SALAD SANDWICH_

Marinate one cup of shrimps with French dressing; add one-half cup
each of chopped olives and pimentos; drain, moisten with mayonnaise
dressing, and place on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread,
with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_LENTEN SANDWICH_

Whip a cup of cream until stiff, stir in minced cold shrimp, a little
parsley, a dash of salt and pepper. Spread mixture between thin slices
of white or graham bread. Garnish with an olive.


_CRAB SANDWICH_

Take the contents of a small can of crab meat, squeeze out liquor; mix
with a little mayonnaise dressing. Place a crisp lettuce leaf on each
slice of lightly buttered white bread, and spread with crab mixture.
Put slices together and cut in squares.


_MOCK CRAB SANDWICH_

One-fourth cupful of grated American cheese, two tablespoonfuls butter
creamed, a dash of salt, paprika, and mustard, a teaspoonful of chopped
olives, vinegar and anchovy paste. Mix and spread on thin slices of
white bread. Put the two slices together.


_ANCHOVY SANDWICH_

Pour off wine, then wash thoroughly in vinegar. Allow them to soak in
olive oil for a half-hour, remove, open lengthwise, and take out bones;
place between thin slices of unbuttered bread. Garnish with an olive.


_ANCHOVY SANDWICH NO. 2_

A can of boneless anchovies mixed with three hard-boiled eggs, chopped
fine. Add a dash of lemon juice, a teaspoonful of melted butter, a
pinch of salt. Mix and spread on lightly buttered white bread, with a
lettuce leaf between. Garnish with a pickle.


_FISH SANDWICH_

To cold cooked fish, minced fine, add a little chopped pickle. Season
with pepper and salt. Place between two slices of buttered white bread.


_FISH AND EGG SANDWICH_

Mix with an equal amount of cold cooked fish the yolks of hard-boiled
eggs, mixed to a paste; add a little mayonnaise dressing. Spread
mixture on lightly buttered white bread with a lettuce leaf between.


_SARDELLEN PASTE SANDWICH_

Wash, bone, and skin one-half pound of sardellen and mash to a paste.
Rub together the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs and one teaspoonful of
butter until smooth, then add the sardellen paste. Mix and spread on
small squares of buttered toast. Serve with an olive.


_SARDELLEN SANDWICH_

Clean, bone, and mash smooth, one-half pound sardellen, mix with one
tablespoonful of creamed butter, and juice of half a lemon, a dash of
white pepper, and a half-teaspoonful of prepared mustard. Spread on
thin slices of round toast, cover with another slice, and garnish with
a pickle.


_HALIBUT SANDWICH_

Cold halibut shredded, mixed with a little mayonnaise dressing and
capers. Spread between lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a
radish.


_HALIBUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Shred boneless cold boiled halibut and rub smooth with a wooden spoon;
season with salt and pepper and one tablespoonful of lemon juice; add
three tablespoonfuls of thick cream and toss up. Spread this mixture
on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, with a crisp lettuce
leaf, that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing, between. Cut
triangular.


_ANCHOVY TOAST_

One can of boneless anchovies in oil; toast squares of bread without
crusts to a nice even brown; two anchovies are placed between two
slices of toast and the yolks of hard-boiled eggs are chopped fine and
sprinkled over same, the whites being cut into cubes and disposed over
the top; dust with white pepper. Garnish with a slice of lemon.


_FRENCH SANDWICH_

To one pint of cold cooked fish, add two hard-boiled eggs chopped fine,
two tablespoonfuls of capers, and a little mayonnaise to moisten. Mix
and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, cover with
another slice, and cut in strips. Add a sprinkling of finely chopped
cress to the top of each sandwich; rub the yolk of a hard-boiled egg
through a sieve and chop the white very fine. Add a sprinkling of the
yolk to the cress on half the number of sandwiches, adding the white to
the other half. Then arrange them in groups of twos, one of each color
on the serving plate. Any cold meat may be used instead of the fish.


_HOT CREAMED CODFISH SANDWICH_

Between toasted and lightly buttered slices of white bread place hot
creamed codfish. Put a tablespoonful of the codfish on top and sprinkle
finely chopped hard-boiled egg over the codfish and garnish with a
sprig of parsley and a pickle. Serve as soon as made.




                                  EGG


_EGG SANDWICH_

Chop finely the whites of hard-boiled eggs; force the yolks through a
potato ricer; mix yolks and whites, season with salt and pepper, and
moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing. Place mixture between thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread with a lettuce leaf between.
Garnish with an olive.


_EGG SANDWICH NO. 2_

Slice cold hard-boiled eggs and lay them between very thin, buttered
slices of white bread, seasoning them with salt, pepper, and nutmeg.
Garnish with a pickle.


_FRIED EGG SANDWICH_

Fry eggs well done, add a dash of salt and pepper, and place between
thin slices of white bread, with a crisp lettuce leaf between. Garnish
with a radish.


_RIBBON SANDWICH_

Mash the yolks of five hard-boiled eggs to a paste, add three
tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing and pepper and salt to taste.
Spread lightly with butter three square thin slices of white bread
and two corresponding slices of wheat. For lower slice use the white
bread and spread with the egg paste, then place the wheat bread on
top of that and spread with the egg paste, followed by a slice of the
white bread. Press tightly together, then take a sharp knife and cut
crosswise into five sandwiches. Garnish with an olive.


_EGG AND LETTUCE SANDWICH_

Place slices of hard-boiled eggs to cover slices of thinly cut buttered
white bread, add a dash of salt and paprika, on this lay a crisp leaf
of lettuce that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; cover with the
other buttered slice of bread and cut diagonally in halves. Garnish
with an olive.


_EGG AND OLIVE SANDWICH_

Chop five hard-boiled eggs very fine. Stone and chop fifteen large
olives and mix with the egg, moisten all with three tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, season with salt and pepper, and mix to a moist paste.
Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Put two slices
together and garnish with an olive.


_EGG AND CUCUMBER SANDWICH_

Run a sour cucumber pickle through the meat chopper, then run through
six hard-boiled eggs. Mix with a little mayonnaise dressing. Place
mixture between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with a
crisp lettuce leaf between.


_EGG AND BROWN BREAD SANDWICH_

Chop hard-boiled eggs fine, season with salt and pepper, add olive oil
until of the consistency to spread. Use for a filling for brown bread
sandwiches.


_PURITAN SANDWICH_

Rub smooth the yolk of a hard-boiled egg, add a tablespoonful of
melted butter, a dash of salt and white pepper, one-half teaspoonful
of mustard and one-fourth of a pound of American cheese grated, then
stir in a scant tablespoonful of vinegar. Spread mixture on thin slices
of lightly buttered white or rye bread. Put two slices together and
garnish with a pickle.


_GOLD SANDWICH_

Rub the yolks of three hard-boiled eggs to a paste. Add two
tablespoonfuls of olive oil, mixing with a silver fork. Add a pinch
of mustard, cayenne pepper and salt, and lastly one tablespoonful of
vinegar. When this is thoroughly mixed, add one cup of grated American
cheese. Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_MONTPELIER SANDWICH_

Put three hard-boiled eggs and three boned anchovies in a mortar and
pound fine; add one ounce of butter, and season with salt and cayenne
pepper. Place between thin slices of white bread cut in fancy shapes.
Garnish with a sprig of parsley.


_JAPANESE EGG SANDWICH_

Chop four hard-boiled eggs and three boned sardines fine, add a
teaspoonful of melted butter and rub to a paste; season with pepper and
salt and a little mayonnaise dressing; cut in slender strips. Garnish
with parsley and an olive.


_BROWN EGG SANDWICH_

Mash the yolks of five hard-boiled eggs and moisten with a teaspoonful
of melted butter and a drop of vinegar, work to a paste, adding salt,
pepper and a little French mustard, and a drop of tabasco. Spread the
mixture between slices of lightly buttered Boston brown bread cut wafer
thin. Garnish with an olive.


_EASTER SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a crisp
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing. On this place
round slices of cold hard-boiled egg. Dust with pepper and salt. Cut
sandwiches in squares and tie with lavender baby ribbon.


_CHEVY CHASE SANDWICH_

Put six hard-boiled eggs through a potato ricer. To these add six
sweet pickles, chopped fine, a dash of salt and white pepper, and two
teaspoonfuls of melted butter; mix and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread.


_OUTING SANDWICH_

Chop hard-boiled eggs fine, season with salt and pepper; moisten with
mayonnaise dressing. Spread on buttered whole wheat bread. Garnish with
a pickle.


_TRAVELLER’S SANDWICH_

Chop hard-boiled eggs fine, add a few minced olives, season with lemon
juice; mix with butter, creamed. Spread on thin slices of white bread.


_CURRIED EGG AND OYSTER SANDWICHES_

Chop four boiled eggs very fine, season with pepper and salt and
spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread; on top of eggs
place three pickled oysters; over this spread a tablespoonful of curry
sauce and cover with another slice of bread. The sauce is made thus;
put a tablespoonful of butter into a sauce pan, add a cup of milk,
thicken with a little flour dissolved in a little cold milk, let come
to a boil, then add a dash of onion juice, salt and pepper, and a
teaspoonful of curry. Let simmer a minute, then set it aside to cool.
When sandwiches are ready to serve, spread this sauce over the egg
and oysters, then cover with the other slice of bread. Garnish with
parsley.




                                 SALAD


_TOMATO SANDWICH_

Pare, chill, and cut ripe tomatoes thin, season with salt and pepper
and a little lemon juice. Place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_TOMATO SANDWICH NO. 2_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread place a crisp lettuce
leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; on this, place
thin slices of tomato, add a dash of salt, and spread lightly with
mayonnaise dressing; cover with another lightly buttered slice of bread.


_TOMATO AND ONION SANDWICH_

Mix in a bowl some tomato catsup, season with pepper and salt and
a pinch of sugar, add a little finely chopped onion, mix and place
between thin slices of buttered white bread, with a crisp lettuce leaf
between.


_TOMATO AND HORSE-RADISH SANDWICH_

Slice a tomato thin and sprinkle with salt. Mix one-half cup of
horse-radish with two tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing. Spread
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with the horse-radish
mixture, and put the sliced tomato between.


_TOMATO AND NUT SANDWICH_

Chop three medium sized tomatoes, add one small green pepper chopped
fine, and a half-cup of chopped walnuts; add a dash of mayonnaise
dressing and place on a lettuce leaf between thin slices of white bread
cut in squares.


_SPECIALTY SANDWICH_

On thin slices of toasted bread that have been lightly buttered, place
a thick slice of tomato, over top of tomato spread salad dressing, then
just a touch of caviare, cover with another slice of toast, and garnish
with a slice of lemon.


_EPICUREAN SANDWICH_

Two medium sized tomatoes, three green sweet peppers, and one small
onion, chop fine, mix together, salt, and drain in sieve for five
minutes. Mix with a little salad dressing and place on a lettuce leaf,
between thin slices of white or whole wheat bread lightly buttered.


_BEET SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled beets fine, season with salt and pepper and a dash of
vinegar. On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, spread cream
cheese. On top of this sprinkle the chopped beets. Cover with another
slice of bread.


_BEET AND CHEESE SANDWICH_

Slice bread thin. Spread one piece with beets that have been chopped
very fine and moistened with mayonnaise dressing. The other spread with
cream cheese. Press slices firmly together.


_WATERCRESS SANDWICH_

Dip fresh leaves of watercress in mayonnaise dressing. Place between
thin slices of white bread lightly buttered.


_WATERCRESS AND EGG SANDWICH_

Chop cress and moisten with French dressing. Press the yolks of three
hard-boiled eggs through a colander and add to the mixture. Place
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_WATERCRESS AND EGG SANDWICH NO. 2_

Cut watercress into small pieces, removing the stalks, and mix with
finely chopped hard-boiled eggs, seasoned with salt and pepper. Place
between thin, buttered slices of bread, sprinkling the cress and egg
very lightly with lemon juice. Press together, and cut in squares,
removing the crusts.


_MUSHROOM SANDWICH_

Boiled mushrooms chopped fine, cold boiled tongue chopped fine, season
with pepper and salt, add a little mayonnaise dressing, mix, and spread
between thin slices of buttered white bread. Garnish with an olive.


_WESTERN SANDWICH_

Chop five olives, a dozen capers, and one gherkin fine and mix with
two tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing. Spread the lower slices of
buttered white bread with fresh cream cheese, season with salt and
pepper, then put another slice on top of that and spread with the olive
mixture. On top place a third slice, press together, cut round, and
garnish with a sprig of parsley.


_PICCALILLI SANDWICH_

Between thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a
layer of sweet piccalilli; cut in diamond shape. Garnish with a sprig
of parsley.


_GREEN PEPPER AND EGG SANDWICH_

Between thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread, place
seedless green peppers that have been chopped fine and mixed with a
little mayonnaise dressing. On top of that place slices of hard-boiled
egg. Garnish with a sprig of parsley and a small pickle.


_NASTURTIUM SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with mayonnaise
dressing; place nasturtium blossoms overlapping one another half way;
roll up the sandwich and fasten with a toothpick.


_RIPE OLIVE SANDWICH_

Chop ripe olives fine, mix with a little mayonnaise, and place between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_OLIVE SQUARES_

Cut thin squares of brown bread and lightly butter, adding a dash of
pepper and salt. Stone eight olives, chop them with two stalks of
celery, one tiny cucumber pickle, a teaspoonful of catsup, a dash of
salt and pepper, and a very little mustard. Mix well and spread on the
brown bread, covering with another square.


_OLIVE AND PEPPER SANDWICH_

Chop olives fine, add a little finely chopped green and red (sweet)
peppers, a dash of mayonnaise dressing; mix and place between thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_OLIVE AND CHICKEN LIVER SANDWICH_

Chop olives and cold boiled chicken livers fine; mix with mayonnaise
and spread on thin slices of whole wheat bread. Put the slices
together.


_OLIVE AND CHEESE SANDWICH_

Thin slices of white bread lightly buttered, cut in hexagon shape.
Between each two slices place a layer of Neufchatel cheese mixed to
a paste with a little thick cream and mayonnaise dressing, and cover
thickly with chopped olives.


_OLIVE AND CAPER SANDWICH_

Stone the olives and chop fine, adding one-third quantity of capers,
mix with a little mayonnaise dressing, and spread between thin slices
of lightly buttered white bread.


_OLIVE AND CAPER SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop equal amount of capers and olives fine, season with celery salt
and paprika, add a little olive oil or melted butter, mix until smooth.
Spread on slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_OLIVE AND NUT SANDWICH_

Chop olives and English walnuts fine, add a dash of mayonnaise
dressing, and spread on lightly buttered brown bread.


_CUCUMBER SANDWICH_

Peel cucumbers and cut into the thinnest possible slices and sprinkle
with salt and pepper and a few drops of lemon juice. Place between thin
slices of lightly buttered bread.


_CUCUMBER SANDWICH NO. 2_

Sprinkle thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with cayenne.
Place thinly sliced cucumbers that have been mixed with a little French
dressing between the slices.


_CUCUMBER SANDWICH NO. 3_

Soak thin slices of cucumber for one hour in good white vinegar, season
with salt and pepper. Place between thin slices of buttered brown
bread. Cut in strips.


_CUCUMBER SANDWICH NO. 4_

Chop cucumbers fine, add a pinch of salt and pepper and a dash of
French dressing. Mix and place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread, with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_CUCUMBER AND CHIVES SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place thin slices of
cucumber, over which sprinkle chopped chives; cover with another slice
of bread and cut in squares.


_CUCUMBER AND CHEESE SANDWICH_

Slice cucumbers thin, let stand in salt water ten minutes, drain, and
place slices on thinly buttered white bread. Sprinkle with grated
American cheese, put slices together, and garnish with a radish.


_CUCUMBER AND RED PEPPER SANDWICH_

Chop three medium sized cucumbers and one red pepper, add a little
mayonnaise dressing, and place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread.


_CUCUMBER AND ONION SANDWICH_

Chop fine one large cucumber and a small white onion. Add a dash of
pepper and salt and moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing. Place
between thin slices of lightly buttered Boston brown bread.


_DILL SANDWICH_

Lightly butter slices of white bread; cover half of them with thin
slices of the white meat of roasted chicken; put over this a thin layer
of dill pickles; cover with another slice of buttered bread, trim off
the crusts, cut in triangles, and serve on a lettuce leaf.


_SPINACH SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled spinach and the yolks of hard-boiled eggs fine, add a
dash of salt and vinegar. Spread between thin slices of buttered white
bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_ONION SANDWICH_

Slice a mild sweet onion and lay in salted ice water for a half-hour.
Mix with a good mayonnaise dressing, and place slices of onion between
well buttered slices of Boston brown bread cut thin.


_MUSTARD SANDWICH_

Cream two tablespoonfuls of butter with one tablespoonful of prepared
mustard. Spread a thin layer between thinly cut slices of rye bread.
Garnish with a pickle.


_MOSAIC SANDWICH_

White, brown, and graham bread are used for this sandwich. Cut the
slices thin and spread with green butter. The butter is made by putting
cold boiled spinach through a sieve, season with finely chopped parsley
and capers, and mix smooth with creamed butter. Put slices together.


_HORSE-RADISH SANDWICH_

Cream two tablespoonfuls of butter, add three tablespoonfuls of
prepared horse-radish, spread between exceedingly thin slices of white
bread. Garnish with parsley; serve as soon as made.


_CELERY SANDWICH_

Chop fine a few stalks of celery, mix with a little mayonnaise
dressing, spread on thin slices of lightly buttered bread, cover with
another slice.


_CELERY SANDWICH NO. 2_

Butter bread on the loaf, first having creamed the butter. Cut away the
crusts and starting at one corner of the slice, roll it over two crisp
short celery sticks. Tie with baby ribbon.


_CELERY AND ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Mix one cup of chopped celery, one-fourth cup of chopped English
walnuts, and one-fourth cup chopped olives. Moisten with mayonnaise and
place between thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread.


_CELERY AND ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop celery and English walnuts fine, add a dash of salt and allspice,
moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing. Spread between thin slices
of lightly buttered white bread.


_LETTUCE SANDWICH_

Between thin, oblong slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a
crisp lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing, and
sprinkled with Parmesan cheese.


_LETTUCE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Cut crisp lettuce leaves into ribbons with scissors, add a dash of
mayonnaise dressing, and season with salt. Place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white or brown bread.


_BOSTON BROWN BREAD SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread place a lettuce
leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing.


_BAR HARBOR SANDWICH_

Cut the crisp lettuce leaves into ribbons with the scissors, salt and
pepper and moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing. Place on thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread; on each lay a thin slice of
tomato and cover with another slice of buttered bread. Press together
and serve as soon as made.


_RADISH SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread place sprigs of
watercress and thin slices of a radish that has been dipped in French
dressing. Can be served with the fish course.


_STRING BEAN SANDWICH_

Cook string beans until tender; when cold, cut in small pieces, add
a chopped onion, and a few chopped English walnut meats. Mix with a
little French dressing and spread between lightly buttered slices of
white bread, with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_APPLE AND CELERY SANDWICH_

Chop three apples and three stalks of celery fine. Mix with a little
mayonnaise dressing and place on thin slices of lightly buttered white
bread. Put the two slices together.


_APPLE AND GRAPE SANDWICH_

Remove the seeds from thin skinned white grapes; add one apple and one
stalk of celery; chop fine. Moisten with French dressing, toss up, and
spread on thinly cut slices of buttered white bread. Place the two
slices together.


_APPLE SALAD SANDWICH_

Chop fine two medium sized red apples and two stalks of celery; mix
with a little boiled dressing and place between thin slices of buttered
white bread.


_WALDORF SANDWICH_

Chop two apples, two stalks of celery, and one sweet pepper fine, add
a little mayonnaise dressing, mix, and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a sprig of watercress.


_NOVELTY SANDWICH_

Chop one small onion, eight olives, one green pepper (seeds removed),
and one chow chow pickle fine. Add one cupful of grated Parmesan
cheese; moisten with enough mustard dressing from the chow chow to form
a paste. Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Cover
with another slice and cut in triangles.


_ST. PATRICK SANDWICH_

Chop a handful of mint, a handful of parsley, and a tiny onion very
fine, add a dash of paprika, mix with a little mayonnaise dressing.
Place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with
a sprig of parsley.


_TARTAR SANDWICH_

Take two tablespoonfuls each of chopped onion, parsley, capers, and
sour cucumber pickles. Mix with two tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise
dressing. Place mixture between thin slices of graham or white bread
lightly buttered.


_GRAPE FRUIT SANDWICH_

Remove the pulp from grape fruit, making one cup; add one-fourth cup
of finely chopped walnuts, moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing,
and place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread cut in
strips.


_CHERRY SALAD SANDWICH_

Remove stones from two cups of cherries, add one-half cup of English
walnuts and two stalks of celery that have been chopped fine; add
enough mayonnaise to moisten; place between thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread. Garnish with a cherry.


_PINEAPPLE SALAD SANDWICH_

Shred one medium sized pineapple, add one cupful of skinned and seeded
white grapes, one-half cup of finely chopped English walnuts; moisten
with cream mayonnaise. Place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread with a crisp lettuce leaf between. Garnish with a red
cherry.


_MOCK OYSTER SANDWICH_

Boil salsify until tender, work smooth with a little sweet cream,
season with salt, cayenne, and a dash of anchovy sauce; place between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.




                                 MEAT


_ROAST BEEF SANDWICH_

Two cups of cold boiled beef chopped fine; add a tablespoonful of
tomato catsup, a dash of pepper and celery salt, two tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, and a teaspoonful of vinegar. Mix well and spread on
lightly buttered white bread. Put the two slices together and garnish
with an olive.


_ROAST BEEF SANDWICH NO. 2_

Between thin slices of buttered bread place thin slices of cold roast
beef; spread this thinly with horse-radish.


_HOT ROAST BEEF SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread place a thin slice
of hot roast beef. Put two tablespoonfuls of brown gravy over top.
Garnish with a pickle.


_ROAST BEEF AND TOMATO SANDWICH_

Lightly butter thin slices of Boston brown bread, cover with a thin
layer of cold roast beef, lightly spread with mayonnaise dressing; put
on top of this a slice of tomato, dust with pepper and salt, cover with
another slice of bread. Serve on lettuce leaves.


_ROAST BEEF AND JAM SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place thin slices
of cold roast beef; on top of this spread plum jam.


_ROAST BEEF SALAD SANDWICH_

Chop fine one cup of cold roast beef, one-half head of lettuce, one
boiled beet, one hard-boiled egg, one small onion, and one pickled
cucumber. Mix with French dressing and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread.


_RARE BEEF SANDWICH_

To two parts of chopped lean rare beef, add one part of finely minced
celery. Season with salt, pepper, and a little made mustard. Place on a
lettuce leaf between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_CORNED BEEF SANDWICH_

Chop cold corn beef very fine, season with mustard and a dash of
catsup. Place mixture on a lettuce leaf, between lightly buttered white
bread.


_CHIPPED BEEF SANDWICH_

Chop chipped beef very fine and mix with a little mayonnaise; spread on
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_PICNIC SANDWICH_

A pound of raw beef run through the meat chopper; a teacupful of bread
crumbs, pepper and salt to taste; mix with a well beaten egg, and form
into a roll. Take a flank of mutton, remove the bones and lay the
above mixture on the mutton and do it up into a roll; bind it with a
tape. Sew up the ends so mixture will not bulge out; dust with pepper
and salt, then roast it; when it is cold, take off the tape, take
out the sewing, and slice thin. Place between thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread. Garnish with an olive.


_CANNIBAL SANDWICH_

Chop raw beef and onions very fine, season with salt and pepper, and
spread on lightly buttered brown bread.


_MEAT AND MUSHROOM SANDWICH_

Mince boiled mushrooms and cold beef or tongue together, and spread
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Lightly spread the
filling with French mustard. Garnish with a pickle.


_FRIED COLD MEAT SANDWICH_

Place between thin slices of white bread, cold roast beef or lamb,
chopped fine; season with pepper and salt. Mix with a little of the
left-over gravy; dip in egg and milk and fry brown in butter. Serve hot.


_BROILED STEAK SANDWICH_

Between slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a thin piece of
hot broiled steak, season with salt and pepper. Garnish top with a thin
slice of Bermuda onion.


_HAM SANDWICH_

Grind boiled ham fine; mix with a little chopped celery and mayonnaise.
Place between slices of thinly cut buttered bread.


_HAM SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop ham fine, mix with a little mayonnaise dressing, and place between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with parsley and a
pickle.


_HAM SANDWICH NO. 3_

Slice cold boiled ham thin; spread with French mustard, place between
thin slices of rye bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_HAM SANDWICH NO. 4_

One pound of cold boiled ham run through fine knife or meat chopper,
one-half cup strained lemon juice, mix with a little mayonnaise
dressing, spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, with a
crisp lettuce leaf between.


_HOT HAM SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of white bread with chopped cold boiled ham, over
same spread a little mustard, and cover with another slice. Beat an egg
and add one-half cup of milk, and in this mixture dip the sandwiches.
Garnish with parsley and a pickle.


_HOT HAM SANDWICH NO. 2_

Spread finely minced boiled ham on thin slices of lightly buttered
bread. Put the sandwiches together and cut into triangles. Beat two
eggs light, add a cup of milk and a pinch of salt. Dip the sandwiches
in the egg and milk and fry brown on a hot buttered griddle. Garnish
with a slice of broiled tomato and serve at once.


_HAM FINGERS_

Run lean ham through the meat chopper, season with salt and pepper, and
moisten with a little salad dressing. Place the ham between slices of
thinly cut and lightly buttered bread. Cut in shape of lady fingers and
garnish with a sprig of watercress.


_HAM AND EGG SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled ham and hard-boiled eggs fine, season with pepper and
salt, and a dash of mayonnaise dressing. Place the mixture between thin
slices of lightly buttered brown bread. Garnish with a small pickle.


_HAM AND EGG CLUB SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled ham very fine and rub smooth in a mortar; pass the
yolks of four hard-boiled eggs through a sieve and add a little
mayonnaise dressing. Cut white bread very thin and lightly butter; on
one slice spread the ham, then cover with another slice, and on that
spread the egg mixture with a crisp lettuce leaf between, topped by a
third slice of lightly buttered bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_HAM AND NUT SANDWICH_

Mince finely some cold boiled ham and add to it about half the quantity
of finely chopped peanuts. For every cupful of ham add a tablespoonful
of chopped pickles and a little chopped celery. Mix to a paste with
salad dressing and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white
bread and serve on a lettuce leaf.


_POTTED HAM SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread spread potted ham;
remove crusts and shape them in triangular form. Garnish top with a
radish.


_POTTED HAM SANDWICH NO. 2_

Toast saltine biscuit, lightly butter, and spread with potted ham. Put
two together, serve as soon as made. Garnish with a pickle.


_PARTY SANDWICH ROLLS_

Fresh bread is used for these sandwiches. Cut the slices as thin as
possible and remove the crusts. Lay crisp lettuce leaves that have been
dipped in mayonnaise dressing on the slices; on top of that place thin
shavings of cold boiled ham; roll the slices very closely and fasten
with a toothpick or ribbon. Pile on a serving dish and garnish with
pickles and radishes.


_WESTPHALIAN HAM SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread, place thin slices of
Westphalian ham; add a dash of mustard, and garnish top with a pickle.


_AUTOMOBILE SANDWICH_

Run through the meat chopper two pounds of cold boiled ham, half a
pound of walnut meats, and four dill pickles. Mix with a little French
mustard, and place between slices of lightly buttered bread.


_STAG SANDWICH_

Run cold boiled ham and dill pickle through the meat chopper, add a
little French mustard, and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread. Cover with another slice.


_BOSTON CLUB SANDWICH_

Cut brown bread into rounds with a cake cutter and lightly butter.
Chop one-half pound of cold boiled mutton fine; add a dash of salt and
pepper, two tablespoonfuls of olive oil, or melted butter. On the lower
round of buttered bread place a small crisp lettuce heart that has been
dipped in mayonnaise dressing. On top of that place a slice of tomato,
then another slice of buttered bread, then the mutton mixture. Place on
top another round of buttered bread and press the two together.


_VEAL SANDWICH_

Grind through meat chopper the desired amount. To one cup of chopped
meat add one tablespoonful of vinegar, one-half teaspoonful of mustard,
one-half of a small onion chopped fine. Salt and pepper to taste. Mix
to a paste with mayonnaise dressing, and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_CALF’S LIVER SANDWICH_

Chop cooked calf’s liver fine, add crisp fried bacon chopped fine.
Season with salt and pepper, add a dash of catsup; mix and place on
lettuce leaves between thin slices of buttered white bread.


_CALF’S LIVER AND BACON SANDWICH_

Calf’s liver well cooked and chopped fine, slices of bacon fried crisp
and chopped fine; season with salt and pepper and a dash of catsup. Mix
and place on thin slices of lightly buttered graham or white bread,
with a crisp lettuce leaf between.


_TEXAS SANDWICH_

Chop one-half pound of broiled calf’s liver fine. Season with salt and
cayenne pepper, add one teaspoonful of melted butter and a few drops of
onion juice; rub together to a smooth paste. Spread on thin slices of
unbuttered white bread. Cover with another slice.


_TONGUE SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, lay a crisp
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; on that lay a
thin slice of tongue; on top of that a slice of ripe tomato spread with
mayonnaise.


_TONGUE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Mince boiled tongue, add a teaspoonful of melted butter, a
tablespoonful of tomato catsup, a dash of celery salt, and when mixed
place between thinly buttered white or brown bread. Serve with a sweet
pickle.


_TONGUE AND EGG SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled tongue fine; season with salt and pepper and a
tablespoonful of melted butter; mix and spread on rounds of toasted
bread. Place leaves of watercress around edge on top of the toast and
in the centre pile hard-boiled egg that has been chopped fine and mixed
with a little mayonnaise dressing.


_DEVILED TONGUE SANDWICH_

Run a quarter of a pound of cold boiled tongue through the meat
chopper; add to it three hard-boiled eggs chopped fine, a dash of red
pepper and paprika, a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce, and two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Mix and place between thin slices of
lightly buttered bread with sprigs of watercress between.


_TONGUE AND TOMATO SANDWICH_

Lightly butter three thin slices of white bread. On lower slice place a
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; on leaf place
a slice of cold boiled tongue, then a slice of bread; on this lay a
slice of tomato that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing, topped by
a third slice of bread. Garnish with an olive.


_EXCURSION SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled tongue fine. To each cupful, add two tablespoonfuls of
melted butter, a dash of red pepper, and one-half teaspoonful of onion
juice. Mix and spread on very thin slices of white bread, cover with
another slice, and serve with a pickle.


_LAMB SANDWICH_

To three cups of cold cooked lamb, chopped fine, add three
tablespoonfuls of Parmesan cheese, one teaspoonful of mustard, a dash
of salt and pepper, and a little mayonnaise dressing; mix until smooth.
Place this on lettuce leaf between slices of lightly buttered white
bread.


_LAMB SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop cold cooked lamb and a green pepper fine. Season with salt and add
a dash of mayonnaise dressing. Spread on thin slices of graham bread
lightly buttered. Put the two slices together.


_MUTTON SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled mutton fine, add a dash of tabasco sauce, a
teaspoonful of olive oil or melted butter, a tablespoonful of vinegar,
and a pinch of salt. Spread on lightly buttered white bread. Serve with
a pickle.


_MUTTON SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop cold cooked mutton very fine; to each pint add one teaspoonful of
salt, one tablespoonful of capers, one teaspoonful of chopped mint,
a dash of pepper, and one tablespoonful of lemon juice. Spread this
thickly over whole wheat bread. Cover with another slice and serve on
lettuce leaves.


_MUTTON AND PEA SANDWICH_

Butter slices of white bread lightly and lay on them thin slices of
cold boiled mutton. Mix together half a pint of cooked peas that have
been seasoned with salt, pepper, a little butter, and a teaspoonful of
capers. Place a layer of peas over the mutton, then a crisp lettuce
leaf, then cover with another slice of buttered bread, and cut into
triangles.


_SUMMER SANDWICH_

Cut white bread into rounds with a cake cutter and lightly butter.
Chop one-half pound of cold boiled mutton fine; add two tablespoonfuls
of melted butter, and a dash of salt and pepper. Peel four tomatoes,
cut these into rather thick slices and remove the seeds from the
centre. Place a lettuce leaf that has been lightly dipped in mayonnaise
dressing on a slice of toast, and put a slice of tomato on top of that.
Fill the space from which you have taken the seeds with the mutton
mixture. Put on top another slice of toasted and lightly buttered
bread, and press the two slices firmly together.


_POTTED MEAT SANDWICH_

Chop one pound of tender cooked veal fine and add one-fourth cup of fat
pork cooked and chopped fine. Season with salt and pepper, a little
anchovy essence, and a little mace. Moisten with a little butter and
work until smooth. Press the mixture solidly into small can or jar,
pour melted butter to the depth of one-half inch over same, and set in
a cool place. When ready for use, slice and place between thin slices
of white bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_FARMER SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of white bread, place thin slices of cold roast
pork; on top of this spread apple sauce.


_PORK SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled pork and a celery stalk fine; season with salt, add
a dash of Worcestershire, slightly diluted with water; mix and place
between thin slices of buttered white bread.


_MINCE-MEAT SANDWICH_

Moisten thick round crackers with hot milk; spread with a thick layer
of hot mince meat, made rather moist with the addition of a little
fruit juice or syrup. Place another cracker on top, then whipped cream
on top of that. To be eaten with a fork.


_SOUTHERN (BACON) SANDWICH_

On thin slices of buttered whole wheat bread, place a lettuce leaf; add
thin slices of crisp fried bacon; spread with a little mustard, and put
slices together. Garnish with a radish.


_TIP-TOP SANDWICH_

Chop fine six slices of uncooked bacon, add two green peppers (seeds
removed) chopped fine, three onions the size of an egg chopped fine,
season with pepper and salt. Fry the above mixture until the bacon is
done, then scramble in two eggs. Place between thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread. Garnish with a radish.


_CHICKEN SANDWICH_

Two cups of finely minced cold cooked chicken, a heaping tablespoonful
of Parmesan cheese, a tablespoonful of tomato catsup, a dash of
French mustard, salt and pepper, add a little thick cream, work all
to a smooth paste. Place between thin slices of buttered white bread.
Garnish with a stick of celery.


_CHICKEN SANDWICH NO. 2_

To the white meat of a cold boiled chicken chopped fine, add a crisp
celery stalk chopped fine, and mix with a little mayonnaise dressing.
Place between thinly cut slices of buttered white bread, and garnish
with an olive.


_CHICKEN SANDWICH NO. 3_

Chop cold cooked chicken fine; season with pepper and salt, add a dash
of mayonnaise dressing, spread on thinly cut slices of buttered white
bread, with a lettuce leaf between, and garnish with an olive.


_CHICKEN SANDWICH NO. 4_

One cup of cold boiled chicken chopped fine; season with salt and
paprika, moisten with a little cream, paste between thin slices of
lightly buttered whole wheat bread.


_HOT CHICKEN SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered toast, place slices of warm
chicken breast; over same pour hot gravy, made of slightly thickened
chicken stock, seasoned with salt and pepper, and a little chopped
parsley. Cut triangular and garnish with a pickle, and a radish.


_CHICKEN LIVER SANDWICH_

Boil chicken liver until tender and rub through a sieve; mix with an
equal amount of olives chopped fine, and mayonnaise dressing; place
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_PRESSED CHICKEN SANDWICH_

Boil fowl until tender; remove bones and skin; chop fine; season with
salt, pepper, and sage to taste. Mix teaspoonful of mustard with a
tablespoonful of vinegar, heat and pour over chicken, with some of the
broth, and press in earthen dish. When cold and ready for use, slice
and place between thin, lightly buttered bread with a crisp lettuce
leaf between.


_JELLIED CHICKEN SANDWICH_

Chop the white meat of cold boiled chicken fine, rub to a paste. Put
a scant tablespoonful of gelatine in a half-cup of cold water, place
it over the fire until it has dissolved; then add the chicken paste, a
dash of salt and pepper, and a half-teaspoonful of grated horse-radish.
Stir this mixture until it begins to thicken, then stir in one cup of
cream that has been whipped to a stiff froth, place it in the ice box
until very cold; when ready for use, cut thin and place between lightly
buttered slices of crustless white bread. Garnish with parsley and an
olive.


_CREAM OF CHICKEN SANDWICH_

Take one cupful of chopped chicken and pound it fine; dissolve a
tablespoonful of gelatine in a half-cup of cold water; then add the
chicken meat, a dash of salt, a teaspoonful of grated horse-radish;
stir until it begins to thicken, then add a little at a time, one-half
pint of cream that has been whipped to a stiff froth; set in the ice
box until very cold. On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread,
spread the mixture; cut in fancy shapes and garnish each with a radish.


_CHICKEN AND EGG SANDWICH_

One cupful of cold chicken chopped fine; the yolks of two hard-boiled
eggs chopped fine; one teaspoonful of melted butter, one teaspoonful
of lemon juice, one teaspoonful of rich stock, and salt and pepper to
taste. Mix to a paste and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread. Garnish with an olive.


_CHICKEN SURPRISE SANDWICH_

Chop cold boiled chicken and few capers fine; mix with a little
mayonnaise dressing and spread between thin slices of toasted white
bread. Garnish with an olive.


_CHICKEN AND HAM SANDWICH_

One cupful of chopped ham, one cupful of cold boiled chicken meat;
season with salt and pepper and moisten with mayonnaise dressing.
Spread this mixture on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread,
cover with another slice, and cut in halves. Garnish with a pickle.


_CHICKEN AND HAM (CLUB) SANDWICH_

Toast and lightly butter three thin slices of white bread; place a
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing on the lower
slice. On this, place slices of cold roast fowl, then put another
slice of toast on top of that, with another leaf of lettuce, follow by
thin slices of broiled ham, topped by a third slice of toasted bread.
Garnish top with dill pickle, cut in thin slices lengthwise.


_CHICKEN AND ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of buttered white bread with English walnut or
almond meats chopped fine. Spread the corresponding pieces with cold
boiled chicken chopped fine; add a little mayonnaise dressing and press
pieces together. Garnish with an olive.


_CHICKEN AND ALMOND SANDWICH_

One cup of cold boiled chicken chopped fine; one cup of almonds chopped
fine; moisten with a little cream, season with salt and paprika, place
between thin slices of entire wheat bread. Garnish with parsley, and an
olive.


_CHICKEN AND GREEN PEPPER SANDWICH_

Run enough chicken through the meat chopper to make two cupfuls; cut
out the stem ends and remove the seeds from three large sweet peppers;
run them through the meat chopper; mix the chicken and pepper together;
season with half a teaspoonful of salt, and two tablespoonfuls of sweet
cream. Place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Cut
in triangles. Serve on lettuce leaf.


_ASPIC JELLY SANDWICH_

Soak one box (two ounces) of gelatine in one cup of chicken liquor
until softened; add three cupfuls of chicken stock seasoned with a
little parsley, celery, three cloves, a blade of mace, and dash of
salt and pepper. Strain into a dish and add a little shredded breast
of chicken; set in a cold place to harden; when cold, slice in fancy
shapes and place on slightly buttered whole wheat bread. Garnish with a
stick of celery.


_RECEPTION SANDWICH_

Equal quantities of breast of cold boiled chicken and tongue, put
through food chopper; season with celery salt, cayenne, anchovy paste,
and mayonnaise. Place mixture between slices of lightly buttered white
bread with crisp lettuce leaf that has been dipped in tarragon vinegar.


_QUEEN SANDWICH_

Mince finely two parts of cooked chicken or game to one part of cooked
tongue, and one part of minced cooked mushrooms. Season with salt and
pepper and a little lemon juice; mix and place between thin slices of
buttered white bread. Garnish with small pickle.


_FRENCH ROLL SANDWICH_

French rolls are used for this sandwich. Make a small round opening
in top of each and take out some of the crumbs; save the small crusts
from the top of the opening; chop fine five olives, a tablespoonful of
capers, one green sweet pepper (seeds removed), one gherkin, the white
meat of one chicken, and two ounces of tongue chopped fine. Moisten
with mayonnaise dressing. Fill this mixture into the roll, put the
small crust on top, and garnish with a pickle.


_CREOLE SANDWICH_

One cupful of cold boiled chicken chopped fine, two tablespoonfuls
of green pepper that has been parboiled and chopped fine. Add a dash
of salt, and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley; moisten with a little
mayonnaise dressing and place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread. Garnish with an olive.


_WINDSOR SANDWICH_

One cupful of cold boiled chicken chopped fine, a teaspoonful of finely
chopped onion, a half teaspoonful of finely chopped chives. Salt and
pepper to taste, moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing, mix well,
and spread on thin slices of toasted bread. Cover with another slice of
toasted bread, cut in halves, and garnish with a radish.


_BISCUIT SANDWICH_

Roll biscuit dough very thin, about like piecrust, and spread with
butter, then roll another and put on top of this; cut out and bake
in quick oven. When done, pull apart and spread with this mixture
while warm. Take equal parts of chicken and ham, run through the meat
chopper, season with celery salt and cayenne pepper; moisten with
mayonnaise dressing.


_SARATOGA SANDWICH_

On a lightly buttered square slice of white bread, place a lettuce leaf
that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; on that lay four large
fried oysters with a little horse-radish on top of the oysters, and
cover with a lightly buttered slice of rye bread, and butter upper
side of this slice. On this lay a slice of breast of cooked chicken;
dust with salt and pepper and lay on that crisp slices of fried bacon;
cover this with a slice of white bread. Garnish top with radishes, cut
fancy, serve with slice of lemon on the side.


_SHERIDAN PARK CLUB SANDWICH_

Toast and butter three thin slices of white bread; place a lettuce leaf
on the lower slice, and on its top put slices of chicken breast. Then
put another slice of toast on top of that with another leaf of lettuce,
followed by thin slices of broiled breakfast bacon, topped by third
slice of toasted bread. Garnish top with small pickles cut in slices
lengthwise. Serve as soon as made.


_COLONIAL (CLUB) SANDWICH_

Toast and butter three slices of thinly cut bread; place slices of cold
boiled chicken spread lightly with mayonnaise dressing on the lower
slice, with a crisp lettuce leaf. Then put another slice of toast on
top of that with a slice of ripe tomato spread lightly with mayonnaise
dressing, topped by a third slice of toast spread with finely chopped
celery that has been mixed with a little mayonnaise dressing. Lay on
top of that sweet red peppers cut in ribbons; cut triangular.


_CHICKEN AND PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS SANDWICH_

Two tablespoonfuls _pâté de foie gras_ and a cup of finely chopped cold
boiled chicken; season with pepper and salt; spread on a crisp lettuce
leaf that has been dipped in French dressing, and place between thin
slices of white bread.


_CHICKEN BISCUIT FINGER_

Chop cold boiled chicken very fine; add a little chopped parsley;
moisten with salad dressing; make rolls of the mixture about the size
of a small pickle. Cover each roll with baking powder biscuit dough
rolled thin, pressing the ends tightly. Brush with beaten egg and bake.


_PRESSED MOCK CHICKEN_

Boil a piece of fresh shoulder of pork until tender, adding pepper
and salt to the water in which it is cooked. When done, run the meat
through the meat chopper and return to the liquor in which it was
boiled in the kettle. Add enough rolled oats to absorb or thicken the
liquid, season to suit the taste, and simmer from twenty to thirty
minutes; then pack into a bowl or crock; when cold, slice and place
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with
pickles and radish roses.


_COUNTRY CLUB SANDWICH_

Use three slices of white bread thinly cut and lightly buttered; place
a lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing on lower
slice, and on top of that place slices of cold boiled chicken; then put
another slice of bread and a lettuce leaf followed by thin slices of
veal loaf, topped by another slice of bread with thinly sliced pickles
on top.


_CHICAGO CLUB SANDWICH_

Toast lightly two slices of white bread and one of rye; lightly butter
and on the slices of white bread, place slices of cold cooked chicken
and a couple of slices of bacon well crisped; cover with the slice of
rye bread and on that place a lettuce leaf that has been dipped in
a little mayonnaise dressing; sprinkle with a little chopped green
pepper, then cover with the other slice of white bread.


_TURKEY SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white or brown bread, place
thin slices of turkey breast; spread a little cranberry jelly over this
and sprinkle with finely chopped celery.


_HOT TURKEY SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered toast, place slices of warm
turkey breast; over same pour a hot gravy made of slightly thickened
turkey stock. Garnish with a pickle.


_TURKEY CLUB SANDWICH_

Toast three thin slices of white bread and butter, on the lower slice
lay cold white breast of turkey; cover with another slice of toast; on
that lay a thin slice of hot broiled ham; cover with another slice of
buttered toast and press together. Serve on a lettuce leaf. Garnish
with small pickles.


_GAME SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered bread, place slices of breast of
roasted partridge; spread lightly with currant jelly and cover with
another buttered slice of bread. Garnish with cress.


_TRUFFLE SANDWICH_

One tablespoonful of broiled truffle, one-half breast of chicken,
and two tablespoonfuls of sweetbreads chopped fine. Add a dash of
mayonnaise dressing, salt and pepper. Place between slices of buttered
white bread, cut in oblong pieces. Garnish with pickle.


_HEAD CHEESE SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place a lettuce
leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing. On this place thin
slices of head cheese, cut diagonally, and garnish with a pickle.


_SWEETBREAD SANDWICH_

Cook sweetbreads until tender. When cold, remove skin, chop fine,
season with salt and pepper, add one cup of finely chopped celery,
and a dash of mayonnaise dressing; spread on thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread. Cover with another slice and garnish with an
olive.


_SAUSAGE SANDWICH_

Boil link sausages until done; when cold cut into thin slices; place
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a
pickle.


_GERMAN BOLOGNA SANDWICH_

Remove the skin from a bologna sausage and rub to a paste. Spread thin
slice of lightly buttered rye bread with a little French mustard, then
a layer of bologna, cover with another slice, and garnish with a pickle.


_FRANKFURT SAUSAGE SANDWICH_

Cut cold boiled Frankfurt sausage into the thinnest slices and place
on slice of buttered white or rye bread; run a cucumber pickle through
a meat chopper and sprinkle on top of sausage. Place another buttered
slice over this.


_SALAMI (ITALIAN SAUSAGE) SANDWICH_

Between slices of lightly buttered rye bread, place thin slices of
salami. Garnish with an olive.


_PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS_ is made from the liver of geese, ducks, or turkeys.
Put one-half cup goose grease in a fryer on stove; when hot lay in the
livers and baste with a spoon until tender; remove the livers from the
pan and chop very fine. Add a small onion chopped and boiled brown,
season with salt and pepper and mix in some of the grease in which
livers were fried. The mixture must resemble paste. _Pâté de foie gras_
can be purchased in small cans.


_PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS SANDWICH_

On thin slices of toasted bread shorn of crusts, spread _pâté de foie
gras_; add a dash of salt and cayenne; cover with another slice of
toast and serve with a sweet pickle.


_PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS SANDWICH NO. 2_

Three slices of white or brown bread lightly buttered; on the lower
slice spread _pâté de foie gras_, then put another slice of bread on
top of that. Cover with delicate shreds of tomato, tiny lettuce hearts
with a dash of mayonnaise dressing, topped by a third slice of bread.
Garnish with an olive.


_PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS SANDWICH NO. 3_

One-half cup of _pâté de foie gras_, remove the fat and mash to a
smooth paste; season with a little salt and a dash of cayenne pepper
and drop of onion juice; press the whole through a sieve. Spread on
thin slices of buttered white bread and cover with another slice of
buttered bread. Garnish top with slices of hard-boiled egg and an olive.


_IMITATION PÂTÉ DE FOIE GRAS SANDWICH_

Saute half a chopped onion in butter until brown; add one-half dozen
chicken livers, cover with seasoned chicken stock, and let simmer until
tender; mash the livers fine and press through a sieve, season with
salt, paprika, mustard, and a dash of curry powder. Put this paste in a
cup, pour melted butter over top; when cold, remove the butter and cut
in thin slices; place between thin slices of white bread. Garnish with
a pickle.




                                CHEESE


_AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH_

Cream three tablespoonfuls of butter, add three tablespoonfuls of
grated American cheese, one tablespoonful of anchovy essence, a dash
of salt and paprika, one-fourth teaspoonful of mustard, and one-fourth
cupful of finely chopped olives. Place mixture between thin slices of
lightly buttered rye bread.


_AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH NO. 2._

Cream two tablespoonfuls of butter, add one-fourth cupful of grated
American cheese and one teaspoonful of vinegar, and season with salt,
paprika, mustard, and anchovy essence. Place mixture between thin
slices of white bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH NO. 3_

Salted cracker slightly toasted, spread with American cheese; serve
hot.


_AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH NO. 4_

Melt a quarter of a pound of American cheese in a sauce pan, add the
yolk of one egg beaten with two tablespoonfuls of cream, a dash of salt
and red pepper, and half a teaspoonful of Worcestershire sauce. Take
from the fire and when cold, spread on thin slices of white or rye
bread. Press the two together and cut in strips. Garnish with a pickle.


_CHEESE RARE-BIT SANDWICH_

Grate a quarter of pound of American cheese fine; melt it in a
sauce pan over the fire, add the yolks of two eggs well beaten,
two tablespoonfuls of cream, a dash of salt and red pepper, and a
teaspoonful of Worcestershire. Stir the mixture into the melted cheese;
when blended, remove from the fire, and when cool, spread it on thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread. Put the two slices together and
garnish with an olive.


_BROWN BREAD AND AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH_

Steam the brown bread before spreading with butter, and cut in the
usual way. Between the slices, place grated American cheese and finely
chopped English walnuts well salted. Garnish with an olive.


_BROWN BREAD AND AMERICAN CHEESE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Cut thin small rounds of brown bread and lightly butter; sprinkle with
grated cheese; put two slices together and cut in two.


_FRIED CHEESE SANDWICH_

Cut slices of white bread round with biscuit cutter; spread with paste
made with half a cupful of fresh American cheese, mashed smooth with
a little cream. Season with salt and paprika. Put slices together and
fry a light brown in the blazer, in which a tablespoonful of butter has
been melted. Serve hot.


_NEUFCHATEL SANDWICH_

Mince a little candied orange very fine, add a dash of ginger, and mix
with Neufchatel cheese which has been moistened with a little cream.
Place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with
an olive.


_NEUFCHATEL AND NUT SANDWICH_

Mix with one roll of Neufchatel cheese, half a cupful of chopped
almonds or butternuts; spread on thin slices of lightly buttered graham
or Boston brown bread. Garnish with a small pickle.


_NEUFCHATEL AND OLIVE SANDWICH_

Chop half a dozen olives and a half-cupful of pecan meats fine; mix
with a cake of Neufchatel cheese, moisten with a little cream, and
place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_HARLEQUIN SANDWICH_

Lightly buttered slices of white and graham bread. Spread each with
Neufchatel cheese and sprinkle with a few English walnut meats. Put a
white and a brown slice together.


_BERLIN SANDWICH_

Chop olives fine and moisten with mayonnaise dressing; spread on
buttered slices of bread. Spread other slices with Neufchatel cheese
and put slices together in pairs.


_LIMBURGER CHEESE SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread with limburger cheese,
then with thin slices of bologna sausage; cover with another slice of
rye bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_ROQUEFORT SANDWICH_

Mix grated cheese with thick cream to make a paste; place between
thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with an
olive.


_GERMAN CLUB SANDWICH_

Thin slices of pumpernickel, rye, and white bread are used for this
sandwich. Rub half a pound of smearcase until smooth, add three
tablespoonfuls of thick cream and two of melted butter; season with
pepper and salt. Spread some of this cheese mixture on a buttered
slice of pumpernickel bread, followed by a slice of rye covered with
the cheese, covered with a slice of buttered white bread. Garnish with
slice of pickle.


_PARMESAN SANDWICH_

Finely grated Parmesan cheese, a dash of salt and pepper, one
tablespoonful of tomato catsup, mix and place between squares of
unsweetened cracker. Put crackers on a thin plate, set in hot oven for
three minutes or until the cheese melts and the cracker becomes crisp.
Serve hot.


_PARMESAN AND RADISH SANDWICH_

Peel radishes and chop very fine; place on ice until needed; then mix
with a very little whipped cream; spread the mixture between thin
oblongs of brown bread, dust a little grated Parmesan cheese over the
top before the second slice is put on.


_PARMESAN AND CELERY SANDWICH_

Whip a gill of cream, add to it sufficient grated cheese, American or
Parmesan, to make a stiff paste; spread lightly buttered white bread
with this and sprinkle thickly with very finely minced celery. Cover
with another slice of buttered bread.


_SEAFOAM SANDWICH_

Spread crisp seafoam crackers with butter, a sprinkling of grated
Parmesan cheese, and very finely chopped celery or olives. Place two
together and serve.


_FRENCH CHEESE SANDWICH_

Slice brown bread very thin, butter, lay thinly sliced cheese on top,
and spread over cheese a thick layer of any kind of jam, and cover with
another slice of bread.


_MOROCCO SANDWICH_

Melt a cupful of cheese, American or Parmesan; while soft, add enough
mayonnaise to make it spread easily; lay this on thin slices of lightly
buttered whole wheat bread and slice stuffed olives over cheese. Cover
with another slice of lightly buttered bread; garnish top with stuffed
olive.


_CLUB HOUSE SANDWICH_

Rub to a paste one tablespoonful of butter and two tablespoonfuls of
soft club house cheese, a tablespoonful of grated Parmesan, a dash of
salt and pepper, a teaspoonful of tarragon vinegar, and a teaspoonful
of anchovy paste. Spread the above mixture on thin slices of toasted
bread. Put slices together and cut triangular.


_COTTAGE SANDWICH_

Cut slices of brown bread, do not remove crusts; rub half a pint of
cottage cheese to a smooth paste, then press it through fine sieve. Add
two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, slowly beating the while, add half
a teaspoonful of salt, and two tablespoonfuls of thick cream; spread
each slice of the bread with mixture; cover with another thin slice of
white bread and on top of that another thin layer of cheese; place a
slice of brown bread on top and trim into shape. Garnish with an olive.


_COTTAGE SANDWICH NO. 2_

On thin slices of lightly buttered graham bread spread cottage cheese
that has been mixed with a little chopped chives. Cover with another
slice of bread.


_GRUYERE SANDWICH_

Cut rye and white bread in very thin slices and spread sparingly with
butter; cut cold tongue and gruyere cheese in thin slices; on white
bread arrange the tongue, rye bread over tongue and cheese over rye
bread; repeat, put under a weight and let stand for two hours; then cut
crosswise in thin slices. Garnish with olive.


_COTTAGE AND OLIVE SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered graham bread with mustard, then
a thin layer of cottage cheese, and then a layer of chopped olives that
have been mixed with a little mayonnaise dressing. Cover with another
slice of bread and press together.


_BOHEMIAN SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered graham bread, spread a thin layer
of mustard; on top of that spread a layer of cottage cheese, then a
layer of olives that have been chopped fine, and mixed with a little
mayonnaise dressing. Cover with another slice of bread and press
together. Cut in strips and serve on a lettuce leaf.


_DUTCH SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread, spread highly
seasoned cottage cheese; on this sprinkle finely chopped olives. Cut in
diamond shape. Garnish with a sprig of parsley.


_WAUKESHA CHEESE SANDWICH_

Cream one brick of Waukesha cheese with a little sweet cream, add a
pinch of salt, a few chopped pecan nut meats, and a few chopped olives.
Place between thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread.


_IMPERIAL CHEESE SANDWICH_

One-half jar of Imperial cheese, one-half bottle (small size) of
stuffed olives sliced fine, four tablespoonfuls of cream. Mix well and
spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with a crisp
lettuce leaf between the slices.


_SWISS CHEESE SANDWICH_

Cut rye bread very thin. Spread lightly with butter. Between the pieces
place thin slices of Swiss cheese. Spread with mustard. Garnish with a
dill pickle sliced thin.


_SWISS CHEESE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Butter thin slices of pumpernickel bread. Between slices put a thin
layer of Swiss cheese and leaves of watercress. Cut in long narrow
strips. Garnish with an olive.


_GREEN CHEESE SANDWICH_

Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, green cheese
grated fine. Put slices together and garnish with a sour pickle.


_SWISS AND NUT SANDWICH_

Chop English walnuts fine; mix with grated Swiss cheese. Add a little
thick cream to moisten, season with salt and cayenne. Place between
thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread. Garnish with an olive.


_CREAM CHEESE AND OLIVE SANDWICH_

Work cream cheese until smooth, add one-half quantity of chopped
olives, season with salt, and moisten with mayonnaise. Place between
thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread.


_CREAM CHEESE AND OLIVE SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop olives fine, mix with cream cheese, add a little sweet cream to
moisten, season with salt and paprika. Place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white or brown bread.


_DAIRY SANDWICH_

On thin slices of Swiss cheese, spread fresh butter and put the two
slices together.


_CREAM CHEESE AND PIMOLAS SANDWICH_

Mix one cream cheese with an equal amount of chopped pimolas; season
with salt and cayenne, and moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing.
Place between thin slices of lightly buttered white or brown bread.


_CREAM CHEESE AND PINEAPPLE SANDWICH_

Chop the pineapple fine and drain. Spread lightly buttered white bread
thinly with cream cheese; sprinkle with pineapple and press together,
then cut the sandwiches in thin, slender strips.


_CREAM CHEESE AND WALNUT SANDWICH_

One cup of walnut meats, chopped fine; add enough cream cheese to
make a paste; add salt and a bit of red pepper. Place between lightly
buttered white bread cut in fancy shapes.


_CREAM CHEESE AND NUT SANDWICH_

Chop English walnuts fine, mix with cream cheese and a little chopped
celery; add a dash of mayonnaise dressing. Place the mixture between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a sprig of
watercress.


_CREAM CHEESE AND BEET SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, lay a crisp lettuce
leaf; on that spread cream cheese, on top of the cheese sprinkle
chopped pickled beets. Cover with another slice of buttered bread.


_CREAM CHEESE AND CUCUMBER SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread spread cream cheese;
over same sprinkle chopped cucumbers that have been mixed with a little
French dressing. Cover with another slice of lightly buttered brown
bread.


_CREAM CHEESE AND GUAVA JELLY SANDWICH_

Spread an equal number of slices of lightly buttered white bread with
guava jelly and cream cheese. Put slices together and trim the edges.


_CREAM CHEESE AND GREEN PEPPER SANDWICH_

Spread lightly buttered white bread with cream cheese; on this lay thin
slices of green pepper that have been dipped in mayonnaise dressing.
Cover with another slice of bread, cut oblong, and garnish with a sprig
of parsley and an olive.


_CREAM CHEESE AND PARSLEY SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of Boston brown bread lightly buttered, with cream
cheese, mixed with a little chopped parsley. Put two slices together
and garnish with an olive.


_CREAM CHEESE AND LETTUCE SANDWICH_

Slice white bread very thin, when you have pared off the crust. Butter
smoothly and lightly. Spread one slice with cream cheese and lay upon
the other a crisp lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise
dressing. Put slices together. Garnish with an olive.


_CHEESE AND BAR-LE-DUC CURRANT SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with cream cheese;
sprinkle currants over the cheese; then a teaspoonful of maple syrup.
Cover with another slice of bread.


_TOASTED WAFERS WITH CREAM CHEESE_

Mix a cream cheese with cream and paprika to make a mixture that is
soft and yet will hold its shape. Just before serving, toast the wafers
and press a star of cheese upon each. (Use a star tube.) Finish with a
slice of pimola.


_RUSSIAN SANDWICH_

Spread zepherettes with cream cheese and cover with chopped olives
mixed with a little mayonnaise. Place a zepherette over each and press
together.


_ORIENTAL SANDWICH_

Mix one cake of cream cheese with a little maple syrup, then add sliced
maraschino cherries. Place between thin slices of lightly buttered
bread. Garnish with a spray of smilax and a cherry.


_DAINTY CHEESE SANDWICH_

A dainty cheese sandwich to serve at afternoon parties is made by
placing the halves of an English walnut on either side of a square of
cream cheese. Serve on a crisp lettuce leaf.


_MACAROON SANDWICH_

Be sure the macaroons are fresh. Lay a slice of fresh cream cheese
between two macaroons, pressing them firmly together. Keep in a cool
place until wanted.


_FAIRMONT SANDWICHES_

Work a small cream cheese until smooth, using a wooden spoon, and
season with salt. Chop red and green peppers separately and wring in
cheese-cloth to remove some of the moisture. Mix one-half of the cheese
with some of the red pepper, the other half the green pepper. Spread
four thin slices of white bread sparingly with butter, on the lower
slice spread the green pepper mixture, cover with another slice of
bread, on top of that spread a layer of the red pepper mixture, cover
with the third slice and spread that with the green pepper mixture.
Cover with the fourth slice of bread. Fold in cheese-cloth and press
under a weight, then cut in thin slices downward.


_ITALIAN SANDWICH_

Take an equal number of slices of white and graham bread, spread with
butter and cream cheese; on these put finely chopped olives that have
been mixed with a little mayonnaise dressing. Press slices together in
pairs with a crisp lettuce leaf between each pair, and cut diagonally.
Garnish with parsley.


_BUFFET SANDWICH_

One teacupful grated American or Parmesan cheese, one tablespoonful
of melted butter, one teaspoonful of made mustard, a little salt and
pepper. Mix well, spread on thin slices of lightly buttered rye bread.
Put two slices together and cut in triangles.


_BUMMERS CUSTARD SANDWICH_

Take a cake of Roquefort cheese and divide in thirds; moisten one third
with brandy, another third with olive oil, and the other third with
Worcestershire sauce. Mix all together and place between split water
biscuits toasted. Good for a stag lunch.




                                  NUT


_ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Chop English walnuts fine, and over them pour the following dressing;
five yolks of eggs well beaten, juice of two lemons, a good half-cup
of water, one teaspoonful of sugar, and a pinch of salt. Let it cook
until the eggs thicken. When cool, place between thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread.


_ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop fine a cupful of English walnut meats; moisten with a little thick
cream and place between a slice of brown bread and one of white lightly
buttered. Cut in rounds with a biscuit cutter.


_ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH NO. 3_

Chop English walnuts fine; moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing,
and place between thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread.


_ENGLISH WALNUT AND FIG SANDWICH_

Chop figs fine, adding enough water to make a smooth paste, and cook
slowly until of a consistency to spread. Flavor with a little orange
juice or grated candied orange peel. Chop one-half cup of English
walnuts fine, add to the fig paste filling. Place between thin slices
of white or brown bread lightly buttered, cut in fanciful shapes.


_ENGLISH WALNUT AND GINGER SANDWICH_

Three thin slices of lightly buttered white bread; between the first
and second place a layer of chopped, preserved ginger, mixed with a
little thick cream; and between the second and third slices, place a
layer of chopped English walnuts; then tie up each sandwich neatly with
blue baby ribbon.


_ENGLISH WALNUT AND RAISIN SANDWICH_

Chop equal quantities of English walnuts and raisins fine, mix with a
little cream, and place between thin slices of lightly buttered white
bread. Garnish top with a raisin.


_ENGLISH WALNUT AND DATE SANDWICH_

Chop English walnut meats fine, mix with an equal amount of chopped
dates; moisten with a little whipped cream and place mixture between
buttered crackers or thin slices of white bread.


_SALTED ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of Boston brown bread with butter; then chop English
walnuts fine, sprinkle with salt, and put a layer of the nuts between
two slices of bread.


_BLACK WALNUT SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered brown bread spread black walnut
meats chopped rather fine. Nice to serve with hot chocolate.


_CHESTNUT SANDWICH_

Shell and blanch the chestnuts, then boil fifteen minutes; drain and
cool, and when cool chop fine. Add an equal quantity of finely chopped
celery, moisten with a little French dressing, mix, and put between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, with a crisp lettuce leaf
between.


_PECAN SANDWICH_

One cup of chopped pecans, one cup of chopped dates, mixed with a
tablespoonful of whipped cream to moisten. Place between thin slices of
white or whole wheat bread.


_PECAN SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop pecan nuts very fine, moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing
and place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_PECAN SANDWICH NO. 3_

Mix one cup of finely chopped pecan nuts with a little chutney. Place
between thin slices of buttered white bread.


_PECAN AND ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Chop fine one-half cup each of pecan and walnut meats, add one-half cup
of olives stoned and chopped fine, moisten with a little mayonnaise
dressing and place between thin slices of lightly buttered graham
bread.


_HICKORY NUT SANDWICH_

Mix together chopped hickory nuts and pot cheese, add a dash of
paprika, and place between thin slices of either white or brown bread
lightly buttered. Garnish with an olive.


_HICKORY NUT AND CHEESE SANDWICH_

Beat to a cream one tablespoonful of butter, then add three heaping
tablespoonfuls of cream cheese. Mix thoroughly, adding a little sweet
cream if necessary to make creamy. Chop a quarter-pound of hickory nuts
fine, and blend with the cheese paste; season with salt, pepper, and
a little lemon juice. Spread on thin slices of brown bread. Put two
slices together and garnish with an olive.


_PEANUT SANDWICH_

Chop roasted and salted peanuts, mix with a little mayonnaise dressing,
place between thin slices of lightly buttered entire wheat bread.


_PEANUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop a cup of freshly roasted shelled peanuts very fine, mix with three
tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise dressing, add salt to taste, and sprinkle
upon lightly buttered slices of white bread. Put slices together and
cut in tiny squares.


_PEANUT SANDWICH NO. 3_

Chop peanuts fine or put through a coffee mill, salt to taste, and add
a little sherry or port wine to make a thick paste. Spread on thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread. Put two slices together and
garnish with a candied cherry.


_PEANUT SANDWICH NO. 4_

Cut white bread in rounds with the biscuit cutter, cover with whipped
cream slightly sweetened. Sprinkle chopped peanuts over the cream.
Cover with another round of bread and serve as soon as made.


_PEANUT AND BANANA SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread place a crisp
lettuce leaf that has been dipped in mayonnaise dressing; on this place
slices of banana and sprinkle with ground peanuts.


_PEANUT MAYONNAISE SANDWICH_

Heat a tablespoonful of butter in a pan and add the juice of a lemon.
Season with salt and pepper. To this gradually add a well beaten egg,
thinned with sour cream, adding it slowly, stirring the while to
prevent it from curdling. When it begins to thicken, remove and stir
in enough ground peanuts to make a good spreading butter. In preparing
sandwiches of this, cut bread thin, spread with the mayonnaise; and lay
between the slices a crisp lettuce leaf. Cut the sandwiches in fancy
shapes. Dainty for noon-day luncheon.


_ALMOND SANDWICH_

Cut white bread in rounds and lightly butter, put on a layer of finely
chopped almonds, add a sprinkling of salt and a dash of lemon juice;
cover with another round of bread and press a blanched nut in the
centre. Serve on a lettuce leaf.


_ALMOND SANDWICH NO. 2_

Whip one-half gill of sweet cream to a stiff froth; add one-half pound
of almonds, blanched and pounded to a paste, with a little rose or
orange flower water; add two tablespoonfuls of sugar and spread over
thin slices of white bread; roll into tiny cylinders or cut in narrow
strips.


_ALMOND SANDWICH NO. 3_

On thin slices of buttered Boston brown bread sprinkle finely chopped
almonds, cover with another slice of bread, and cut in squares.


_ALMOND AND CELERY SANDWICH_

Chop almonds fine and mix with twice the bulk of finely chopped celery;
moisten with a little mayonnaise dressing and put between thin slices
of lightly buttered white bread.


_ALMOND AND LEMON SANDWICH_

Grate the thin yellow rind of one lemon, being careful not to rub
off any of the bitter white pith; blanch and pound one-half pound of
almonds, adding slowly the juice of one lemon. When a smooth paste is
formed, add the grated lemon rind. Rub the yolks of two hard-boiled
eggs to a smooth paste, add the almond mixture, and spread over thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread. Cover with another slice of
bread and cut in triangles.


_TOASTED ALMOND SANDWICH_

Toast almonds to a light brown and grate; form into a paste with a
little lemon juice, add a little salt, spread on thin slices of lightly
buttered white bread and cover with another slice and cut in strips.




                                 SWEET


_ORANGE SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread place thin slices
of orange that have been lightly dusted with powdered sugar.


_ORANGE MARMALADE SANDWICH_

Spread thinly buttered white bread with orange marmalade. Put two
slices together and cut the sandwich in slender strips.


_ORANGE MARMALADE SANDWICH NO. 2_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread spread orange marmalade.
Put four slices together, put under a weight and when well pressed,
trim off the crusts and cut down in thin slices. Serve on lace paper
doily.


_DAINTY RIBBON SANDWICH_

Cut the crust from a loaf of white and of brown bread. Cut three slices
one-half inch thick from each loaf. Spread with butter and orange
marmalade. Put six slices together and press firmly. Trim the edges
evenly, then with a sharp knife cut into slices about three-quarters of
an inch thick. Place the sandwich on a lace paper doily. Serve as soon
as made.


_GEM SANDWICH_

Grate orange peel very fine, add a dash of ginger, spread thin slices
of buttered white bread with Neufchatel cheese, sprinkle orange peel
and ginger over the cheese. Put slices together. Garnish with an olive.


_LEMON SANDWICH_

Slice a lemon very thin and remove the rind, sprinkle with powdered
sugar and place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread cut
round. Garnish top with a candied cherry.


_FRUIT SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of white bread with chocolate cream butter, on
this place a layer of fresh fruit such as bananas, strawberries, or
raspberries; cover with another slice, and garnish top with a sugared
berry.


_STRAWBERRY SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, place strawberries
cut in halves, sprinkle with powdered sugar. Garnish top of sandwich
with a whole sugared berry.


_GRAPE SANDWICH_

Remove skins and seeds from one pound of white grapes. Chop grapes, one
large apple, and two stalks of celery fine. Mix with a little French
dressing and place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.
Cut sandwiches in strips.


_RED RASPBERRY SANDWICH_

Mix berries with thick cream and a little powdered sugar and place
between thinly cut slices of buttered white bread. Garnish top with a
berry.


_APPLE SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of buttered white bread place thin slices of tart
apples, which have been steeped for an hour in a mixture of lemon juice
and sugar.


_APPLE SANDWICH NO. 2_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread spread baked apple.
Dust with powdered sugar. Cover with another slice of bread and cut in
strips.


_APPLE BUTTER SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, spread apple butter.
Sprinkle chopped candied orange peel, cover with another slice of
bread.


_PINEAPPLE SANDWICH_

One cup of pineapple cut fine, two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice, and
one cupful of sugar. Cook until thick, and when cold spread upon lady
fingers and press together. White bread may be used.


_CHERRY SANDWICH_

One cup of maraschino cherries cut in small pieces, mixed with one-half
cup of English walnuts chopped fine. Moisten with whipped cream. Spread
on thin slices of white buttered bread, put two slices together and cut
in squares. Garnish with a maraschino cherry.


_CHERRY SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop a quarter of a pound of candied cherries fine; add a few drops of
sherry. Mix and spread on rounds of lightly buttered white bread. Cover
with another slice and garnish with a candied cherry.


_CANDIED CHERRY SANDWICH_

Chop candied cherries very fine, add as many seeded raisins chopped
fine, moisten with orange juice. Mix to a paste and spread on thin
slices of white bread lightly buttered. Put two slices and garnish top
with a cherry.


_CANDIED CHERRY SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop candied cherries fine, moisten with orange juice, place between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish top with a cherry.


_CREAM AND CANDIED FRUIT SANDWICH_

Cut candied cherries fine and moisten with a few drops of wine. Cut
sponge cake in squares and cover with whipped cream that has been
sweetened and flavored and chilled; on top of this sprinkle the
candied cherries. Cover with another piece of the cake and serve at
once.


_CAKE AND CANDIED CHERRY SANDWICH_

Cut sponge cake into slices a quarter of an inch thick; cut the slices
into rounds. Chop candied cherries fine, moisten with a little orange
juice. Spread the mixture on the rounds of cake; press two pieces
together. Garnish with a candied cherry.


_TUTTI-FRUTTI SANDWICH_

Chop candied cherries, peaches, and apricots, add a little sherry wine
and mix to a paste. Spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white
bread, cover with another slice and cut in strips.


_BANANA SANDWICH_

Mash ripe bananas; add a dash of lemon juice; sweeten to taste. Place
between thin slices of buttered white bread cut oblong.


_BANANA SANDWICH NO. 2_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread spread mayonnaise
dressing then add thin slices of bananas; cover with another slice of
bread. Serve on a lettuce leaf.


_BANANA AND CHERRY SANDWICH_

Mash three bananas fine, add one-half cup of chopped maraschino
cherries, a tablespoonful of powdered sugar, moisten with a little
thick cream, mix, and place between thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread. Garnish with a cherry.


_BANANA TOAST SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of lightly buttered graham bread, place three
slices of banana; toast quickly to a light brown. Serve hot.


_BANANA AND TOASTED BROWN BREAD SANDWICH_

Between thin slices of buttered brown bread from which the crusts have
been removed, place slices of banana, press together and place in
the oven and leave until bread is toasted. Serve hot. Very good for
invalids.


_ORIENTAL SANDWICH_

Mash four bananas; add one-half cup of maraschino cherries, two
tablespoonfuls of honey, and two tablespoonfuls of sweet thick cream.
Mix and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, cover
with another slice, and garnish top with a cherry.


_FIVE O’CLOCK TEA_

Mash bananas fine, add an equal amount of mashed red raspberries,
moisten with a little sweet thick cream. Place between thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread. Cut in fancy shapes.


_FIG SANDWICH_

Chop figs fine, moisten with a little maple syrup and work to a paste;
spread mixture on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, roll,
and tie with baby ribbon.


_FIG SANDWICH NO. 2_

One-half pound of finely chopped figs, one-third cup of sugar, half-cup
of boiling water, and two tablespoonfuls of lemon juice; mix these
ingredients and cook in a double boiler until thick. When cool spread
mixture on thin slices of buttered white bread, cover with another
slice and cut in fancy shapes.


_FIG SANDWICH NO. 3_

Stew figs and chop; season with a little wine and place between lightly
buttered slices of white or graham bread.


_FAVORITE SANDWICH_

Chop stewed figs, add a dash of lemon juice, spread on thin slices of
lightly buttered white bread, and cover with another slice. Garnish
with a spray of smilax.


_FIG AND NUT SANDWICH_

Cut rounds of bread with a biscuit cutter and lightly butter. For each
sandwich use two dried figs, fill the figs with the English walnut
meats chopped; roll the figs in powdered sugar and place between the
rounds of bread.


_FIG AND NUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Chop figs and English walnuts fine; moisten with whipped cream; place
between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with
smilax.


_FIG AND ROLL_

Split twelve figs, scrape out the soft portion and rub this to a paste;
butter thin slices of fresh white or brown bread, remove the crust,
spread on the fig paste and roll the bread carefully; press for a
moment, then roll it in a piece of tissue paper, pressing the ends as
you would an old-fashioned motto, or it may be tied with baby ribbon of
any color.


_LADY FINGER SANDWICH_

Chop figs fine and rub to a smooth paste; add a dash of orange juice
and spread on lady fingers; press two fingers together and garnish with
a spray of smilax.


_DATE AND FIG SANDWICH_

To two cups of dates with stones removed, add one cup of washed figs,
also one cup of seeded raisins; chop very fine and add enough water to
make a paste to spread easily. Let this boil one minute, and when cool
spread between thin slices of buttered white bread, cover with another
slice and garnish top with a sugared date.


_DATE AND NUT SANDWICH_

Between slices of brown bread lightly buttered and cut thin, place this
filling; dates stoned and chopped fine, walnut meats chopped fine,
moistened with a little sherry wine. Garnish with a spray of smilax.


_DATE AND ORANGE SANDWICH_

Remove the pulp and inner skin from six oranges, cut into small pieces,
add one pound of chopped dates and a half-cup of walnut meats chopped
fine; add half-cup of powdered sugar, moisten with a little sherry or
port wine, and place the mixture between slices of lightly buttered
white bread.


_RAISIN SANDWICH_

Cut large raisins in halves with a sharp knife; take out the seeds, dip
in brandy or sherry; do not let them remain a moment in the liquor; cut
white bread in rounds, spread with butter, and put a layer of raisins
between the two rounds of bread. Garnish top with a raisin and serve
with lemonade.


_FRUIT JELLY SANDWICH_

Soak one box of gelatine in one cup of cold water, and dissolve it
in one cup of boiling water. Add one cup of sugar, one-half cup of
lemon juice, one cup of orange juice, and half a cup of mashed red
raspberries. When cool spread on squares of sponge cake, or thinly cut
and lightly buttered white bread. Cover with another slice.


_JELLY AND NUT SANDWICH_

Chop English walnuts fine and stir into whipped cream; spread currant
jelly on thin slices of lightly buttered white bread; on top of that
spread the walnuts and cream, cover that with currant jelly, and lastly
cover with another slice of bread. Serve as soon as made.


_CURRANT JELLY SANDWICH_

Cut fresh bread in as thin slices as possible. Butter them evenly,
spread with currant jelly and sprinkle with fresh grated cocoanut; roll
each slice separately and tie the roll with baby ribbon. Make when
ready to serve.


_CURRANT JELLY AND ENGLISH WALNUT SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with currant jelly
and sprinkle with finely chopped English walnut meats. Cover with
another slice and cut in oblong shape.


_TOMATO JELLY SANDWICH_

One cupful of boiled and strained tomatoes, seasoned with salt, pepper,
paprika and a little tabasco sauce. Dissolve quarter box of gelatine in
one-half cup of water, add to the tomatoes, and mix thoroughly. Cool in
forms that will slice in shape of sandwiches to be used. Place between
thin slices of lightly buttered white bread.


_QUINCE JELLY AND NUT SANDWICH_

Mix a cupful of quince jelly with half a cupful of finely chopped
hickory or pecan nuts and spread on thin slices of lightly buttered
white bread. Cover with another slice and cut in squares.


_QUINCE JELLY SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of lightly buttered white bread with quince jelly.
Put slices together, cut in squares, and garnish with a spray of
maidenhair fern.


_GOOSEBERRY JAM SANDWICH_

Spread thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread with
gooseberry jam; place slices together and cut in slender strips.
Garnish with a spray of smilax. Serve as soon as made.


_CLARET JELLY SANDWICH_

Soak one box of gelatine in one cup of cold water, then dissolve in
one cup of boiling water, add one cup of sugar and strain. When cold,
add the juice of half a lemon, and one cup of claret and set in a cool
place. When ready for use, cover thin slices of lightly buttered white
bread with the jelly, cover with another slice of buttered bread and
cut in strips.


_MARBLED BREAD SANDWICH_

Make an equal number of white and brown bread sandwiches, lightly
spread with butter and currant jelly, press sandwiches together in
alternating colors, cut in thin strips. Serve on lace paper doily.


_BANANA SANDWICH_

Place peeled bananas, sliced across, between thin slices of buttered
brown bread from which the crusts have been trimmed. Place in the
oven and leave until bread is toasted and you will have delicious and
nourishing hot sandwiches. Very good for invalids.


_MARRON SANDWICH_

Cut the bread in rounds with a biscuit cutter; put a _marron glace_
in the centre and around it whipped cream that has been sweetened and
flavored. Nice for afternoon luncheon.


_HONEY SANDWICH_

Spread thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread with honey;
put slices together and garnish with a pansy. Serve as soon as made.


_HONEY AND BANANA SANDWICH_

Mixed strained honey with mashed ripe bananas; place between thinly cut
slices of buttered white bread.


_FRENCH TEA SANDWICH_

On thinly cut slices of lightly buttered white bread cut round, spread
cream cheese and currant jelly. Cover with another slice and sprinkle
top of sandwich with crumbs of pistache.


_DAINTY PEANUT SANDWICH_

One cup of sugar and enough water to cover; boil until it threads from
spoon; stir this into the white of an egg beaten stiff. Add one cup of
peanuts ground fine; spread the paste on salted wafers; let stand a
while before serving.


_VERANDA SANDWICH_

Chop crystallized ginger fine, moisten with a dash of orange juice;
place between thin slices of lightly buttered white bread; cut in fancy
shapes and garnish each with a spray of smilax.


_PUFF PASTE SANDWICH_

Roll puff paste very thin; cut round with a biscuit cutter; bake to a
delicate brown. Add chopped almonds to apple or peach marmalade and
place the mixture between two rounds of pastry.


_DREAM SANDWICH_

Cold chopped boiled sweetened prunes, mix with English walnuts chopped
fine, moisten with a little of the prune syrup, and place between thin
slices of lightly buttered white bread. Garnish with a spray of smilax.


_CHOCOLATE SANDWICH_

Melt a teaspoonful of butter in a saucepan, stir into it all the
unsweetened chocolate (bitter) it will take up. Grate the chocolate
directly into the butter. Stir until butter and chocolate are
thoroughly mixed. Take from the fire and let it get cold before
spreading on thin slices of graham bread, lightly buttered. Cover with
another slice and cut in strips.


_CHOCOLATE AND NUT SANDWICH_

Take two tablespoonfuls of sweetened chocolate, mix with a little water
and heat to a thick paste; chop fine a half-pint of English walnuts or
hickory nuts, stir the chocolate paste when cooling, add the nuts, and
spread thinly on narrow wafers. Let harden, then press the two wafers
together.


_MAPLE CREAM SANDWICH_

One-half pound of maple sugar, one-half pound of brown sugar, one-half
cup of water, and one-half teaspoonful of cream of tartar; boil these
together until they form a soft ball when dipped into cold water. When
nearly cold, beat with a fork until thick and creamy; spread on an
equal number of thin round slices of buttered white and entire wheat
bread, and place together in pairs, one of each kind of bread.


_MAPLE SUGAR SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread spread maple sugar,
put slices together and cut with a maple leaf cutter. Serve with hot
coffee.


_LOG CABIN SANDWICH_

Boil one cupful of maple syrup, one-half cupful chopped dates, one-half
cupful chopped almonds, one-half cupful pineapple together, let cook
for five minutes, take from fire, and add teaspoonful of lemon juice.
Cut the bread in long thin strips and remove the crust. Spread with
the mixture. Put slices together and wrap in oiled paper; let stand a
few hours, when the paper can be removed and they will keep the shape
desired.


_GINGER SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered graham bread, sprinkle finely
chopped Canton ginger; press slices together.


_GINGER AND ORANGE SANDWICH_

Soften Neufchatel cheese with a little cream; spread on thin slices
of white bread and cover with finely minced candied orange peel and
preserved ginger; cover with another slice of bread and garnish with a
spray of maidenhair fern.


_CHESTNUT AND PRUNE SANDWICH_

Boil chestnuts twenty minutes; peel and chop fine, add an equal amount
of cooked prunes chopped; moisten with a little cream and place between
thin slices of lightly buttered whole wheat bread. Garnish top with a
maraschino cherry.


_HALLOWEEN SANDWICH_

One cup of celery, one orange cut fine, one-half cup of raisins
seeded and halved; add one-half cup of grated apple to one-half cup
of mayonnaise and mix with this; place between thin slices of lightly
buttered white or whole wheat bread. Garnish with a spray of smilax.


_INDIA SANDWICH_

One cup each preserved ginger and candied orange peel chopped fine;
mix with one-half cup of thick cream and spread, on white bread thinly
buttered. Garnish with stick of candied orange peel.


_WHIPPED CREAM SANDWICH_

One cup of thick cream, one tablespoonful of powdered sugar. Beat until
solid, then add three drops of vanilla, let it become chilled, then
spread on lady fingers, press together and serve as soon as made.


_SCHOOL SANDWICH_

On thin slices of lightly buttered white bread, spread brown sugar;
cover with another slice of bread and wrap in wax paper.


_COCOANUT SANDWICH_

One and one-half cup of grated cocoanut, one-half cup of English
walnuts chopped fine, one tablespoonful of rose water, three
tablespoonfuls of sugar; mix well, moisten with three tablespoonfuls
of thick cream. Spread mixture on thin slices of buttered white bread,
cover with another slice and cut in strips.


_COCOANUT SANDWICH NO. 2_

Roll out one-half pound of puff paste until one-fourth of an inch
thick, then place it in a baking tin and bake in a hot oven until a
golden brown; when done, let it get cold; whip one-half pint of cream
to a stiff dry froth, add to it three tablespoonfuls each of powdered
white sugar and desiccated cocoanut. Cut the pastry into strips three
inches long by one inch wide; spread some of the cocoanut cream on
each piece, put two pieces together and sprinkle powdered white sugar
thickly over them.


_NUT AND FRUIT SANDWICH_

Mash half-pound of pitted prunes, mix them with a half-pound of
seedless raisins, half-pound of stoned dates, and the same quantity of
washed figs, quarter of a pound of blanched almonds, a quarter of a
pound of peeled Brazil nuts, and one pound of pecans. Put through the
meat chopper, add the juice of two oranges and knead the mixture with
your hands; pack it down into baking powder boxes or into any round tin
and stand it aside in a cold place; when wanted for use, remove from
the tins, cut thin, and place slices between lightly buttered white
bread cut round. Garnish top with a maraschino cherry.


_FUDGE SANDWICH_

Melt on tin in oven, fudge or fresh chocolate creams until soft enough
to be spread; spread wafer crackers with this filling, tie each two
with white baby ribbon. Serve with lemonade.


_VIOLET SANDWICH_

Cover the butter with violets over night; slice white bread thin and
spread with the butter; put slices together and cover with the petals
of the violets.


_ROSE-LEAF SANDWICH_

Flavor fresh unsalted butter with rose by packing in closed jar with
a layer of rose leaves and leaving several hours. Any fragrant rose
will answer. Cut white bread into dainty strips or circles, spread with
the perfumed butter, put one or two rose leaves between the slices,
allowing the edges to show.


_CLOVER SANDWICH_

Trim the crust from a loaf of bread and place bread in a stone jar
with clover blossoms; wrap the butter in cheese-cloth and also place
in the jar; leave over night. Cut the bread thin and spread with the
clover-scented butter; put two slices together and garnish with a
clover blossom.


_NASTURTIUM SANDWICH_

Cover the bread and butter with nasturtium flowers over night; cut
white bread thin and spread lightly with the butter. Put two nasturtium
flowers between the slices.


_CHINESE NUT SANDWICH_

Stone two cups of Chinese nuts, moisten with three tablespoonfuls of
thick cream, sweetened with a little honey; spread on slices of lightly
buttered white bread. Cover with another slice and cut in squares.


_CREAM SANDWICH_

Cream four ounces of butter, add gradually four ounces of brown sugar,
four ounces of fine flour, four eggs one by one, a squeeze of lemon
juice or a tablespoonful of rose water, and lastly a teaspoonful of
baking powder. When thoroughly mixed, bake in shallow tins. Whip up
till perfectly thick a quarter of a pint of cream, spread this on
half the strips and cover with the other sandwich-fashion. Ice these
sandwiches over with chocolate icing.




                             MISCELLANEOUS


_BOSTON BAKED BEAN SANDWICH_

Press cold baked beans through a colander, add two stalks of celery
chopped fine, a teaspoonful of horse-radish, and a little tomato
catsup; mix and spread on buttered slices of Boston brown bread, cover
with another slice, and garnish with a radish and a pickle.


_NEW ENGLAND SANDWICH_

Mash beans that have been cooked well, add a dash of catsup, lay on
a crisp lettuce leaf between lightly buttered white or brown bread.
Garnish with a pickle.


_MEXICAN SANDWICH_

Put large square salted crackers into the oven to heat. When warm, put
on each cracker a large tablespoonful of baked beans that has been
mixed with a little catsup heated with butter and highly seasoned.


_POTATO SANDWICH_

Run three good sized boiled potatoes through the potato ricer, season
with salt and pepper, add the yolks of four hard-boiled eggs that have
been rubbed to a paste, and one tablespoonful of melted butter. Mix
thoroughly and place between thin slices of lightly buttered brown
bread. Garnish with a pickle.


_POTATO AND HAM SANDWICH_

Into a pint of well seasoned mashed potatoes, stir two eggs without
beating; spread two tablespoonfuls of this potato out smoothly, and lay
on it a slice of neatly trimmed boiled ham. Cover this with the potato,
pinch the edges together. Fry in butter until a delicate brown.


_RICE SANDWICH_

Creole rice may be shaped to a circle, in which make a cavity; leave
this to stand in a cool place until firm; when so, cut in half,
horizontally. Spread peach preserves neatly on lower ring, mask
well with syrup. Put on the upper ring and mask well with the syrup.
Put in a cool place until ready to serve; cut V-shape and serve with
unflavored cream.


_POPCORN SANDWICH_

Pass two cupfuls of freshly popped corn through the meat chopper, place
this in the chopping bowl, add a dash of salt and cayenne pepper, five
boned sardines, a dash of Worcestershire, and enough tomato catsup to
form a paste. Spread this on circles of hot buttered toast. Sprinkle
with Parmesan cheese and crisp in hot oven. Serve as soon as made.


_DYSPEPTIC SANDWICH_

Spread thin slices of gluten bread with peanut butter, mixed with crisp
brown bread crumbs, put the two slices together, and cut in strips.


_MOSAIC SANDWICH_

Cut two slices each of white and dark graham bread; cream one-quarter
cup of butter until white. Spread a slice of white bread with the
creamed butter, then place a slice of graham bread on it; then spread
graham bread with creamed butter; repeat. Place a light weight on all
four slices. When butter hardens remove the weight, then cut in thin
slices downward.


_SANDWICH ROLLS_

Take four cupfuls of light bread dough, spread it on the breadboard and
roll thin. Spread this sheet with one cupful of butter, fold it up and
roll out again; fold as before and let it stand a few minutes in a warm
place. Now roll and fold twice more. Let stand a short time, roll out
and cut into biscuits, place in pans, not touching, brush over the tops
with a little lard and hot water. Let rise one hour and bake. These are
very light and will pull apart in flakes. Any filling may be used.




                                CANAPES


_CANAPES_

Canapes are _savories_, or appetizers, usually served before the first
course at dinners, luncheons, or chafing dish suppers. One slice only
is used for each canape. They may be dipped in melted butter, toasted
or fried and cut into fancy shapes. The mixture is spread on top, the
top is garnished.


_CAVIARE CANAPES_

Season the caviare with a dash of lemon juice and a very little onion
juice. Spread mixture on toasted rounds of white bread and sprinkle top
with finely chopped hard-boiled egg. Garnish with cress.


_HERRING CANAPES_

Toast slices of white bread, remove the crusts and cut oblong. Spread
them with butter mixed with a very little French mustard, cover with
finely minced sour pickle; place upon each two boneless herrings.
Sprinkle finely chopped hard-cooked egg yolk over top.


_ANCHOVY CANAPES_

Toast rounds of white bread to a nice even brown; place two boneless
anchovies on a round of toast, and sprinkle over same the yolks of
hard-boiled eggs; dust with white pepper and garnish with a slice of
lemon.


_LOBSTER CANAPES_

Chop the meat of a boiled lobster fine, season with pepper and salt,
a dash of lemon juice, and a little mayonnaise dressing and spread on
rounds of toasted bread. Garnish with a sprig of parsley.


_CRAB CANAPES_

Put the contents of a can of crab meat into a saucepan, add one
tablespoonful of sherry and let simmer until the liquid disappears. Fry
one small finely minced onion in a tablespoonful of butter until brown,
add a cupful of milk that has blended with a tablespoonful of flour,
let it come to a boil, then add the crab meat and let simmer for ten
minutes; remove from the fire and when cool spread on rounds of toast
and sprinkle with grated Parmesan cheese; place in a hot oven until a
golden brown. Serve hot.


_SARDINE CANAPES_

Pound boneless and skinless sardines to a paste; moisten with a little
olive oil, and a dash of lemon juice; spread mixture on thin rounds of
toasted bread. Arrange leaves of watercress around the edge and put
finely chopped hard-boiled egg in the centre.


_SARDINE CANAPES NO. 2_

Take a box of sardines, remove bone and skin, rub to a paste with three
ounces of fresh butter, and gradually add four tablespoonfuls of thick
cream, until a paste is formed. Spread the paste over toasted rounds of
white bread; sprinkle chopped olives over the whole.


_SARDELLEN CANAPES_

Toast a thin biscuit cracker and lightly butter. Put a slice of
hard-boiled egg in the centre and coil one well cleaned sardellen
around the egg. Garnish with a slice of lemon.


_SALMON CANAPES_

Toast rounds of white bread and spread with melted butter; next with
finely flaked salmon, to which add a dash of Worcestershire sauce, and
a drop of olive oil; sprinkle finely chopped hard-boiled egg over top.
Garnish with a small sprig of parsley.


_FISH CANAPES_

Rub a quarter of a pound of any kind of cooked fish to a paste; season
with pepper and salt, and a few drops of onion juice. Moisten with one
tablespoonful of sauce tartare. Spread the above mixture on rounds of
buttered brown bread, sprinkle over top finely chopped dill pickles.


_HAM CANAPES_

Mince and mash to a smooth paste half a pound of cold boiled ham, add
two tablespoonfuls of currant jelly, one tablespoon of soft butter, and
a half a teaspoon of curry powder or half this amount of paprika if the
latter be preferred. Spread this paste on round pieces of toast and
garnish with chopped, cooked eggs, whites and yolks separate, minced
pickles, green peppers, and olives.


_HAM CANAPES NO. 2_

Cut bread in rounds one-fourth inch thick. Saute in butter; spread with
finely chopped ham mixed to a paste with a little melted butter and
seasoned. Sprinkle top with finely chopped hard-boiled eggs.


_BACON CANAPES_

Cut bread in squares one-fourth inch thick, saute the bacon fat. Spread
with a little French mustard, cover with fried bacon finely chopped,
and sprinkle with finely chopped pimolas.


_TONGUE CANAPES_

Toast one-fourth inch slices of graham bread, cut in rounds and fried
in butter; mix cooked tongue that has been chopped fine with creamed
butter till it is a paste, and add one tablespoonful of capers to a
cupful of tongue. Spread on bread, add a dash of salt and cayenne, and
sprinkle with a little finely chopped watercress.


_CHICKEN CANAPES_

Chop fine the white meat of a chicken and two stalks of celery. Season
with salt, pepper, and vinegar. Let stand a few minutes, then drain
dry; add a little mayonnaise dressing and mix well. Serve on rounds
of toast that have been spread lightly with melted butter. Sprinkle
chopped chives over the whole.


_NUT AND OLIVE CANAPES_

Fry rounds of white bread in butter; mix equal quantities of chopped
English walnuts and olives with enough mayonnaise dressing to moisten.
Spread on bread and garnish with chopped pimentos.


_TOMATO AND CUCUMBER CANAPES_

Saute rounds of white bread in butter. Fry slices of tomato in deep
fat; place one slice of tomato on each round of bread. Dust with salt
and pepper, and lightly spread with mayonnaise dressing followed by a
thin slice of cucumber. Sprinkle top with finely chopped hard-boiled
egg.




                                 INDEX




                            LIST OF RECIPES


                                 FISH

  Oyster                                                               9

  Fried Oyster                                                         9

  Deviled Oyster                                                       9

  Oyster Loaf                                                         10

  Oyster and Caviare                                                  10

  Grill Room Oyster                                                   10

  Oyster Salad                                                        11

  Caviare                                                             11

  Caviare No. 2                                                       11

  Caviare—Lobster                                                     12

  Roe                                                                 12

  Shad-Roe                                                            12

  Shad-Roe and Cucumber                                               13

  Lobster                                                             13

  Lobster No. 2                                                       13

  Lobster No. 3                                                       14

  Lobster No. 4                                                       14

  Lobster Salad                                                       15

  Dutch Lunch                                                         15

  Lobster and Mushroom                                                15

  Sardine                                                             16

  Sardine No. 2                                                       16

  Sardine No. 3                                                       17

  Sardine No. 4                                                       17

  Sardine No. 5                                                       18

  Sardine and Cheese                                                  18

  Sardine Club                                                        18

  Spanish                                                             19

  Broiled Sardine                                                     19

  Austrian                                                            20

  Salmon                                                              20

  Salmon No. 2                                                        21

  Salmon No. 3                                                        21

  Salmon No. 4                                                        21

  Salmon and Ham                                                      22

  Pimento                                                             22

  Shrimp                                                              22

  Shrimp Salad                                                        23

  Lenten                                                              23

  Crab                                                                23

  Mock Crab                                                           24

  Anchovy                                                             24

  Anchovy No. 2                                                       24

  Fish                                                                25

  Fish and Egg                                                        25

  Sardellen Paste                                                     25

  Sardellen                                                           26

  Halibut                                                             26

  Halibut No. 2                                                       26

  Anchovy Toast                                                       27

  French                                                              27

  Hot Creamed Codfish                                                 27


                                  EGG

  Egg                                                                 31

  Egg No. 2                                                           31

  Fried Egg                                                           31

  Ribbon                                                              32

  Egg and Lettuce                                                     32

  Egg and Olive                                                       33

  Egg and Cucumber                                                    33

  Egg and Brown Bread                                                 33

  Puritan                                                             34

  Gold                                                                34

  Montpelier                                                          35

  Japanese Egg                                                        35

  Brown Egg                                                           35

  Easter                                                              36

  Chevy Chase                                                         36

  Outing                                                              36

  Traveller’s                                                         37

  Curried Egg and Oyster                                              37


                                 SALAD

  Tomato                                                              41

  Tomato No. 2                                                        41

  Tomato and Onion                                                    41

  Tomato and Horse-Radish                                             42

  Tomato and Nut                                                      42

  Specialty                                                           42

  Epicurean                                                           43

  Beet                                                                43

  Beet and Cheese                                                     43

  Watercress                                                          44

  Watercress and Egg                                                  44

  Watercress and Egg No. 2                                            44

  Mushroom                                                            45

  Western                                                             45

  Piccalilli                                                          45

  Green Pepper and Egg                                                46

  Nasturtium                                                          46

  Ripe Olive                                                          46

  Olive Squares                                                       47

  Olive and Pepper                                                    47

  Olive and Chicken Liver                                             47

  Olive and Cheese                                                    48

  Olive and Caper                                                     48

  Olive and Caper No. 2                                               48

  Olive and Nut                                                       49

  Cucumber                                                            49

  Cucumber No. 2                                                      49

  Cucumber No. 3                                                      50

  Cucumber No. 4                                                      50

  Cucumber and Chives                                                 50

  Cucumber and Cheese                                                 51

  Cucumber and Red Pepper                                             51

  Cucumber and Onion                                                  51

  Dill                                                                52

  Spinach                                                             52

  Onion                                                               52

  Mustard                                                             53

  Mosaic                                                              53

  Horse-Radish                                                        53

  Celery                                                              54

  Celery No. 2                                                        54

  Celery and English Walnut                                           54

  Celery and English Walnut No. 2                                     55

  Lettuce                                                             55

  Lettuce No. 2                                                       55

  Boston Brown Bread                                                  56

  Bar Harbor                                                          56

  Radish                                                              56

  String Bean                                                         57

  Apple and Celery                                                    57

  Apple and Grape                                                     57

  Apple Salad                                                         58

  Waldorf                                                             58

  Novelty                                                             58

  St. Patrick                                                         59

  Tartar                                                              59

  Grape Fruit                                                         59

  Cherry Salad                                                        60

  Pineapple Salad                                                     60

  Mock Oyster                                                         60


                                 MEAT

  Roast Beef                                                          63

  Roast Beef No. 2                                                    63

  Hot Roast Beef                                                      63

  Roast Beef and Tomato                                               64

  Roast Beef and Jam                                                  64

  Roast Beef Salad                                                    64

  Rare Beef                                                           65

  Corned Beef                                                         65

  Chipped Beef                                                        65

  Picnic                                                              65

  Cannibal                                                            66

  Meat and Mushroom                                                   66

  Fried Cold Meat                                                     67

  Broiled Steak                                                       67

  Ham                                                                 67

  Ham No. 2                                                           67

  Ham No. 3                                                           68

  Ham No. 4                                                           68

  Hot Ham                                                             68

  Hot Ham No. 2                                                       69

  Ham Fingers                                                         69

  Ham and Egg                                                         69

  Ham and Egg Club                                                    70

  Ham and Nut                                                         70

  Potted Ham                                                          71

  Potted Ham No. 2                                                    71

  Party Sandwich Rolls                                                71

  Westphalian Ham                                                     72

  Automobile                                                          72

  Stag                                                                72

  Boston Club                                                         73

  Veal                                                                73

  Calf’s Liver                                                        74

  Calf’s Liver and Bacon                                              74

  Texas                                                               74

  Tongue                                                              75

  Tongue No. 2                                                        75

  Tongue and Egg                                                      75

  Deviled Tongue                                                      76

  Tongue and Tomato                                                   76

  Excursion                                                           77

  Lamb                                                                77

  Lamb No. 2                                                          77

  Mutton                                                              78

  Mutton No. 2                                                        78

  Mutton and Pea                                                      78

  Summer                                                              79

  Potted Meat                                                         80

  Farmer                                                              80

  Pork                                                                80

  Mince Meat                                                          81

  Southern (Bacon)                                                    81

  Tip-Top                                                             81

  Chicken                                                             82

  Chicken No. 2                                                       82

  Chicken No. 3                                                       82

  Chicken No. 4                                                       83

  Hot Chicken                                                         83

  Chicken Liver                                                       83

  Pressed Chicken                                                     84

  Jellied Chicken                                                     84

  Cream of Chicken                                                    85

  Chicken and Egg                                                     85

  Chicken Surprise                                                    86

  Chicken and Ham                                                     86

  Chicken and Ham (Club)                                              86

  Chicken and English Walnut                                          87

  Chicken and Almond                                                  87

  Chicken and Green Pepper                                            88

  Aspic Jelly                                                         88

  Reception                                                           89

  Queen                                                               89

  French Roll                                                         89

  Creole                                                              90

  Windsor                                                             90

  Biscuit                                                             91

  Saratoga                                                            91

  Sheridan Park Club                                                  92

  Colonial (Club)                                                     92

  Chicken and _Pâté de Foie Gras_                                     93

  Chicken Biscuit Finger                                              93

  Pressed Mock Chicken                                                94

  Country Club                                                        94

  Chicago Club                                                        95

  Turkey                                                              95

  Hot Turkey                                                          95

  Turkey Club                                                         96

  Game                                                                96

  Truffle                                                             96

  Head Cheese                                                         97

  Sweetbread                                                          97

  Sausage                                                             97

  German Bologna                                                      98

  Frankfurt Sausage                                                   98

  Salami (Italian Sausage)                                            98

  _Pâté de foie gras_                                                 99

  _Pâté de foie gras_ No. 2                                           99

  _Pâté de foie gras_ No. 3                                          100

  Imitation _Pâté de foie gras_                                      100


                                CHEESE

  American Cheese                                                    103

  American No. 2                                                     103

  American No. 3                                                     103

  American No. 4                                                     104

  Cheese Rare-bit                                                    104

  Brown Bread and America Cheese                                     105

  Brown Bread and American Cheese No. 2                              105

  Fried Cheese                                                       105

  Neufchatel                                                         106

  Neufchatel and Nut                                                 106

  Neufchatel and Olive                                               106

  Harlequin                                                          107

  Berlin                                                             107

  Limburger Cheese                                                   107

  Roquefort                                                          108

  German Club                                                        108

  Parmesan                                                           108

  Parmesan and Radish                                                109

  Parmesan and Celery                                                109

  Seafoam                                                            110

  French Cheese                                                      110

  Morocco                                                            110

  Club House                                                         111

  Cottage                                                            111

  Cottage No. 2                                                      112

  Gruyere                                                            112

  Cottage and Olive                                                  112

  Bohemian                                                           113

  Dutch                                                              113

  Waukesha Cheese                                                    113

  Imperial Cheese                                                    114

  Swiss Cheese                                                       114

  Swiss Cheese No. 2                                                 114

  Green Cheese                                                       115

  Swiss and Nut                                                      115

  Cream Cheese and Olive                                             115

  Cream Cheese and Olive No. 2                                       116

  Dairy                                                              116

  Cream Cheese and Pimolas                                           116

  Cream Cheese and Pineapple                                         117

  Cream Cheese and Walnut                                            117

  Cream Cheese and Nut                                               117

  Cream Cheese and Beet                                              118

  Cream Cheese and Cucumber                                          118

  Cream Cheese and Guava Jelly                                       118

  Cream Cheese and Green Pepper                                      119

  Cream Cheese and Parsley                                           119

  Cream Cheese and Lettuce                                           119

  Cream Cheese and Bar-le-Duc Currant                                120

  Toasted Wafers with Cream Cheese                                   120

  Russian                                                            121

  Oriental                                                           121

  Dainty Cheese                                                      121

  Macaroon                                                           122

  Fairmont                                                           122

  Italian                                                            123

  Buffet                                                             123

  Bummers Custard Sandwich                                           123


                                  NUT

  English Walnut                                                     127

  English Walnut No. 2                                               127

  English Walnut No. 3                                               127

  English Walnut and Fig                                             128

  English Walnut and Ginger                                          128

  English Walnut and Raisin                                          129

  English Walnut and Date                                            129

  Salted English Walnut                                              129

  Black Walnut                                                       130

  Chestnut                                                           130

  Pecan                                                              130

  Pecan No. 2                                                        131

  Pecan No. 3                                                        131

  Pecan and English Walnut                                           131

  Hickory Nut                                                        132

  Hickory Nut and Cheese                                             132

  Peanut                                                             132

  Peanut No. 2                                                       133

  Peanut No. 3                                                       133

  Peanut No. 4                                                       133

  Peanut and Banana                                                  134

  Peanut Mayonnaise                                                  134

  Almond                                                             135

  Almond No. 2                                                       135

  Almond No. 3                                                       135

  Almond and Celery                                                  136

  Almond and Lemon                                                   136

  Toasted Almond                                                     136


                                 SWEET

  Orange                                                             139

  Orange Marmalade                                                   139

  Orange Marmalade No. 2                                             139

  Dainty Ribbon                                                      140

  Gem                                                                140

  Lemon                                                              140

  Fruit                                                              141

  Strawberry                                                         141

  Grape                                                              141

  Red Raspberry                                                      142

  Apple                                                              142

  Apple No. 2                                                        142

  Apple Butter                                                       142

  Pineapple                                                          143

  Cherry                                                             143

  Cherry No. 2                                                       143

  Candied Cherry                                                     144

  Candied Cherry No. 2                                               144

  Cream & Candied Fruit                                              144

  Cake & Candied Cherry                                              145

  Tutti-Frutti                                                       145

  Banana                                                             146

  Banana No. 2                                                       146

  Banana and Cherry                                                  146

  Banana Toast                                                       147

  Banana and Toasted Brown Bread                                     147

  Oriental                                                           147

  Five O’clock Tea                                                   148

  Fig                                                                148

  Fig No. 2                                                          148

  Fig No. 3                                                          149

  Favorite                                                           149

  Fig and Nut                                                        149

  Fig and Nut No. 2                                                  150

  Fig and Roll                                                       150

  Lady Finger                                                        150

  Date and Fig                                                       151

  Date and Nut                                                       151

  Date and Orange                                                    151

  Raisin                                                             152

  Fruit Jelly                                                        152

  Jelly and Nut                                                      153

  Currant Jelly                                                      153

  Currant Jelly and English Walnut                                   153

  Tomato Jelly                                                       154

  Quince Jelly and Nut                                               154

  Quince Jelly                                                       154

  Gooseberry Jam                                                     155

  Claret Jelly                                                       155

  Marbled Bread                                                      155

  Banana                                                             156

  Marron                                                             156

  Honey                                                              156

  Honey and Banana                                                   156

  French Tea                                                         157

  Dainty Peanut                                                      157

  Veranda                                                            157

  Puff Paste                                                         158

  Dream                                                              158

  Chocolate                                                          158

  Chocolate and Nut                                                  159

  Maple Cream                                                        159

  Maple Sugar                                                        159

  Log Cabin                                                          160

  Ginger                                                             160

  Ginger and Orange                                                  160

  Chestnut and Prune                                                 161

  Hallowe’en                                                         161

  India                                                              162

  Whipped Cream                                                      162

  School                                                             162

  Cocoanut                                                           163

  Cocoanut No. 2                                                     163

  Nut and Fruit                                                      164

  Fudge                                                              164

  Violet                                                             165

  Rose-Leaf                                                          165

  Clover                                                             165

  Nasturtium                                                         166

  Chinese Nut                                                        166

  Cream                                                              166


                             MISCELLANEOUS

  Boston Baked Bean                                                  169

  New England                                                        169

  Mexican                                                            169

  Potato                                                             170

  Potato and Ham                                                     170

  Rice                                                               170

  Popcorn                                                            171

  Dyspeptic                                                          171

  Mosaic                                                             172

  Sandwich Rolls                                                     172


                                CANAPES

  Canapes                                                            175

  Caviare                                                            175

  Herring                                                            175

  Anchovy                                                            176

  Lobster                                                            176

  Crab                                                               176

  Sardine                                                            177

  Sardine No. 2                                                      177

  Sardellen                                                          177

  Salmon                                                             178

  Fish                                                               178

  Ham                                                                178

  Ham No. 2                                                          179

  Bacon                                                              179

  Tongue                                                             179

  Chicken                                                            180

  Nut and Olive                                                      180

  Tomato and Cucumber                                                180




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE


  The index was not checked for correct page references.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within the
  text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text, and
  inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

       Pg 39: “Salads” replaced with “Salad” to match other references.
       Pg 68: Hot Ham Sandwich omits instruction to fry the sandwich,
              this has not been corrected.
       Pp 74, 77: “on teaspoonful” replaced with “one teaspoonful”.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UP-TO-DATE SANDWICH BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


