The Project Gutenberg eBook of Snowball
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Snowball

Author: Poul Anderson

Illustrator: Kelly Freas

Release date: April 20, 2019 [eBook #59314]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SNOWBALL ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                               SNOWBALL

                           BY POUL ANDERSON

                     _Simon's new source of power
                  promised a new era for Mankind. But
                  what happens to world economy when_
                   any_one can manufacture it in the
                kitchen oven?... Here's_ one _answer!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Worlds of If Science Fiction, May 1955.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


It did not come out of some government laboratory employing a thousand
bright young technicians whose lives had been checked back to the crib;
it was the work of one man and one woman. This is not the reversal of
history you might think, for the truth is that all the really basic
advances have been made by one or a few men, from the first to steal
fire out of a volcano to E=mc^2. Later, the bright young technicians
get hold of it, and we have transoceanic airplanes and nuclear bombs;
but the idea is always born in loneliness.

Simon Arch was thirty-two years old. He came from upstate
Massachusetts, the son of a small-town doctor, and his childhood and
adolescence were normal enough aside from tinkering with mathematics
and explosive mixtures. In spite of shyness and an overly large
vocabulary, he was popular, especially since he was a good basketball
player. After high school, he spent a couple of tedious years in the
tail-end of World War II clerking for the Army, somehow never getting
overseas; weak eyes may have had something to do with that. In his
spare time he read a great deal, and after the war he entered M.I.T.
with a major in physics. Everybody and his dog was studying physics
then, but Arch was better than average, and went on through a series of
graduate assistantships to a Ph.D. He married one of his students and
patented an electronic valve. Its value was limited to certain special
applications, but the royalties provided a small independent income and
he realized his ambition: to work for himself.

He and Elizabeth built a house in Westfield, which lies some fifty
miles north of Boston and has a small college--otherwise it is only a
shopping center for the local farmers. The house had a walled garden
and a separate laboratory building. Equipment for the lab was expensive
enough to make the Arches postpone children; indeed, after its
requirements were met, they had little enough to live on, but they made
sarcastic remarks about the installment-buying rat race and kept out of
it. Besides, they had hopes for their latest project: there might be
real money in that.

Colin Culquhoun, professor of physics at Westfield, was Arch's closest
friend--a huge, red-haired, boisterous man with radical opinions on
politics which were always good for an argument. Arch, tall and slim
and dark, with horn-rimmed glasses over black eyes and a boyishly
smooth face, labelled himself a reactionary.

"Dielectrics, eh?" rumbled Culquhoun one sunny May afternoon. "So
that's your latest kick, laddie. What about it?"

"I have some ideas on the theory of dielectric polarization," said
Arch. "It's still not too well understood, you know."

"Yeh?" Culquhoun turned as Elizabeth brought in a tray of dewed
glasses. "Thank'ee kindly." One hairy hand engulfed a goblet and he
drank noisily. "Ahhhh! Your taste in beer is as good as your taste in
politics is moldy. Go on."

Arch looked at the floor. "Maybe I shouldn't," he said, feeling his
old nervousness rise within him. "You see, I'm operating purely on a
hunch. I've got the math pretty well whipped into shape, but it all
rests on an unproven postulate about the nature of the electric field.
I've tried to fit it in with both relativity and quantum mechanics
and--well, like I said, it's all just a notion of mine which demands
experimental proof before I can even think about publishing."

"What sort of proof?"

"It's this way. By far the best dielectric found to date is a mixture
of barium and strontium titanates. Under optimum conditions, the
dielectric constant goes up to 11,600, though the loss rate is still
pretty high. There's a partial explanation for this on the basis of
crystal theory, the dipole moment increases under an electric field....
Well, you know all that. My notion involves an assumption about the
nature of the crystalline ionic bond; I threw in a correction for
relativistic and quantum effects which _looks_ kosher but really hasn't
much evidence to back it up. So--uh--"

Elizabeth sat down and crossed trim legs. She was a tall and rather
spectacular blonde, her features so regular as to look almost cold till
you got to know her. "Our idea suggests it should be possible to fit a
crystalline system into an organic grid in such a way that a material
can be made with just about any desired values of dielectricity and
resistivity," she said. "Constants up in the millions if you want.
Physically and chemically stable. The problem is to find the conditions
which will produce such an unorthodox linkage. We've been cooking
batches of stuff for weeks now."

Culquhoun lifted shaggy brows. "Any luck?"

"Not so far," she laughed. "All we've gotten is smelly, sticky messes.
The structure we're after just doesn't want to form. We're trying
different catalysts now, but it's mostly cut and try; neither of us is
enough of a chemist to predict what'll work."

"Come along and see," offered Arch.

They went through the garden and into the long one-room building
beyond. Culquhoun looked at the instruments with a certain wistfulness;
he had trouble getting money to keep up any kind of lab. But the
heart of the place was merely a second-hand gas stove, converted by
haywiring into an air-tight, closely regulated oven. It was hot in the
room. Elizabeth pointed to a stack of molds covered with a pitchy tar.
"Our failures," she said. "Maybe we could patent the formula for glue.
It certainly sticks tightly enough."

Arch checked the gauges. "Got a while to go yet," he said. "The
catalyst this time is powdered ferric oxide--plain rust to you. The
materials include aluminum oxide, synthetic rubber, and some barium and
titanium compounds. I must admit that part of it is cheap."

They wandered back toward the house. "What'll you do with the material
if it does come out?" asked Culquhoun.

"Oh--it'd make damn good condensers," said Arch. "Insulation, too.
There ought to be a lot of money in it. Really, though, the theory
interests me more. Care to see it?"

Culquhoun nodded, and Arch pawed through the papers on his desk. The
top was littered with his stamp collection, but an unerring instinct
seemed to guide his hand to the desired papers. He handed over an
untidy manuscript consisting chiefly of mathematical symbols. "But
don't bother with it now," he said. "I blew us to a new Bach the other
day--St. Matthew Passion."

Culquhoun's eyes lit up, and for a while the house was filled with a
serene strength which this century had forgotten. "Mon, mon," whispered
the professor at last. "What he could have done with the bagpipes!"

"Barbarian," said Elizabeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

As it happened, that one test batch was successful. Arch took a slab of
darkly shining material from the lab oven and sawed it up for tests.
It met them all. Heat and cold had little effect, even on the electric
properties. Ordinary chemicals did not react. The dielectric constant
was over a million, and the charge was held without appreciable leakage.

"Why doesn't it arc over?" wondered Elizabeth.

"Electric field's entirely inside the slab," said Arch absently. "You
need a solid conductor, like a wire, between the poles to discharge it.
The breakdown voltage is so high that you might as well forget about
it." He lifted a piece about ten inches square and two inches thick.
"You could charge this hunk up with enough juice to run our house for
a couple of years, I imagine; of course, it'd be D.C., so you'd have
to drain it through a small A.C. generator. The material itself costs,
oh, I'd guess fifty cents, a dollar maybe if you include labor." He
hesitated. "You know, it occurs to me we've just killed the wet-cell
battery."

"Good riddance," said Elizabeth. "The first thing you do, my boy, is
make a replacement for that so-called battery in our car. I'm tired of
having the clunk die in the middle of traffic."

"Okay," said Arch mildly. "Then we see about patents. But--honey, don't
you think this deserves a small celebration of sorts?"

Arch spent a few days drawing up specifications and methods of
manufacture. By giving the subject a little thought, he discovered that
production could be fantastically cheap and easy. If you knew just what
was needed, you had only to mix together a few chemicals obtainable in
any drugstore, bake them in your oven for several hours, and saw the
resulting chunk into pieces of suitable size. By adding resistances and
inductances, which could be made if necessary from junkyard wire, you
could bleed off the charge at any desired rate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Culquhoun's oldest son Robert dropped over to find Arch tinkering with
his rickety '48 Chevrolet. "Dad says you've got a new kind of battery,"
he remarked.

"Uh.... Yes. I'll make him one if he wants. All we'll need to charge it
is a rectifier and a volt-meter. Need a regulator for the discharge, of
course." Arch lifted out his old battery and laid it on the grass.

"I've got a better idea, sir," said the boy. "I'd like to buy a _big_
piece of the stuff from you."

"Whatever for?" asked Arch.

"Run my hot rod off it," said Bob from the lofty eminence of sixteen
years. "Shouldn't be too hard, should it? Rip out the engine; use the
big condenser to turn a D.C. motor--it'd be a lot cheaper than gas, and
no plugged fuel lines either."

"You know," said Arch, "I never thought of that."

He lifted the ridiculously small object which was his new current
source and placed it inside the hood. He had had to add two pieces of
strap iron to hold it in position. "Why a regular motor?" he mused. "If
you have D.C. coming out at a controlled rate, you could use it to turn
your main drive shaft by a very simple and cheap arrangement."

"Oh, sure," said Robert scornfully. "That's what I meant. Any backyard
mechanic could fix that up--if he didn't electrocute himself first. But
how about it, Dr. Arch? How much would you want for a piece like that?"

"I haven't the time," said the physicist. "Tell you what, though, I'll
give you a copy of the specs and you can make your own. There's nothing
to it, if your mother will let you have the oven for a day. Cost you
maybe five dollars for materials."

"Sell it for twenty-five," said Bob dreamily. "Look, Dr. Arch, would
you like to go into business with me? I'll pay you whatever royalty
seems right."

"I'm going to Boston with just that in mind," said Arch, fumbling with
the cables. "However, go ahead. Consider yourself a licensee. I want
ten percent of the selling price, and I'll trust a Scotch Yankee like
you to make me a million."

He had no business sense. It would have saved him much grief if he had.

       *       *       *       *       *

The countryside looked clean, full of hope and springtime. Now and
then a chrome-plated monster of an automobile whipped past Arch's
sedately chugging antique. He observed them with a certain contempt, an
engineer's eye for the Goldbergian inefficiency of a mechanism which
turned this rod to push that cam to rotate such and such a gear, and
needed a cooling system to throw away most of the energy generated. Bob
Culquhoun, he reflected, had a saner outlook. Not only was electricity
cheaper in the first place, but the wasted power would be minimal and
the "prime mover"--the capacitor itself--simply would not wear out.

Automobiles could be sold for perhaps five hundred dollars and built to
last, not to run up repair bills till the owner was driven to buying
a new model. The world's waning resources of petroleum could go into
something useful: generating power at central stations, forming a base
for organic syntheses; they would stretch out for centuries more. Coal
could really come back into its own.

Hm ... wait. There was no reason why you couldn't power every type of
vehicle with capacitors. Aircraft could stay aloft a month at a time if
desired--a year if nothing wore out; ships could be five years at sea.
You wouldn't need those thousands of miles of power line littering the
countryside and wasting the energy they carried; you could charge small
capacitors for home use right at the station and deliver them to the
consumer's doorstep at a fraction of the present cost.

Come to think of it, there was a lot of remote power, in waterfalls for
instance, unused now because the distance over which lines would have
to be strung was too great. Not any longer! And the sunlight pouring
from this cloudless sky--to dilute to run a machine of any size. But
you could focus a lot of it on a generator whose output voltage was
jacked up, and charge capacitors with thousands of kilowatt-hours
each. Generators everywhere could be made a lot smaller, because they
wouldn't have to handle peak loads but only meet average demand.

_This thing is bigger than I realized_, he thought with a tingle of
excitement. _My God, in a year I may be a millionaire!_

He got into Boston, only losing his way twice, which is a good record
for anyone, and found the office of Addison, his patent attorney. It
didn't take him long to be admitted.

The dusty little man riffled through the pages. "It looks all right,"
he said unemotionally. Nothing ever seemed to excite him. "For a
change, this seems to be something which can be patented, even under
our ridiculous laws. Not the law of nature you've discovered, of
course, but the process--" He peered up, sharply. "Is there any
alternative process?"

"Not that I know of," said Arch. "On the basis of theory, I'm inclined
to doubt it."

"Very well, very well. I'll see about putting it through. Hm--you say
it's quite simple and cheap? Better keep your mouth shut for a while,
till the application has been approved. Otherwise everybody will
start making it, and you'll have a devil of a time collecting your
royalties. A patent is only a license to sue, you know, and you can't
sue fifty million bathtub chemists."

"Oh," said Arch, taken aback. "I--well, I've told some of my neighbors,
of course. One of the local teen-agers is going to make a car powered
by--"

Addison groaned. "You would! Can't you shoot the boy?"

"I don't want to. For a person his age, he's quite inoffensive."

"Oh, well, you didn't want a hundred million dollars anyway, did you?
I'll try to rush this for you, that may help."

Arch went out again, some of the elation taken from him. But what the
hell, he reflected. If he could collect on only one percent of all
the capacitite which was going to be manufactured, he'd still have
an unreasonable amount of money. And he wanted to publish as soon as
possible in all events: he had the normal human desire for prestige.

He got a hamburger and coffee at a diner and went home. Nothing
happened for a month except an interview in the local paper. Bob
finished his hot rod and drove it all over town. The boy was a little
disappointed at the quietness of the machine, but the interest it
attracted was compensation. He began to build another: twenty-five
dollars for an old chassis, another twenty-five or so for materials,
tack on a hundred for labor and profits--the clunk might not look like
much, but it would run for a year without fuel worries and would never
need much repair or replacement. He also discovered, more or less
clandestinely, that such a car would go up to 200 miles an hour on the
straightaway. After selling it, he realized he could command a much
bigger price, and set happily to work on another.

       *       *       *       *       *

The physics journal to which Arch sent his manuscript was interested
enough to rush printing. Between the time he submitted it and the
time it came out some five weeks later, he found himself in lively
correspondence with the editor.

"College will soon be letting out all over the country," said
Elizabeth. "Stand by to repel boarders!"

"Mmmm ... yes, I suppose so." Arch added up the cost of entertaining
a rush of colleagues, but his worry was only a flicker across a
somewhat bashful glow of pride. After all--he had done a big thing. His
polarization theory cut a deep swath into what mystery remained about
the atom. There might even be a Nobel Prize in it.

It was on the day of publication that his phone rang. He looked up from
his stamps, swore, and lifted it. "Hello?"

"Dr. Arch?" The voice was smooth and cultivated, just a trace of
upper-class New York accent. "How do you do, sir. My name is Gilmer,
Linton Gilmer, and I represent several important corporations in
the electricity field." He named them, and Arch barely suppressed a
whistle. "Dr. Bowyer of the _Journal_ staff mentioned your work to one
of his friends in an industrial research lab. He was quite excited,
and you can understand that we are too. I believe I have some good news
for you, if I may come to see you."

"Eh--oh. Oh, sure!" Visions whirled across Arch's eyes. Money! It
represented a hi-fi set, a three-penny black, an automatic dishwasher,
a reliable car, a new oscilloscope, a son and heir. "Come on up, b-by
all means--Yes, right away if you like--Okay, I--I'll be seeing you--"
He set the receiver down with a shaking hand and bawled: "Betty!
Company coming!"

"Oh, damn!" said his wife, sticking a grease-smudged face in the door.
She had been tinkering with the lab oven. "And the house in such a
mess! So am I, for that matter. Hold the fort when he comes, darling."
She still didn't know who "he" was, but whirled off in a cloud of
profanity.

Arch thought about putting on a decent suit and decided to hell with
it. Let them come to him and accept him as he was; he had the whip
hand, for once in his life. He contented himself with setting out beer
and clearing the littered coffee table.

Linton Gilmer was a big man, with a smooth well-massaged face, wavy
gray hair, and large soft hands. His presence seemed to fill the room,
hardly leaving space for anyone else.

"Very pleased to meet you, Dr. Arch ... brilliant achievement.... We
borrowed proof sheets from the _Journal_ and made tests for ourselves,
of course. I'm sure you don't mind. Thank you." He seemed just a
trifle shocked at being offered beer rather than Johnny Walker Black
at four o'clock in the afternoon, but accepted gracefully. Arch felt
excessively gauche.

"What did you want to s-see me about?" asked the physicist.

"Oh, well, sir, let's get acquainted first," said Gilmer heartily. "No
rush. No hurry. I envy you scientific fellows. The unending quest,
thrill of discovery, yes, science was my first love, but I'm afraid I
sort of got steered off into the business administration end. I know
you scientists don't think much of us poor fellows behind the desks,
you should hear how our boys gripe when we set the appropriations for
their projects, but somebody has to do that, ha." Gilmer made a bridge
of plump fingers. "I do think, though, Dr. Arch, that this hostility is
coming to an end. We're both part of the team, you know; scientist and
businessman both work inside our free enterprise system to serve the
American public. And more and more scientists are coming to recognize
this."

Arch shifted uneasily in his chair. He couldn't think of any response.
But it was simple to converse with Gilmer: you just sat back, let him
flow, and mumbled in the pauses.

Some data began to emerge: "--we didn't want to trouble you with a
dozen visitors, so it was agreed that I would represent the combine to,
ah, sound you out, if I may so phrase it."

Arch felt the stir of resentment which patronizing affability always
evoked in him. He tried to be courteous: "Excuse me, but isn't that
sort of thing against the anti-trust laws?"

"Oh, no!" Gilmer laughed. "Quite the opposite, I assure you. If one
company tried to corner this product, or if all of them went together
to drive the price up, that would be illegal, of course. But we all
believe in healthy competition, and only want information at the
moment. Negotiations can come later."

"Okay," said Arch. "I suppose you know I've already applied for a
patent."

"Oh, yes, of course. Very shrewd of you. I like to deal with a good
businessman. I think you're more broadminded than some of your
colleagues, and can better understand the idea of teamwork between
business and science." Gilmer looked out the French doors to the
building in the rear. "Is that your laboratory? I admire a man who can
struggle against odds. You have faith, and deserve to be rewarded for
it. How would you like to work with some real money behind you?"

Arch paused. "You mean, take a job on somebody's staff?"

"Not as a lab flunky," said Gilmer quickly. "You'd have a free hand.
American business recognizes ability. You'd plan your own projects,
and head them yourself. My own company is prepared to offer you twenty
thousand a year to start."

Arch sat without moving.

"After taxes," said Gilmer.

"How about this--capacitite, I call it?"

"Naturally, development and marketing would be in the hands of the
company, or of several companies," said Gilmer. "You wouldn't want to
waste your time on account books. You'd get proper payment for the
assignment, of course--"

Elizabeth entered, looking stunning. Gilmer rose with elaborate
courtesy, and the discussion veered to trivialities for awhile.

Then the girl lit a cigaret and watched them through a haze of smoke.
"Your time is valuable, Mr. Gilmer," she said abruptly. "Why don't you
make an offer and we'll talk about that?"

"Oh, no hurry, Mrs. Arch. I was hoping you would be my guests tonight--"

"No, thanks. With all due regard for you, I don't want to be put under
a moral obligation before business is discussed."

Gilmer chuckled amiably and repeated the idea he had broached.

"I like Westfield," said Elizabeth. "I don't like New York. It isn't
fit for human consumption."

"Oh, I quite agree," said Gilmer. "Once a year I have to break
loose--cabin up in Maine, hunting, fishing, back to Nature--you really
must come up sometime soon. Your objection can be answered easily
enough. We could set up a laboratory for you here, if you really
insist. You see, we're prepared to be very generous."

Arch shook his head. "No," he said harshly. "No, thanks. I like being
independent."

Gilmer raised his brows. "I understand that. But after all, the only
difference would be--"

Arch grinned. He was enjoying himself now. On a dark day some years
ago, he had tried to raise a bank loan and had failed for lack of
collateral and credit rating and his refusal to subject any friend to
co-signing. Ever since, he had indulged daydreams about having finance
come crawling to him. The reality was intoxicating.

"No," he repeated. "That's all I want to say about it, too. The income
from capacitite will be quite enough for us. If you want to discuss a
license to manufacture, go ahead."

"Hrm! As you wish." Gilmer smoothed the coldness out of his voice.
"Maybe you'll change your mind later. If so, feel free to call on me
anytime. Now, for an assignment of rights, I think a sum of fifty
thousand dollars could be arranged--"

Elizabeth drooped lids over startlingly blue eyes. "As an initial
payment, perhaps," she said gently. "But think what a royalty of, say,
ten cents a pound would add up to even in a year."

"Oh, yes, that would be negotiated too," said Gilmer. "However, you
realize manufacture could not start immediately, and would in any case
be on a smaller scale than you perhaps think."

"Eh?" Arch sat bolt upright. "What do you mean? Why, this stuff is
going to revolutionize not only electronics, but all power--dammit,
everything!"

"Dr. Arch," said Gilmer regretfully, "you must not have considered the
matter of capital investment. Do you know how many billions of dollars
are sunk in generators, dams, lines, motors--"

"Gasoline," said Elizabeth. "We've thought of that angle too."

"We _can't_ throw all that in the discard!" went on Gilmer earnestly.
He seemed more human, all at once. "It may take twenty years to recover
the investment in, say, a local transmission network. The company would
go broke overnight if that investment were suddenly made valueless.
Millions of people would be thrown out of work. Millions more would
lose their savings in stocks and bonds--"

"I always said stocks were a mug's game," interrupted Arch. "If the two
or three shares owned by the widow and orphan you're leading up to go
blooey, it won't break her. For years, now, I've had ads dinning the
wonders of the present economic system into my ears. One of its main
features, I'm told, is progress. All right, here's a chance to leap a
hundred years ahead. Let's see you take it."

Gilmer's pink cheeks reddened. "I'm afraid you still don't understand,"
he replied. "We have a responsibility. The world is watching us. Just
imagine what those British Socialists would say if--"

"If you're against socialism," said Elizabeth with a laugh, "why not
start at home? Public schools and federal highways, for instance.
I fail to see where personal liberty is necessarily tied to any
particular method of distribution."

Gilmer seemed, for a moment, to lose his temper. "This is no place for
radicals," he said thickly. "We've all got to have faith and put our
shoulders to the wheel. We--" He paused, swallowed, and smiled rather
stiffly. "Excuse me. I didn't mean to get worked up. There are a lot of
stories about wonderful new inventions which the greedy corporations
have bought up and hidden away. They simply are not true. All I'm after
is a gradual introduction of this material."

"I know those wonderful inventions are pure rumor," said Arch. "But I
also know that just about everything I buy is made to wear out so I'll
have to buy some more. It's cheaper, yes, but I'd rather pay twice as
much to start with and have my purchase last ten times as long. Why
can't I buy a decent kitchen knife? There's not one that keeps its
edge. My wife finally made eyes at the butcher and got one of his old
knives; _it_ lasts.

"A big thing like capacitite represents a chance to change our whole
philosophy into something more rational. That's what I'm after--not
just money. There needn't be any unemployment. Capacitite makes
increased production possible, so why not--well, why not drop the work
day to four hours for the same wages? Then you can employ twice as many
people."

"It is not your or my place to make carping criticisms," retorted
Gilmer. "Fundamental changes aren't as easy as you think. Dr. Arch,
I'm sorry to say that unless you'll agree to proper terms, none of the
companies I represent will be interested in your material."

"All right," snapped Arch. "I can make it myself. Make it by the ton if
I like, and sell it for a dollar a pound."

"You may find yourself undersold."

"My patent--"

"It hasn't gone through yet. That takes time, plenty of time if you
don't want to cooperate. And even if it is granted, which I by no means
guarantee, you'll have to sue infringers; and do you know how crowded
court calendars are? And how expensive a series of appeals can make
such a suit?"

"Okay," said Elizabeth sweetly. "Go ahead and make it. You just got
through telling us why you can't."

Gilmer looked out the window. "This is a great country," he said, with
more sincerity than Arch had expected. "No country on earth has ever
been so rich and happy. Do you know how it got that way?"

"By progressing," said Arch. "For your information, I am not a leftist;
I'll bet I'm far to the right of you. So far, that I still believe in
full speed ahead and damn the torpedoes."

Gilmer rose, with a certain dignity. "I'm afraid tempers are getting
a little short," he said quietly. "I beg of you to reconsider. We'll
fight for the public interest if we must, but we'd rather cooperate.
May I leave my card? You can always get in touch with me."

He made his farewells and left. Arch and Elizabeth looked somewhat
blankly at each other.

"Well, Killer," said the girl at last, "I hope we haven't taken too
big a chaw to swallow."

       *       *       *       *       *

Culquhoun dropped over in the evening and listened to their account.
He shook his head dubiously. "You're up against it, laddie," he said.
"They'll defend their coffers to the bitter end."

"It isn't that." Arch stared moodily into the darkness. "I don't think
they're a bunch of monsters--no more than anybody else. They just
believe in the status quo. So do you, you know."

"How?" Culquhoun bristled. "I'll admit I'm not the hell-fire
revolutionary of my undergraduate days, but I still think a basic
change is called for."

"Not basic," said Arch. "You just want to change part of the mechanism.
But you'd keep the same ant-heap industrial society. I believe the
heart went out of this land after the Civil War, and the death warrant
was signed about 1910. Before then, a man was still an individual; he
worked for himself, at something he understood, and wasn't afraid to
stand up and spit in the eye of the world. Now he spends his daily
routine on an assembly line or behind a desk or counter, doing the same
thing over and over for someone else. In the evening he watches the
same pap on his television, and if something goes wrong he whines his
way to the apartment superintendent or the VA or the Social Security
office.

"Look at the progress of euphemism. Old people are Senior Citizens.
Draft becomes Selective Service. Graveyard to cemetery to memorial
park. We've become a race of dependents. And we can't break away: there
isn't any frontier left, there isn't any alternative society, one man
can't compete with a corporation. Or with a commissar, for that matter.

"What we need is not to go back to living in log cabins, but to make
the means of sustenance and the sources of energy so cheap that every
man can have them in sufficient quantity to live and work. I don't
know--maybe I'm being vainglorious, but it does seem as if capacitite
is a long step in that direction."

"I warn you, you're talking good Marxism," said Culquhoun with a grin.
"The means of production determine the type of society."

"Which is pure hogwash," answered Arch. "Egypt and Assyria had
identical technologies. So did Athens and Sparta. So do America
and Russia. The means of production only determine the _possible_
societies, and there are always many possibilities.

"I'd like to see the possibility of individualism available again to
the American people. If they're too far gone to accept it, to hell with
them."

       *       *       *       *       *

The government can work fast when it wants to. It was just the
following afternoon when the phone rang again. Elizabeth came out
to the lab, where Arch and Bob Culquhoun were preparing a batch of
capacitite, with a strained look on her face. "Come inside, dear," she
said thinly. "I've got some bad news." When he was in the house, she
added: "Two FBI men are on their way here."

"What the devil?" Arch felt a gulp of fear. It was irrational he told
himself. The FBI was no Gestapo; on the whole, he approved of it. Maybe
some friend had given his name as a security reference. "All right.
We'll see what they want."

"I'm going to start some coffee," said Elizabeth. "Lucky we've got a
cake too."

"Huh?"

"You'll see." She patted his cheek and managed a smile. "You're too
innocent, sweetheart."

Sagdahl and Horrisford turned out to be hard young men with carefully
expressionless faces. They introduced themselves very politely, and
Arch led the way into the living room. Horrisford took out a notebook.

"Well," said Arch a little huskily, "what can I do for you?"

"You can answer some questions, if you please," said Sagdahl
tonelessly. "You don't have to answer any, and whatever you say can be
used in evidence."

"I haven't broken any laws that I know of," said Arch feebly.

"That remains to be seen. This is an investigation."

"Whatever _for_?"

"Dr. Arch," said Sagdahl patiently, "yesterday you published an article
on a discovery of potential military importance. It has upset a great
many plans. Worse, it has been released with no discretion whatsoever,
and the consequences aren't easy to foresee. If we'd had any inkling,
it would never have been published openly. As it is, you went outside
regular channels and--"

"I didn't have to go through channels," said Arch. "I've never gotten
any confidential data, or even applied for a clearance. I work for
myself and--" He saw Horrisford busily writing, and his words dried up.

The realization was appalling. The military applications of capacitite
had crossed his mind only vaguely and been dismissed with an escapist
shrug.

"Let's get down to business," said Sagdahl. "Everything will be a lot
easier if you cooperate. Now, where were you born?"

Arch hadn't imagined anyone could be so thorough about tracking down a
man's entire life. He answered frankly, feeling he had nothing to hide.
Of course, there _had_ been his roommate at M.I.T., and the roommate
had had a girl friend one of whose other friends was a Communist, and...

"I see. Now, when you graduated--"

Elizabeth entered from the kitchen with a tray. "Pardon me," she
smiled. "I think refreshments are in order."

Sagdahl's face didn't change, but his eyes bugged slightly. Elizabeth
put a coffee cup in his hand and a plate of cake on one knee. He looked
unhappy, but mumbled dutiful thanks.

"Oh, it's a pleasure," said Elizabeth blandly. "You boys are doing your
duty, and really, this is very exciting."

Sagdahl got down a mouthful of cake. Valiantly, he tried to resume the
staccato flow: "Now, when you graduated, Dr. Arch, you took a vacation,
you say. Where was that?"

"Up in Quebec. About three months. Just driving around and--"

"I see. Then you returned to school for a master's degree, right? Did
you at this time know a Joseph Barrett?"

"Well, yes, I shared an office with him."

"Did you ever discuss politics with him?"

"Drink your coffee before it gets cold," said Elizabeth. "There's
plenty more."

"Oh--thanks. Now, about this Barrett?"

"We argued a lot. You see, I'm frankly a reactionary--"

"Were you associated with any political-action group?"

"Mr. Horrisford," said Elizabeth reproachfully, "you haven't touched
your cake."

"No, I wasn't that interested," said Arch. "Didn't even bother to vote
in '50."

"Here, Mr. Sagdahl, do have some more cake."

"Thanks!--You met some of Barrett's friends?"

"Yes, I was at some parties and--"

"Excuse me, I'll just warm your coffee."

"Did you at this time know anyone who had worked in the Manhattan
Project?"

"Of course. They were all over the place. But I never was told
anything restricted, never asked for--"

"Please, Mr. Horrisford! It's my favorite recipe."

"Ummm. Thank you, but--"

"You met your future wife when?"

"In--"

"Excuse me, there's the phone... Hello. Mrs. Arch speaking... Oh?...
Yes, I'll see... Pardon me. There's a man from the Associated Press in
town. He wants to see you, dear."

Sagdahl flinched. "Stall him off," he groaned. "Please."

"Can't do that forever," said Arch. "Not under the circumstances."

"I realize that, Dr. Arch." Sagdahl clenched his jaw. "But this is
unprecedented. As an American citizen, you'll want to--"

"Certainly we'll cooperate," said Elizabeth brightly. "But what shall I
tell the AP man? That we're not supposed to say anything to anyone?"

"No! That won't do, not now. But--are all the technical details of this
public?"

"Why, yes," said Arch. "Anybody can make capacitite."

"If you issued a denial--"

"Too late, I'm afraid. Somebody's bound to try it anyway."

Sagdahl looked grim. "You can be held incommunicado," he said. "This is
a very serious matter."

"Yes," said Elizabeth. "The AP man will think so too, if he can't get a
story."

"Well--"

"Oh, dear! My Russell Wright coffee cup!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing happened overnight. That was the hardest thing to believe.
By all the rules, life should have been suddenly and dramatically
transformed; but instead, there were only minor changes, day by day,
small incidents. Meanwhile you ate, slept, worked, paid bills, made
love and conversation, as you had always done.

The FBI held its hand as yet, but some quiet men checked into the
town's one hotel, and there was usually one of them hanging around
Arch's house, watching. Elizabeth would occasionally invite him in for
a snack--she grew quite fond of them.

The newspapers ran feature articles, and for a while the house was
overrun with reporters--then that too faded away. Editorials appeared,
pointing out that capacitite had licked one of the Soviet Union's major
problems, fuel; and a syndicated columnist practically called for
Arch's immediate execution. He found some of his neighbors treating him
coldly. The situation distressed him, too. "I never thought--" he began.

"Exactly," rumbled Culquhoun. "People like you are one reason science
is coming to be considered a Frankenstein. Dammit, man, the researcher
has to have a social conscience like the rest of us."

Arch smiled wearily. "But I do," he said. "I gave considerable thought
to the social effects. I just imagined that they'd be good. That's been
the case with every major innovation, in the long run."

"You've committed a crime," said Culquhoun. "Idealism. It doesn't fit
the world we inhabit."

Arch flushed angrily. "What was I supposed to do?" he snapped. "Burn
my results and forget them? If the human race is too stupid to use the
obvious advantages, that's its own fault."

"You're making a common error, dear," said Elizabeth. "You speak of
the human race. There isn't any. There are only individual people and
groups of people, with their own conflicting interests."

For a while, there was a big campaign to play down the effects of
capacitite. It wasn't important. It meant nothing, as our eminent
columnist has so lucidly shown. Then the attempt switched: capacitite
was dangerous. So-and-so had been electrocuted working with it. There
was cumulative poisoning... Such propaganda didn't work, not when some
millions of people were seeing for themselves.

Petroleum stock began sagging. It didn't nosedive--the SEC and a
valiantly buying clique saw to that--but it slipped down day by day.

Arch happened to drop in at Hinkel's garage. The old man looked up from
a car on which he was laboring and smiled. "Hello, there," he said.
"Haven't seen you in a long time."

"I--well--" Arch looked guiltily at the oil-stained floor. "I'm
afraid--your business--"

"Oh, don't worry about me. I've got more business than I can handle.
Everybody in town seems to want his car converted over to your type of
engine. That young Bob is turning out the stuff like a printing press
gone berserk."

Arch couldn't quite meet his eyes. "But--aren't your gasoline sales
dropping?"

"To be sure. But cars still need lubrication and--Look, you know the
old watermill down by Ronson's farm? I'm buying that, putting in a
generator and a high-voltage transformer and rectifier. I'll be selling
packaged power. A lot easier than running a gas pump, at my age."

"Won't the power company be competing?"

"Eventually. Right now, they're still waiting for orders from higher
up, I guess. Some people can charge their capacitors right at home, but
most would rather not buy the special equipment. They'll come to me,
and by the time the power outfit gets wise to itself, I'll 've come in
on the ground floor."

"Thanks," said Arch, a little shakily. "It makes me feel a lot better."

If only everybody had that Yankee adaptability, he thought as he walked
home. But he saw now, as he wished he had seen earlier, that society
had gone too far. With rare exceptions, progress was no longer a matter
of individual re-adjustments. It was a huge and clumsy economic system
which had to make the transformation... a jerry-built system whose
workings no one understood, even today.

He wanted to call up Gilmer and make what terms he could, but it was
too late. The snowball was rolling.

He sighed his way into an armchair and picked up the paper.

Item: the bill before Congress to make capacitite a government monopoly
like uranium, and to enforce all security restrictions on it, had been
sent back to committee and would probably not pass. A few senators had
had the nerve to point out that security was pointless when everybody
could already make the stuff.

Item: the government was setting up a special laboratory to study
the military applications. Arch could think of several for himself.
Besides simplifying logistics, it could go into cheap and horrible
weapons. A bomb loaded with several thousand coulombs, set to discharge
instantaneously on striking--

Item: a well-known labor leader had denounced the innovation as a case
of business blundering which was going to take bread from the working
man. A corporation spokesman declared that it was all a leftist trick
designed to cripple the private enterprise system.

Item: _Pravda_ announced that Soviet scientists had discovered
capacitite ten years ago and that full-scale production had long been
under way for peaceful purposes only, such as making the Red Army still
more invincible.

Item: two more men in America electrocuted due to incautious
experiments. Nevertheless, capacitite was being manufactured in
thousands of homes and workshops. Bills in various state legislatures
to ban vehicles so powered were meeting indignant opposition everywhere
save in Texas.

Arch reflected wryly that he wasn't getting paid for any of this. All
he'd gotten out of it so far was trouble. Trouble with the authorities,
with crank letters, with his own conscience. There were, to be
sure, some royalties from Bob Culquhoun, who was becoming quite an
entrepreneur and hiring adults to take over when school opened in fall.

Speaking of tigers by the tail--

       *       *       *       *       *

Autumn, the New England fall of rain and chill whistling wind, smoky
days and flame-like leaves and the far wild honking of southbound
geese. The crash came in late September: a reeling market hit bottom
and stayed there. Gasoline sales were down twenty-five percent already,
and the industry was laying men off by the hundreds of thousands. That
cut out their purchasing power and hit the rest of the economy.

"It's what you'd expect, laddie," said Culquhoun. They were over at his
house. Outside, a slow cold rain washed endlessly down the windows.
"Over production--over-capitalization--I could have predicted all this."

"Damn it to hell, it doesn't make _sense_!" protested Arch. "A new
energy source should make everything cheaper for everybody--more
production available for less work." He felt a nervous tic beginning in
one cheek.

"Production for use instead of for profit--"

"Oh, dry up, will you? Any system is a profit system. It has to show a
profit in some terms or other, or it would just be wasted effort. And
the profit has to go to individuals, not to some mythical state. The
state doesn't eat--people do."

"Would you have the oil interests simply write off their investment?"

"No, of course not. Why couldn't they--Look. Gasoline can still
run generators. Oil can still lubricate. Byproducts can still be
synthesized. It's a matter of shifting the emphasis of production,
that's all. All that's needed is a little common sense."

"Which is a rather scarce commodity."

"There," said Arch gloomily, "we find ourselves in agreement."

"The trouble is," said Bob earnestly, "we're faced with a real
situation, not a paper problem. It calls for a real solution. For an
idea."

"There aren't any ideas," said Elizabeth. "Not big sweeping ones to
solve everything overnight. Man doesn't work that way. What happens is
that somebody solves his own immediate, personal problems, somebody
else does the same, and eventually society as a whole fumbles its way
out of the dilemma."

Arch sighed. "This is getting over my head," he admitted. "Thanks for
small blessings: the thing has grown so big that I, personally, am
becoming forgotten."

He rose. "I'm kind of tired tonight," he went on. "Maybe we better be
running along. Thanks for the drinks and all."

He and his wife slipped into their raincoats and galoshes for the short
walk home. The street outside was dark, a rare lamp glowing off slick
wet concrete. Rain misted his face and glasses, he had trouble seeing.

"Poor darling," Elizabeth took his arm. "Don't worry. We'll get through
all right."

"I hope so," he said fervently. No money had come in for some time
now. Bob's enterprise was levelling off as initial demand was filled,
and a lurching industry wasn't buying many electronic valves. The bank
account was getting low.

He saw the figure ahead as a vague shadow against the night. It stood
waiting till they came up, and then stepped in their path. The voice
was unfamiliar: "Arch?"

"Yes--"

He could see only that the face was heavy and unshaven, with something
wild about the mouth. Then his eyes dropped to the revolver barrel
protruding from the slicker. "What the devil--"

"Don't move, you." It was a harsh, broken tone. "Right now I'm aiming
at your wife. I'd as soon shoot her, too."

Fear leaped crazily in Arch's breast. He stood unable to stir, coldness
crawling in his guts. He tried to speak, and couldn't.

"Not a word, you--. Not another word. You've said too goddam much
already." The gun poked forward, savagely. "I'm going to kill you. You
did your best to kill me."

Elizabeth's face was white in the gloom. "What do you mean?" she
whispered. "We never saw you before."

"No. But you took away my job. I was in the breadlines back in the
thirties. I'm there again, and it's your fault, you--Got any prayers to
say?"

A gibbering ran through Arch's brain. He stood motionless, thinking
through a lunatic mind-tilt that there must be some way to jump that
gun, the heroes of stories always did it, that might--

Someone moved out of the night into the wan radiance. An arm went about
the man's throat, another seized his gun wrist and snapped it down. The
weapon went off, sounding like the crack of doom in the stillness.

They struggled on the slippery sidewalk, panting, the rain running over
dimly glimpsed faces. Arch's paralysis broke, he moved in and circled
around, looking for a chance to help. There! Crouching, he got hold of
the assassin's ankle and clung.

There was a meaty smack above him, and the body sagged.

Elizabeth held her hand over her mouth, as if to force back a scream.
"Mr. Horrisford," she whispered.

"The same," said the FBI man. "That was a close one. You can be
thankful you're an object of suspicion, Arch. What was he after?"

Arch stared blankly at his rescuer. Slowly, meaning penetrated.
"Unemployed--" he mumbled. "Bitter about it--"

"Yeah. I thought so. You may be having more trouble of that sort. This
depression, people have someone concrete to blame." Horrisford stuck
the gun in his pocket and helped up his half-conscious victim. "Let's
get this one down to the lockup. Here, you support him while I put on
some handcuffs."

"But I wanted to help his kind," said Arch feebly.

"You didn't," said Horrisford. "I'd better arrange for a police guard."

       *       *       *       *       *

Arch spent the following day in a nearly suicidal depression. Elizabeth
tried to pull him out of it, failed, and went downtown after a fifth of
whiskey. That helped. The hangover helped too. It's hard to concentrate
on remorse when ten thousand red-hot devils are building an annex to
Hell in your skull. Toward evening, he was almost cheerful again. A
certain case-hardening was setting in.

After dark, there was a knock on the door. When he opened it,
Horrisford and a stranger stood there.

"Oh--come in," he said "Excuse the mess. I--haven't been feeling so
well."

"Anyone here?" asked the agent.

"Just my wife."

"She'll be all right," said the stranger impatiently. He was a big,
stiff, gray-haired man. "Bring her in, please. This is important."

They were settled in the living room before Horrisford performed the
introductions. "Major General Brackney of Strategic Services." Arch's
hand was wet as he acknowledged the handclasp.

"This is most irregular," said the general. "However, we've put through
a special check on you. A fast but very thorough check. In spite of
your errors of judgment, the FBI is convinced of your essential
loyalty. Your discretion is another matter."

"I can keep my mouth shut, if that's what you mean," said Arch.

"Yes. You kept one secret for ten years," said Horrisford. "The
business of Mrs. Ramirez."

Arch started. "How the deuce--? That was a personal affair. I've never
told a soul, not even my wife!"

"We have our little ways." Horrisford grinned, humanly enough. "The
point is that you could have gained somewhat by blabbing, but didn't.
It speaks well for you."

General Brackney cleared his throat. "We want your help on a certain
top-secret project," he said. "You still know more about capacitite
than anybody else. But if one word of this leaks out prematurely,
it means war. Atomic war. It also means that all of us, and you
particularly, will be crucified."

"I--"

"You're an independent so-and-so, I realize. What we have in mind is a
scheme to prevent such a war. We want you in on it both for your own
value and because we can't protect you forever from Soviet agents."
Brackney's smile had no humor. "Didn't know that, did you? It's one
reason you're being co-opted, in spite of all you've done.

"I can't say more till you take the oath, and once you've done that
you're under all the usual restrictions. Care to help out?"

Arch hesitated. He had little faith in government ... any government.
Still--

Horrisford of the FBI had saved his life.

"I'm game," he said.

Elizabeth nodded. The oath was administered.

Brackney leaned back and lit a cigar. "All right," he said. "I'll come
to the point.

"Offhand, it looks as if you've done a grave disservice to your
country. It's been pointed out in the press that transporting fuel is
the major problem of logistics. In fact, for the Russians it's _the_
problem, since they can live off the countries they invade to a degree
we can't match. You've solved that for them, and once they convert
their vehicles we can expect them to start rolling. They and their
allies--especially the Chinese. This discovery is going to make them a
first-class power."

"I've heard that," said Arch thinly.

"However, we also know that the communist regimes are not popular. Look
at the millions of refugees, look at all the prisoners who refused
repatriation, look at the Ukrainian insurrection--I needn't elaborate.
The trouble has been that the people aren't armed. To say anything at
home means the concentration camp.

"Now, then. Basically, the idea is this. We've got plants set up to
turn out capacitite in trainload lots. We can, I think, make weapons
capable of stopping a tank for a couple of dollars apiece. Do you
agree?"

"Why--yes," said Arch. "I've been considering it lately. A
rifle discharging its current through magnetic coils to drive a
steel-jacketed bullet--the bullet could be loaded with electricity
too. Or a Buck Rogers energy gun: a hand weapon with a blower run off
the capacitor, sucking in air at the rear and spewing it out between
two electrodes like a gigantic arc-welding flame. Or--yes, there are
all kinds of possibilities."

Brackney nodded with an air of satisfaction. "Good. I see you do have
the kind of imagination we need.

"Now, we'll be giving nothing away, because they already know how to
make the stuff and can think up anything we can. But, we have a long
jump as far as production facilities are concerned.

"The idea is this. We want to make really enormous quantities of
such weapons. By various means--through underground channels, by air
if necessary--we want to distribute them to all the Iron Curtain
countries. The people will be armed, and hell is going to break loose!

"We want you in on it as design and production consultants. Leave
tomorrow, be gone for several months probably. It's going to have to
be highly organized, so it can be sprung as a surprise; otherwise the
Soviet bosses, who are no fools, will hit. But your part will be in
production. Are you game?"

"It's--astonishing," said Elizabeth. "Frankly, I didn't think the
government had that much imagination."

"We're probably exceeding our authority," admitted Brackney. "By
rights, of course, Congress should be consulted, but this is like the
Louisiana Purchase: there's no time to do so."

It was the historical note which decided Arch. Grade-school history,
yes--but it didn't fit in with his preconceptions of the red-necked
militarist. Suddenly, almost hysterically, he was laughing.

"What's so funny?" asked Horrisford sharply.

"The idea--what old Clausewitz would say--winning wars by arming the
enemy! Sure--sure, I'm in. Gladly!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Six months on a secret reservation in Colorado which nobody but the
top brass left, six months of the hardest, most concentrated work a
man could endure, got Arch out of touch with the world. He saw an
occasional newspaper, was vaguely aware of trouble on the outside, but
there was too much immediately at hand for him to consider the reality.
Everything outside the barbed-wire borders of his universe grew vague.

Designing and testing capacitite weapons was harder than he had
expected, and took longer: though experienced engineers assured him
the project was moving with unprecedented speed and ease. Production
details were out of his department, but the process of tooling up and
getting mass output going was not one for overnight solution.

The magnetic rifle; the arc gun; the electric bomb and grenade; the
capacitite land mine, set to fry the crew of any tank which passed
over--he knew their hideous uses, but there was a cool ecstasy in
working with them which made him forget, most of the time. And after
all, the idea was to arm men who would be free.

In March, General Brackney entered the Quonset hut which Arch and
Elizabeth had been inhabiting and sat down with a weary smile. "I guess
you're all through now," he said.

"About time," grumbled the girl. "We've been sitting on our hands here
for a month, just puttering."

"The stuff had to be shipped out," said the general mildly. "We didn't
dare risk having the secret revealed. But we're rolling overseas, it's
too late to stop anything." He shrugged. "Naturally, the government
isn't admitting its part in this. Officially, the weapons were
manufactured by independent operators in Europe and Asia, and you'll
have to keep quiet about the truth for a long time--not that the
comrades won't be pretty sure, but it just can't be openly admitted.
However, there are no security restrictions on the gadgets themselves,
as of today."

"That surprises me," said Arch.

"It's simple enough. Everything is so obvious, really--any handyman can
make the same things for himself. A lot have been doing it, too. No
secrets exist to be given away, that's all." Brackney hesitated. "We'll
fly you back home anytime you wish. But if you want to stay on a more
permanent basis, we'll be glad to have you."

"No, thanks!" Elizabeth's eyes went distastefully around the sleazy
interior of the shack.

"This has all been temporary," said the general. "We were in such a
hell of a hurry. Better housing will be built now."

"Nevertheless, no," said Arch.

Brackney frowned. "I can't stop you, of course. But I don't think you
realize how tough it's getting outside, and how much worse it's going
to get. A revolution is starting, in more senses than one, and you'll
be safer here."

"I heard something about that," agreed Arch. "Discontented elements
making their own weapons, similar to ours--what of it?"

"Plenty," said the officer with a note of grimness. "It's an ugly
situation. A lot of people are out of work, and even those who still
have jobs don't feel secure in them. There are a dozen crank solutions
floating around, everything from new political theories to new
religious sects, and each one is finding wider acceptance than I'd have
believed possible."

"It doesn't surprise me," said Arch. "There's a queer strain of the
True Believer in American culture. You know how many utopian colonies
we've had throughout our history? And the single tax party, and
prohibition, and communism in the thirties. People in this country want
something concrete to believe in, and all but a few of the churches
have long ago degenerated into social clubs."

"Whatever the cause," said Brackney, "there are all these new groups,
clashing with the old authorities and with each other. And the
underworld is gleefully pitching in, and getting a lot of recruits from
the ranks of hungry, frightened, embittered people.

"The regular armed forces have to be mobilized to stop anything the
Soviets may try. The police and the National Guard have their hands
full in the big cities. The result is, that authority is breaking down
everywhere else. There's real trouble ahead, I tell you."

"All right," said Arch. "That's as may be. But our town is a collection
of pretty solid folk--and we want to go home."

"On your heads be it. There'll be a plane at six tomorrow."

--The fact did not strike home till they were stopping over at Idlewild
and saw uniformed men and machine-gun emplacements. In the coffee shop,
Arch asked the counterman just how bad things really were.

"Rough," he answered. "See this?" He flipped back his jacket, showing a
homemade capacitite pistol in a holster.

"Oh, look now--"

"Mister, I live in Brooklyn. I don't get home till after dark, and the
police cordons don't go closer than six blocks to my place. I've had to
shoot twice already in the past couple months."

"Bandits?"

"In gangs, mister. If I could work somewhere closer to home, I'd be off
like a shot."

Arch set down his cup. Suddenly he didn't want any more coffee. _My
God_, he thought, _am I responsible for that?_

A smaller plane carried them to Boston, where they caught a bus for
Westfield. The driver had an automatic rifle by his seat. Arch huddled
into himself, waiting for he knew not what; but the trip was uneventful.

The town didn't seem to have changed much. Most of the cars were
converted, but it didn't show externally. The drug store still flashed
neon at a drowsy sidewalk, the Carnegie library waited rather wistfully
for someone to come in, the dress shop had the same old dummies in
the window. Elizabeth pointed at them. "Look," she said. "See those
clothes?"

"They're dresses," said Arch moodily. "What about them?"

"No style change in six months, that's all," said Elizabeth. "It gives
me the creeps."

They walked along streets banked with dirty, half-melted snow, under
a leaden sky and a small whimpering wind. Their house had not changed
when they entered, someone had been in to dust and it looked like the
home they remembered. Arch sank tiredly into his old armchair and
accepted a drink. He studied the newspaper he'd bought at the depot.
Screaming headlines announced revolt in Russia--mass uprisings in the
Siberian prison camps--announcements from the Copenhagen office of the
Ukrainian nationalist movement--It all seemed very far away. The fact
that there were no new dress styles was somehow closer and more eerie.

A thunderous knock at the door informed him that Culquhoun had noticed
their lights. "Mon, it's guid to see ye again!" The great paw engulfed
his hand. "Where've ye been a' the while?"

"Can't tell you that," said Arch.

"Aweel, you'll permit me to make my own guesses, then." Culquhoun
cocked an eye at the paper. "Who do they think they're fooling, anyhow?
We can look for the Russian bombers any day now."

Arch considered his reply. That aspect had been thoroughly discussed
at the project, but he wasn't sure how much he could tell. "Quite
possibly," he said at last. "But with their internal troubles, they
won't be able to make many raids, or any big ones--and the little they
will be able to throw at us should be stopped while they're still over
northern Canada."

"Let's hope so," nodded Culquhoun. "But the people in the large
cities won't want to take the chance. There's going to be an exodus
of considerable dimensions in the next few days, with all that that
implies." He paused, frowning. "I've spent the last couple of months
organizing a kind of local militia. Bob has been making capacitite
guns, and there are about a hundred of us trying to train ourselves.
Want in on it?"

"They'd probably shoot me first," whispered Arch.

The red head shook, bear-like. "No. There's less feeling against you
locally than you seem to think. After all, few if any of the people in
this area have been hurt--they're farmers, small shopkeepers trading in
the essentials, students, college employees. Many of them have actually
benefited. You have your enemies here, but you have more friends."

"I think," said Arch thinly, "that I'm becoming one of my own enemies."

"Ah, foosh, mon! If you hadn't brought the stuff out, somebody else
would have. It's not your fault that we don't have the kind of economy
to absorb it smoothly."

"All right," said Arch without tone. "I'll join your minute men. There
doesn't seem to be anything else to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

The wave of automobiles began coming around noon of the next day.
Westfield lay off the main highway, so it didn't get the full impact of
the jam which tied up traffic from Philadelphia to Boston; but there
were some thousands of cars which passed through.

Arch stood in the ranks of men who lined Main Street. The gun felt
awkward in his hands. Breath smoked from his nostrils, and the air was
raw and damp. On one side of him was Mr. Hinkel, bundled up so that
only the glasses and a long red nose seemed visible; on the other was a
burly farmer whom he didn't know.

Outside the city limits a sign had been planted, directing traffic to
keep moving and to stay on the highway. There were barriers on all the
side streets. Arch heard an occasional argument when someone tried to
stop, to be urged on by a guard and by the angry horns behind him.

"But what'll they do?" he asked blindly. "Where will they stay? My God,
there are women and children in those cars!"

"Women and children here in town too," said Hinkel. "We've got to look
after our own. It won't kill these characters to go a few days without
eating. Every house here is filled already--there've been refugees
trickling in for weeks."

"We could bunk down a family in our place," ventured Arch.

"Save that space," answered Hinkel. "It'll be needed later."

Briefly, a certain pride rose through the darkness of guilt which lay
in Arch. These were the old Americans, the same folk who had stood at
Concord and gone west into Indian country. They were a survivor type.

But most of their countrymen weren't, he realized sickly. Urban
civilization had become too big, too specialized. There were people in
the millions who had never pitched a tent, butchered a pig, fixed a
machine. What was going to become of them?

Toward evening, he was relieved and slogged home, too numb with cold
and weariness to think much. He gulped down the dinner his wife had
ready and tumbled into bed.

It seemed as if he had not slept at all when the phone was ringing. He
groped toward it, cursing as he tried to unglue his eyes. Culquhoun's
voice rattled at him:

"You and Betty come up to the college, Somerset Hall, right away.
There's hell to pay."

"How--?"

"Our lookout on the water tower has seen fires starting to the south.
Something's approaching, and it doesn't look friendly."

Sleep drained from Arch and he stood in a grayness where Satan jeered
at him: "_Si monumentum requiris, circumspice!_" Slowly, he nodded.
"We'll be right along."

The campus was jammed with townspeople. In the vague pre-dawn light,
Arch saw them as a moving river of white, frightened faces. Farmer,
merchant, laborer, student, teacher, housewife, they had all receded
into a muttering anonymity through which he pushed toward the steps
of the hall. The irregular militia was forming ranks there, with
Culquhoun's shaggy form dominating the scene.

"There you are," he snapped. "Betty, can you help take charge of the
women and children and old people? Get them inside--this one building
ought to hold them all, with some crowding. Kind of circulate around,
keep them calm. We'll pass out coffee and doughnuts as soon as the
Salvation Army bunch can set up a canteen."

"What's the plan?" asked a guardsman. To Arch, his voice had a dim
dreamlike quality, none of this was real, it couldn't be.

"I don't know what those arsonists intend or where they're bound," said
Culquhoun, "but we'd better be ready to meet them. The traffic through
town stopped completely a few hours ago--I think there's a gang of
highwaymen operating."

"Colin, it can't be! Plain people like us--"

"Hungry, frightened, angry, desperate, confused people. A mob has
nothing to do with the individuals in it, my friend. And one small push
is enough to knock down a row of dominoes. Once lawlessness really
gets started, a lot of others are driven into it in self-defense."

They waited. The sun came up, throwing a pale bleak light over the late
snow and the naked trees. The canteen handed out a sort of breakfast.
Little was said.

At nine-thirty, a boy on a clumsy plowhorse came galloping up toward
them. "About a hundred, marching down the highway," he panted. "They
threw a couple shots at me."

"Stay here," said Culquhoun. "I'm going down to see if we can't parley.
I'll want about ten men with me. Volunteers?"

Arch found himself among the first. It didn't matter much what happened
to him, now when the work of his hands was setting aflame homes all
across the land. They trudged down the hillside and out toward the
viaduct leading south. Culquhoun broke into a deserted house and
stationed them in its entrance hall.

Peering out, Arch saw the ragged column moving in. They were all men,
unshaven and dirty. A few trucks accompanied them, loaded with a
strange mass of plunder, but most were on foot and all were armed.

Culquhoun bound a towel to his rifle barrel and waved it through the
front door. After what seemed like a long time, a voice outside said:
"Okay, if yuh wanna talk, go ahead."

"Cover me," murmured Culquhoun, stepping onto the porch. Looking around
his shoulder, Arch made out three of the invaders, with their troop
standing in tired, slumped attitudes some yards behind. They didn't
look fiendish, merely worn and hungry.

"Okay, pal," said the leader. "This is O'Farrell's bunch, and we're
after food and shelter. What can yuh do for us?"

"Food and shelter?" Culquhoun glanced at the trucks. "You seem to've
been helping yourselves pretty generously already."

O'Farrell's face darkened. "What'd yuh have us do? Starve?"

"You're from the Boston area, I suppose. You could have stayed there."

"And been blown off the map!"

"It hasn't happened yet," said Culquhoun mildly. "It's not likely to
happen, either. They have organized relief back there, you didn't have
to starve. But no, you panicked and then you turned mean."

"It's easy enough for yuh to say so. _Yuh're_ safe. We're here after
our proper share, that's all."

"Your proper share is waiting in Boston," said Culquhoun with a sudden
chill. "Now, if you want to proceed through our town, we'll let you;
but we don't want you to stay. Not after what you've been doing lately."

O'Farrell snarled and brought up his gun. Arch fired from behind
Culquhoun. The leader spun on his heel, crumpled, and sagged with a
shriek. Arch felt sick.

His nausea didn't last. It couldn't, with the sudden storm of lead
which sleeted against the house. Culquhoun sprang back, closing the
door. "Out the rear!" he snapped. "We'll have to fight!"

They retreated up the hill, crouching, zigzagging, shooting at the
disorderly mass which milled in slow pursuit. Culquhoun grinned
savagely. "Keep drawing 'em on, boys," he said as he knelt in the slush
and snapped a shot. "If they spread through town, we'll have hell's own
time routing 'em all out--but this way--"

Arch didn't know if he was hitting anything. He didn't hear the bullets
which must be whining around him--another cliché that just wasn't true,
he thought somewhere in the back of his head. A fight wasn't something
you could oversee and understand. It was cold feet, clinging mud,
whirling roaring confusion, it was a nightmare that you couldn't wake
up from.

Then the rest of the Westfield troop were there, circling around to
flank the enemy and pumping death. It was a rout--in minutes, the gang
had stampeded.

Arch leaned on his rifle and felt vomit rising in his throat. Culquhoun
clapped his shoulder. "Ye did richt well, laddie," he rumbled. "No bad
at all."

"What's happening?" groaned Arch. "What's become of the world?"

Culquhoun took out his pipe and began tamping it. "Why, a simple shift
of the military balance of power," he answered. "Once again we have
cheap, easily operated weapons which everyone can own and which are the
equal of anything it's practical for a government to use. Last time it
was the flintlock musket, right? And we got the American and French
Revolutions. This time it's capacitite.

"So the Soviet dictatorship is doomed. But we've got a rough time ahead
of us, because there are enough unstable elements in our own society
to make trouble. Our traditional organizations just aren't prepared to
handle them when they're suddenly armed.

"We'll learn how fast enough, I imagine. There's going to be order
again, if only because the majority of people are decent, hard-working
fellows who won't put up with much more of this sort of thing. But
there has to be a transition period, and what counts is surviving that."

"If I hadn't--Colin, it's enough to make a man believe in demoniac
possession."

"Nonsense!" snorted the other. "I told you before, if you hadn't
invented this stuff, somebody else would have. It wasn't you that made
it by the ton, all over the country. It wasn't you that thought up this
notion of finishing the Iron Curtain governments--a brilliant scheme, I
might add, well worth whatever price we have to pay at home.

"But it _is_ you, my boy, who's going to have to get us tooled up to
last the transition. Can you do it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Fundamental changes are seldom made consciously. Doubtless the man
in the fifth-century Roman street grumbled about all these barbarian
immigrants, but he did not visualize the end of an empire. The
Lancashire industrialist who fired his craftsmen and installed
mechanical looms was simply making a profitable investment. And
Westfield, Massachusetts, was only adopting temporary survival measures.

They didn't even look overwhelmingly urgent. Government had not
broken down: if anything, it was working abnormally hard. News came
through--ferocious air battles over the Canadian tundras; the Soviet
armies rolling westward into Europe and southward into Asia, then
pushed back with surprising ease and surrendering en masse as their
own states collapsed behind them--it was turning out to be a war as
remote and half-forgotten as Korea, and a much easier one, which lasted
a few months and then faded into a multi-cornered struggle between
communists, neo-czarists, and a dozen other elements. By Christmas
time, a shaky democratic confederation in Moscow was negotiating with
Ukrainia, the Siberian Convict Republic, and the Tartar Alliance. China
was in chaos and eastern Europe was free.

And while the great powers were realizing that they were no longer
great, now that a vast capital investment in armament had stopped
paying off; and while they sought to forestall world upheaval by
setting up a genuine international army with strength to enforce the
peace--life went on. People still had to eat.

Arch stood by Hinkel's watermill in the early spring. The ground
glistened and steamed with wetness underfoot, sunlit clouds raced
through a pale windy sky, and a mist of green was on the trees. Near
him the swollen millstream roared and brawled, the wheel flashed with
its own swiftness, and a stack of capacitors lay awaiting their charges.

"All right," he said. "We've got your generator going. But it isn't
enough, you know. It can't supply the whole country; and power lines to
the outside are down."

"So what do we do?" asked Hinkel. He felt too proud of his new
enterprise to care much about larger issues at the moment.

"We find other sources to supplement," said Arch. "Sunlight, now.
Approximately one horse-power per square yard, if you could only get
at it." He raised a face grown thin with overwork and with the guilt
that always haunted him these days, up to the sky. The sun felt warm
and live on his skin. "Trouble is, the potential's so low. You've got
to find a way to get a high voltage out of it before you can charge a
capacitor decently. Now let me think--"

He spent most of his waking hours thinking. It helped hold off the
memory of men lying dead on a muddy hillside.

When power was short, you couldn't go back to oxcarts and kerosene
lamps. There weren't enough of either. The local machine shop made and
sold quantities of home charging units, small primitive generators
which could be turned by any mechanical source, and treadmills were
built to drive them. But this was only an unsatisfactory expedient.
Accompanied by several armed guards, Arch made a trip to Boston.

The city looked much quieter than he remembered, some of the streets
deserted even at midday, but a subdued business went on. Food was still
coming in to the towns, and manufactured goods flowing out; there was
still trade, mail, transportation. They were merely irregular and
slightly dangerous.

Stopping at M.I.T. Arch gave certain of his problems to the big
computer, and then proceeded to an industrial supply house. The amount
of selenium he ordered brought a gasp and a hurried conference.

"It will take some time to get all this together," said a
vice-president. "Especially with conditions as they are."

"I know," said Arch. "We're prepared to make up truck convoys and
furnish guards; what we want you for is negotiation."

The vice-president blinked. "But ... good heavens, man! Is your whole
community in on this?"

"Just about. We have to be. There's little help coming in from outside,
so our area is thrown back on itself."

"Ah--the cost of this operation--"

"Oh, we can meet that. Special assessment, voted at the last town
meeting. They don't care very much, because money has little value when
you can't buy more than the rationed necessities. And they're getting
tired of going on short rations of power."

"I shouldn't say this, because your proposal is a fine deal for us, but
have you stopped to think? Both the REA and the private power concerns
will be restoring service eventually, just as soon as civil order has
been recreated."

Arch nodded. "I know. But there are two answers to that. In the first
place, we don't know when that'll be, and if we don't have adequate
energy sources by winter we'll be up the creek. Also, we're building a
sun-power plant which will cost almost nothing to operate. In the long
run, and not so terribly long at that, it'll pay off."

Bob Culquhoun, who went on the selenium convoy, reported an adventurous
journey through hundreds of miles where gangs of extremists still
ruled. "But they seem to be settling down," he added. "Nobody likes to
be a bandit, and anyhow the state militias are gradually subduing 'em.
Most of the rural communities, though, are striking out on their own
like us. There's going to be a big demand for selenium." Wistfulness
flickered in his eyes. "Wonder if I can raise enough money to buy some
stock?"

"It'll take time," said Elizabeth. "I know the sun-power generator is
simple, but you still can't design and build one overnight."

As a matter of fact, fall had come again before Westfield's plant was
in full operation. It didn't look impressive: great flat screens on
top of hastily constructed buildings, and inside these the apparatus
to raise voltage and charge capacitors. But in conjunction with the
watermill, it furnished more than enough electricity to run the
county's machines.

Arch was kept busy all that summer, directing, advising, helping. It
seemed that everybody had some scheme of his own for using capacitite.
Energy cost nothing, and machinery could be built from junkyard scrap
if nothing else. Westfield was suddenly acquiring her own looms, mills,
even a small foundry. Bob led a gang of young hellions who made an
airplane and kept it aloft for days at a time. His father promptly
confiscated it for the use of the civic guard, and after that there
were no more surprise brushes with roving outlaws.

An eyewitness report was brought in from the air--a clash between
state troops and one of the robber bands which still existed to the
north. The gangmen had their own trucks and jeeps, their own guns, all
operating off accumulators which could be charged at any of a thousand
watermills. A rifleman could stop a tank, and aircraft were of limited
value against guerrillas who crouched in brush and weeds. The battle
was a draw, with both sides finally retreating.

Arch shuddered, alone with Elizabeth, and crept into her arms. "Did I
do that?" he asked through his tears. "Did I do it?"

"No, darling," she said. One hand ruffled his disordered hair. "Can't
you forget that side of it? Think of what you have done, with your own
hands--built this town up again, given its people more than they ever
had before."

He set his teeth. "I'll try," he said.

Somewhat later, the government offered amnesty to those outlaws who
would lay down their arms and come home. It had the desired effect;
they had had enough of warring and insecurity. But Culquhoun scowled.
"'Tis a vurra bad precedent," he said. "Only a weak government makes
such a move."

Oddly, Arch felt a lightening within himself. "Maybe a weak government
is what we need," he answered.

       *       *       *       *       *

News: Several southern states threaten secession unless court decisions
concerning racial equality are withdrawn.

News: Uprisings in these same states. The Negro has had enough.

News: Capitulation of state governments. Constitutional conventions,
transfer of power from state to local authorities.

News: The depression is not ending, but transforming itself:
out-of-work men are starting to produce things for themselves with the
help of capacitite-driven machinery often made at home, trading their
surplus for whatever else they need. A mobile reclamation unit appears,
costing little to operate, and families begin to irrigate and colonize
desert areas. Big business, big labor, big government talk much and do
nothing effective--their day is past, but they simply cannot understand
the new forces at work.

News: More and more city areas are becoming empty as their inhabitants
take advantage of cheap, fast transportation and move into the rapidly
expanding suburbs and even into the country. This migration is
possible because with present energy sources, plastic board for home
construction can be manufactured at very low cost.

News: There is a great deal of debate in Washington about redistricting
to meet the new population pattern. It doesn't seem too important,
though, because a land of nearly self-sufficient communities, such as
this is becoming, is much less dependent on central government.

News: Experiment and innovation in dress, work habits, manners and
morals, grows ever more common. The basic cause of this is that few men
need now be afraid of what the neighbors or the boss thinks. If you
don't like it where you are, you can easily go elsewhere and start over.

None of this happened at once. It would take a century or more for the
change to complete itself. But even in the second year, the trend was
obvious.

       *       *       *       *       *

Snow whirled against the house, blindingly, as if the world drew into
itself and nothing lay beyond these walls. The muted skirl of wind came
through, lonesome and shivering. But inside, there was warmth and a
calm light.

Arch sat with a whiskey and soda in his hand, looking across the floor
at his wife. He felt tired, but there was a relaxation in him, a sense
of labor finished.

Not fully--there would be much to do yet. But power was there,
machinery was there, food stored away; they would last the winter, and
there would be another springtime.

"It's settling down," Elizabeth told him, putting her news magazine
aside. "For once, I agree with the editor of this rag. The crisis is
over, and now it's a matter of readjustment. The world is never going
to be the same, but it'll be a better one ... cleaner."

"Perhaps," said Arch. He didn't feel so sharply the horror of guilt,
not any more.

"Look around you," she invited. "Look what you've done. I'm afraid,
dear, that you're going to be rediscovered. It won't take long before
people suddenly wake up to the fact that your invention did all this
for them. Brace yourself--you're going to be famous for life."

Arch winced. "But I didn't!" he protested. "They did it for themselves.
One man never could--"

"I quite agree," she smiled. "One man can neither make nor destroy a
society. So why not give that conscience of yours a rest?"

"There's been suffering," he said, enough alcohol in him to break down
his reserve. "People have died."

"A lot of them needed killing," she said earnestly. "Look what we've
got. An end to dictatorship. Removal of the atomic-war threat. Cheap
energy for a million new projects. A four-hour work day in prospect.
Government, which was getting too big and officious in all countries,
cut down to size again. The plain man standing on his own feet and
working for himself. Natural resources conserved. If you must take
either credit or blame, Si, then balance your books!"

"I know," he said. "I know all that, up in my conscious mind. But
down underneath--I'll always see those houses burning, and those men
shooting at each other."

"You--" She hesitated. "I know what you need. Your trouble, my boy, is
that underneath that Yankee conservatism, you're a hopeless romantic.
Your mind dwells on the sudden and dramatic. Now the positive benefits
of capacitite aren't anywhere near as quick and spectacular as the
temporary evils were. What you have to do, to satisfy those Puritan
chromosomes, is to produce something really big and fancy, something of
immediate, large value."

He chuckled, lifted out of his dark mood in spite of himself. "I
imagine you're right, Dr. Freud," he said. "But what?"

"I don't know." She frowned with worry for him. "But think, man.
We have leisure now--in another year or so, well, we won't be the
millionaires we once dreamed of, but like everybody else we'll have
real security and real time to ourselves. You could use that time to
work on _something_."

"Hm--" Automatically, his brain turned to practicalities. "Let's see,
now. Capacitite offers a way of concentrating energy enormously ... a
very small packet will hold a hell of a lot--_My God!_" His yell shook
the windows as he leaped to his feet.

"What the devil--something wrong?" Elizabeth got up too.

"No!" He was running toward the phone. "Got to get hold of
Colin--M.I.T.--don't you see, darling?" His hands trembled as he
dialed, but there was laughter in his voice. "Don't you see it?
Spaceships!"







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SNOWBALL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


