The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dopo il veglione o viceversa
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dopo il veglione o viceversa

Author: Roberto Bracco

Release date: November 5, 2011 [eBook #37936]

Language: Italian

Credits: Produced by Carlo Traverso, Claudio Paganelli, Barbara Magni, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOPO IL VEGLIONE O VICEVERSA ***




Produced by Carlo Traverso, Claudio Paganelli, Barbara Magni, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.

This file was produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.

                             ROBERTO BRACCO

                                 TEATRO

                              VOLUME PRIMO

                 NON FARE AD ALTRI... -- LUI LEI LUI --
                UN'AVVENTURA DI VIAGGIO -- UNA DONNA --
                   LE DISILLUSE -- *DOPO IL VEGLIONE*

                              2ª EDIZIONE.



                        REMO SANDRON -- Editore

                        Libraio della Real Casa
                         MILANO-PALERMO-NAPOLI

                          PROPRIETÀ LETTERARIA

    _I diritti di riproduzione e di traduzione sono riservati per
    tutti i paesi, non escluso il Regno di Svezia e quello di
    Norvegia._

    È assolutamente proibito di rappresentare questi lavori senza il
    consenso scritto dell'Autore _(Art. 14 del Testo Unico 17
    Settembre 1882)_.

    Published in Palermo, 10th. June Privilege of Copyright in the
    United States reserved under the Act approved March 3rd. 1905,
    by Roberto Bracco and Remo Sandron.

    Off. Tip. Sandron -- 126 -- I -- 290312.

                                  ----




                            DOPO IL VEGLIONE

                                   o

                               VICEVERSA

(Scherzo comico per _cafè-chantant_, musicato dal Maestro _Umberto
Mazzone_, scritto apposta per _Nicola Maldagea_ e _Amelia Faraone_,
eseguito per la prima volta al _Salone Margherita_ di _Napoli_, nel
1893).




                              PERSONAGGI:

    _Lui_ e _Lei_.

La scena rappresenta un elegante salottino intimo con un paravento.




                              SCENA UNICA.


                         _Lui_ e _Lei_ entrano.

_Lei è vestita da uomo. Lui, «viceversa», è vestito da donna. E tutti e
due portano il domino e la maschera._

_Lui si burla di Lei, e Lei si burla di Lui._

_Dal cappuccio di Lei scappano i riccioli della parrucca maschile; da
quello di Lui scappano i riccioli della parrucca femminile._

_Sicchè, Lui è convinto che Lei sia un uomo: Lei è convinta che Lui sia
una donna._

_Lei si avanza conducendo Lui, graziosamente, per mano._

                                 _Lei_

                     _(imitando una voce maschile)_

    Siam giunti, mascherina....
    Vi prego, favorite:
    la casa è un po' piccina:
    è casa da _garçon_.
    Non è degna di voi,
    lo so, ma compatite....
    chè, in fin dei conti, poi,
    in due ci si sta ben.

                                 _Lui_

                    _(imitando una voce femminile)_

    Perchè vi confondete?
    Non sono una regina...
    Tutt'altro! Mi potete
    trattare _sans façon_.
    Io faccio, lo confesso,
    o un po' la ballerina
    o... quel che faccio adesso:
    ecco, nè più nè men.

                                 _Lei_

                               _(tra sè)_

    Mi par che se la beva:
    mi tratta da merlotto!
    Non sa qual figlia... d'Eva
    le si nasconde in me!

                                 _Lui_

                               _(tra sè)_

    Ch'io sia davvero donna
    convinto è il giovinotto.
    Non sa sotto la gonna
    che pezzo d'uomo c'è.

                             _Lui_ e _Lei_

                  _(insieme -- ognuno per conto suo)_

    Oh! Sesso, mio nemico!
    Perchè non sei diverso?
    Dice quel motto antico:
    «ciò che si lascia è perso.»

_(Poi Lei, accennando a Lui, e Lui, accennando a Lei:)_

    E che farà
    quando per forza
    comparirà
    da questa scorza
    l'imprevedibile
    che dentro sta?
    Si morderà
    le dieci dita
    e imparerà
    che nella vita
    rompe le scatole
    la realtà.

                                 _Lei_

    Toglietevi la maschera,
    scopritevi il visino.
    Dagli occhi l'indovino:
    dev'essere divino!

                                 _Lui_

    Datemi il buon esempio,
    gentil giovanottino.
    È troppo sibillino
    cotesto mascherino.

                                 _Lei_

                           _(con seduzione)_

    Almen fate ch'io guardi
    un sol piedino vostro.

                                 _Lui_

                        _(con timidità pudica)_

    No, no, no, no!... Più tardi....
    Più tardi ve lo mostro.

                                 _Lei_

    Avete, tale e quale,
    l'aria d'una novizia!

                                 _Lui_

    Ma pure, in generale,
    è sempre l'uom che inizia!

                                 _Lei_

    E allora, o dolce incognita,
    sta ben: vi servirò.

_(Voltando le spalle e preparandosi a togliersi la maschera -- tra sè:)_

    Ho quasi quasi scrupolo
    di aver tardato un po'.

                                 _Lui_

    Sbrigatevi! Sbrigatevi!

                                 _Lei_

    Frenate l'ansietà.

                                 _Lui_

_(fingendo un accento di ansia infrenabile)_

    Non posso.... Il cor mi palpita....

                                 _Lei_

_(buttando via il mascherino e sbottonando il domino, appare vestita da
uomo, in frak e cravatta bianca: ma le forme del corpo ed il viso
rivelano la perfetta muliebrità.)_

    Son donna: eccomi qua!

                                 _Lui_

                               _(tra sè)_

    Oh che fortuna!

                               _(a lei)_

    Donna?

                                 _Lei_

    Ma sì! Donna! Donnissima!

                                 _Lui_

                        _(tra sè, tripudiante)_

    Non sa sotto la gonna
    che pezzo d'uomo c'è!

                               _(a lei)_

    Ne siete ben sicura?

                                 _Lei_

    O bella!... Sicurissima!

                                 _Lui_

                              _(fra sè:)_

    Graziosa è l'avventura!

                   _(a lei, ostentando incredulità)_

    Donna!?...

                                 _Lei_

    Credete a me.

                                 _Lui_

                              _(tra sè:)_

    In questa trappola
    che lei parò,
    lei stessa capita,
    e uscir non può.
    L'ora propizia
    attender vo'
    ed in questi abiti
    resto perciò.
    Funger da femmina
    non vorrei più,
    ma... è triste l'epoca:
    l'uomo... sta giù.

                                 _Lei_

                              _(tra sè:)_

    Si agita! Brontola!
    Ci spera ancor?

_(Indicando con un dito il proprio viso)_

    Han forse gli uomini
    il mio color?...
    Se dall'equivoco
    non vengo fuor,
    lei non rinunzia
    al sogno d'or.

_(accennando al frak e ai calzoni)_

    Queste visibili
    maschie virtù,
    per non più illuderla,
    butterò giù.

_(Corre in gran fretta dietro il paravento.)_

                                 _Lui_

    E dite: m'è concesso
    saper che fate, adesso?

                                 _Lei_

                          _(senza mostrarsi)_

    Io voglio del mio sesso
    riprendere possesso.

                                 _Lui_

    Sì, presto, presto, presto!

                                 _Lei_

    Mi svesto...

                                 _Lui_

                  _(fa un movimento di contentezza.)_

                                 _Lei_

    ... e mi rivesto.

                                 _Lui_

    Se vengo, vi molesto?

                                 _Lei_

                           _(energicamente)_

    Restate lì.

                                 _Lui_

                             _(rassegnato)_

    Ci resto.

_(Lui, or drizzandosi sulla punta dei piedi, ora guardando tra le
connessure del paravento, ora salendo sopra una seggiola, assiste alla
toletta di Lei, e si frega le mani, ammira, si entusiasma, s'inebria.
Intanto, Lei, svestendosi, getta di qua dal paravento il parrucchino, il
frak, il panciotto, la camicia, i calzoni, che Lui raccoglie, osserva,
esamina.)_

                                 _Lei_

                _(comparisce in abito molto femminile)_

    Sono pronta, amica mia.

                                 _Lui_

    Santi numi, com'è bella!

                                 _Lei_

    E vi par che un uomo io sia?

                                 _Lui_

    Non è faccia d'uomo quella!

                                 _Lei_

_(pavoneggiandosi, con le mani nei fianchi)_

    Osservate il corpicino....

                                 _Lui_

    Oh! lo vedo ch'è un gioiello.

                                 _Lei_

    Osservatemi il piedino....

                                 _Lui_

    Oh! non è piè d'uomo, quello!

                                 _Lei_

    Perdonate, dunque, cara,
    questo scherzo: è carnevale....

                                 _Lui_

_(dimenticando di dover sembrar donna)_

    Vi perdonerò se avara
    non sarete voi con me....

                                 _Lei_

    Che volete? Non comprendo.

                                 _Lui_

    Un bacino.... Non fa male!

                                 _Lei_

                     _(stringendosi nelle spalle)_

    Ve lo do.

            _(per cortesia lo bacia, in fretta, sul mento.)_

                                 _Lui_

    Io ve lo rendo.

                      _(la bacia sulla guancia.)_

                                 _Lei_

    Non c'è sugo....

                                 _Lui_

    Sì che c'è!

                      _(e tenta di abbracciarla.)_

                                 _Lei_

    Ma, signora! Che vi piglia?

                                 _Lui_

_(impappinandosi, cerca di giustificarsi)_

    Mi sembrate... una mia zia...

                                 _Lei_

    In che cosa mi somiglia?!

                                 _Lui_

                        _(abbracciandola forte)_

    Una vera simmetria!

                                 _Lei_

    Basta!... basta!... Non stringete....

                                 _Lui_

    Non la vedo da tanti anni!...

                                 _Lei_

    Ma, in sostanza, voi... chi siete?

                                 _Lui_

                              _(confuso)_

    Io?... Non sono... nei miei panni!...

_(Corre, alla sua volta, dietro il paravento, portando seco gli abiti
d'uomo che Lei indossava.)_

                                 _Lei_

    E dite: m'è concesso
    saper che fate, adesso?

                                 _Lui_

    Io voglio del mio sesso
    riprendere possesso.

                                 _Lei_

                            _(meravigliata)_

    E che vuol dire questo?!

                                 _Lui_

    Mi svesto... e mi rivesto...

                                 _Lei_

    Se vengo, vi molesto?

                                 _Lui_

                           _(con entusiasmo)_

    Venite pur....

                                 _Lei_

                             _(diffidente)_

    No!... Resto.

_(Ricomincia la mimica. Lei, come ha fatto Lui, punta dalla curiosità,
cerca di vedere quel che avviene dietro il paravento; ed osserva,
inquieta, la roba che Lui, svestendosi, le fa piovere addosso, cioè il
domino, il mascherino, la parrucca, le imbottiture con cui aveva
improvvisate le forme di donna._

_Finalmente, vengono giù la gonna e la sottana. Lei, sempre più curiosa,
sale sopra la seggiola, vede... e dà un grido quasi di spavento. Quindi
scende precipitosamente, e, indignata, aspetta.)_

                                 _Lui_

_(comparisce, pavoneggiandosi, vestito degli abiti maschili di Lei, che
gli vanno male; e, poichè Lei ha un gesto d'ira e di sdegno, le si
ginocchia ai piedi.)_

                                 _Lei_

    Voi, dunque, siete un uomo?!
    Se non uscite subito,
    chiamo la polizia!

                                 _Lui_

                             _(umilmente)_

    Sì... forse sono un uomo;
    ma vi prego di credere
    ... che non è colpa mia.

_(A poco a poco, Lei s'intenerisce e gli apre le braccia.)_

                                 _Lei_

    Sarai mio prigioniero
    insino al far del giorno.
    Del mondo, ch'è ciarliero,
    non me ne importa un corno....
    Nella prigione oscura
    io ti giudicherò,
    ma non aver paura:
    per te clemenza avrò!

                                 _Lui_

    Sarò tuo prigioniero
    insino al far del giorno.
    Del mondo, ch'è ciarliero,
    non me ne importa un corno.
    Io non avrò paura,
    e a te mi affiderò
    in questa mia cattura,
    senza dir mai di no.

                            _Lei_ _e_ _Lui_

                              _(insieme)_

    Non so chi sei, che fai,
    ma già ti voglio ben
    e so che m'amerai....
    fino a domani almen.
    Tra poco, o belle o brutte,
    in quella oscurità,
    ci sveleremo tutte
    le generalità.
    Ahimè, soltanto al buio
    non si nasconde niente.
    Può il buio, immantinente,
    scoprir... la verità.


               _(Qui, cala la tela, tardi ma in tempo.)_







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DOPO IL VEGLIONE O VICEVERSA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


