The Project Gutenberg eBook of Party sweets
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Party sweets

Author: Mary Blake

Creator: Carnation Milk Products Company

Release date: August 3, 2020 [eBook #62835]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARTY SWEETS ***

                             “PARTY SWEETS”


                            By _Mary Blake_


C-168—Litho in U.S.A.

               Copyright 1960 Carnation Company, Los Angeles, California




                                Candies


    [Illustration: Candies]

_Make candies cream-smooth with today’s Carnation—the milk you can use
like cream, with ½ the fat calories!_

_The proof of good candy is in its texture. It should be creamy-smooth,
not coarse or granular._

_Cream itself couldn’t make candy smoother than Carnation does—with ½
the fat calories of cream! Carnation looks like cream, cooks like cream,
even whips! An exclusive method of evaporation slowly removes only
water, at low temperature. This low-heat method gives Carnation the
consistency of rich cream—with ½ the fat calories, and at ½ the cost!_

                                 * * *


Peanut Clusters

                                                   —Makes about 3½ dozen

  2 cups firmly packed light brown sugar
  ⅔ cup (small can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup peanut butter
  1½ cups (6¼-ounce can) chopped peanuts

Mix sugar and Carnation thoroughly in a 2-quart saucepan. Bring to a
rolling boil over high heat. Reduce heat to medium. Boil for 5 minutes,
stirring constantly. Remove from heat. Add vanilla, peanut butter and
peanuts. Beat until well-mixed. Drop candy rapidly from a teaspoon onto
a buttered cookie sheet. Cool.

                                 * * *

Use a candy thermometer to take the guesswork out of candy-making when
cooking to a specific temperature.

                                 * * *


Chocolate Bon Bons

_Sweet-tooth favorite ... Carnation keeps them creamy longer...._

                                    —Makes about 3 dozen 1-inch bon bons

  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ½ cup sifted all-purpose flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 egg
  1 cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 cup (6-ounce package) semi-sweet chocolate pieces
  1 cup chopped nuts
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine all ingredients except nuts and vanilla in saucepan over medium
heat. Stirring constantly, cook until very thick (about 10 to 12
minutes). Chill about one hour. Drop chocolate mixture from teaspoon
into chopped nuts. Roll into small balls, and chill until served.


Cream Pralines

                                                 —Makes 20 to 24 patties

  1 cup firmly packed dark brown sugar
  1 cup granulated sugar
  ⅔ cup (small can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  2 cups pecan halves

Mix sugars and Carnation thoroughly in 2-quart saucepan. Cook over
medium heat to soft ball stage (234° F.), stirring constantly. Remove
from heat. Add vanilla and pecans. Stir until mixture begins to thicken
(1 to 2 minutes). Drop candy rapidly from tablespoon onto wax paper or
buttered cookie sheet to form patties. If candy becomes too stiff at the
last to drop, stir in one or two tablespoons of hot water.


Quick Chocolate Fudge

_The newest thing in fudge ... quick, easy, failproof...._

  Ingredients      Children’s Fudge Family Fudge     Party or Gift
                                                     Fudge

                   16 1-inch        About 2 pounds   About 5 pounds
                   squares
  Butter           1 tablespoon     2 tablespoons    ⅓ cup
  _Undiluted_      ½ cup            ⅔ cup (small     1⅔ cups (large
  Carnation                         can)             can)
  Evaporated Milk
  Sugar            1 cup            1⅔ cups          4½ cups
  Salt             ¼ teaspoon       ½ teaspoon       1 teaspoon
  Marshmallows     12               16 (4 oz.)       32 (8 oz.)
  (diced)
  Semi-sweet       1 cup (6 oz.)    1½ cups          4 cups
  chocolate pieces
  Vanilla          ½ teaspoon       1 teaspoon       1 tablespoon
  Chopped nuts     ¼ cup            ½ cup            1½ cups
  Cooking Time     3 minutes        5 to 6 minutes   7 to 8 minutes
  Stirring Time    About ½ minute   1 to 2 minutes   2 to 3 minutes
  Pan Size         8-inch square    9-inch square    2 9-inch squares

Combine butter, undiluted Carnation, sugar and salt in saucepan over
medium heat. Allow to come to boil. Cook for time indicated, stirring
constantly. Remove from heat, stir in diced marshmallows, chocolate,
vanilla and chopped nuts. Stir vigorously for time indicated (or until
marshmallows are completely melted and blended). Pour into buttered pan
and allow to cool. Cut into squares.


“Cream” Caramels

                                                          —Makes 1 pound

  1 cup granulated sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 cup light corn syrup
  ¼ cup butter
  ⅔ cup (small can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Combine all ingredients except vanilla in saucepan over low heat. Cook
until syrup forms firm ball in cold water (or 245° F. on candy
thermometer). Stir constantly. Add vanilla. Pour into buttered 8-inch
square pan. Cool at room temperature, then chill in refrigerator until
caramel hardens. When ready to cut caramels, set pan in warm water to
loosen from bottom and sides of pan. Turn onto cutting board. Cut into
small squares with a heavy, sharp knife using a saw-like motion.


Panocha

                                                    —Makes about 1 pound

  2⅓ cups (1 pound) firmly packed brown sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons light corn syrup
  2 tablespoons butter
  ¾ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ⅔ cup chopped nuts

Mix sugar, salt, syrup, butter and Carnation thoroughly in 2-quart
saucepan. Cook over medium heat to soft ball stage (236° F.), stirring
constantly. Cool to about 110° F. Stir in vanilla and nuts. Beat until
thick and creamy. Turn into buttered 8-inch square pan. Cool and cut
into squares.




                         Quick Chocolate Fudge!


    [Illustration: Heat butter, Carnation and sugar in saucepan over
    medium heat. Allow to come to boil. Cook for time indicated in
    recipe above, stirring constantly.]

    [Illustration: Remove from heat. Add marshmallows, chocolate,
    vanilla, and nuts. Stir until marshmallows are completely melted.
    Pour into buttered pan.]

    [Illustration: Top with additional nuts, if desired. Cool until
    firm; cut into squares. It takes Carnation—the milk you can use like
    cream—with ½ the fat calories!]




                           Icings & Toppings


    [Illustration: Icings and Toppings]

_“Creamier” icings and toppings—yours with today’s Carnation, the milk
that does what cream can do—with ½ the fat calories!_

_No other form of milk—not even cream itself—can give results so_
perfectly _smooth in these rich-tasting recipes. Carnation does it with
½ the fat calories, and at ½ the cost of cream!_

_Carnation’s “creamy” consistency works wonders in_ all _your
recipes—makes casseroles richer, sauces smoother, everything more
delicious. Have you tried cooking with_ today’s _Carnation?_

                                 * * *


Extra Smooth Vanilla Icing

_Always creamy rich and super smooth ... it’s made with Carnation...._

                                 —Makes icing for two 8-inch cake layers

  ⅓ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 to 4½ cups sifted confectioners sugar
  ¼ cup soft butter

Combine all ingredients except butter until smooth. Add butter; beat
until creamy. Spread between, on top and sides of cooled cake layers.


Nippy Lemon Icing

_The tang of fresh lemons ... the sweetness of sugar ... and the
creaminess of Carnation...._

                                      —Makes icing for two 8-inch layers

  ¼ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  4 to 4½ cups sifted confectioners sugar
  1 tablespoon grated lemon rind
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ¼ cup soft butter

Blend all ingredients except lemon juice and butter until smooth. Add
lemon juice and butter; beat until creamy. Spread between, on sides and
on top of cooled cake layers.

Orange Icing: Use orange juice and orange rind in place of lemon.


1-2-3 Fudge Sauce

_Quick as 1-2-3 ... and so easy to remember...._

                                                          —Makes 2½ cups

  1 large can (1⅔ cups) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  2 cups granulated sugar
  3 squares (3 ounces) unsweetened chocolate
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Mix Carnation, sugar and chocolate in saucepan. Bring to a boil over
medium heat. Cook 5 minutes, stirring vigorously. (Start timing when
mixture starts to “bubble” around edges of pan.) Remove from heat. Add
vanilla. Beat with rotary-type beater for 1 minute. Serve hot or cold on
ice cream or cake. If sauce is too thick when cold, add additional
_undiluted_ Carnation just before serving.

                                 * * *

With your “party dessert,” you’ll serve coffee, of course. And to
millions of real coffee lovers the only way to “cream” their coffee is
with Carnation. They love the creamier, richer flavor—and more tempting
color Carnation gives to coffee. Fill your cream pitcher with
Carnation—the milk that whips!


Butterscotch Sauce

_A dessert sauce that adds a party touch to ice cream, cake,
puddings..._

                                                    —Makes about 1½ cups

  1 cup firmly packed brown sugar
  ½ cup corn syrup
  ¼ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  ¼ cup butter
  1 teaspoon vanilla
  ½ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk

Mix brown sugar, corn syrup and ¼ cup Carnation in saucepan. Heat to
boiling. Boil 5 minutes, stirring constantly. Add butter and vanilla.
Stir until butter is melted. Cool mixture slightly. Add the ½ cup
Carnation. Serve hot or cold.


Fluffy Chocolate Icing

_Rich and creamy ... easy to spread ... so quick to mix...._

                                      —Makes icing for two 8-inch layers

  1 cup (6-oz. package) semi-sweet chocolate pieces
  ¼ cup butter
  1½ cups sifted confectioners sugar
  ⅓ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk

Melt chocolate and butter. Allow to cool thoroughly. Blend in sugar
alternately with undiluted Carnation. Beat briskly to spreading
consistency or on mixer at medium speed until creamy. Spread between
layers, on sides, and on top of cooled cake layers.

Chocolate Marshmallow Icing: Melt ½ cup diced marshmallows (4-5 medium)
with chocolate before adding sugar.

Chocolate Crunch Icing: Add ½ cup finely chopped nuts to icing before
spreading on cooled cake layers.


Broiled Coconut Crunch Topping

_Can’t wait for your cake to cool?... Use this “broiled” icing...._

                                            —Makes topping for loaf cake

  ¼ cup soft butter
  1 cup firmly packed brown sugar
  ⅔ cup shredded coconut
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  ⅓ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk

Combine all ingredients; spread over warm loaf cake (8″ x 12″). Place
under broiler 3 to 4 inches from unit. Broil 1 to 2 minutes or until
topping is bubbly and brown.


Chocolate Sauce

_Couldn’t be simpler to make!... Couldn’t be better to serve!..._

                                                          —Makes 1¼ cups

  ½ cup semi-sweet chocolate pieces
  ⅔ cup (small can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk

Combine chocolate pieces and Carnation in saucepan over hot water or low
heat. Stir constantly until chocolate melts (about 3 to 5 minutes).
Remove from heat; cool. For a thinner sauce, add a little Carnation
Evaporated Milk just before serving.

                                 * * *


For a higher, lighter cake....

In your favorite cake recipes, instead of ordinary bottled milk, use
Carnation Evaporated Milk mixed with an equal amount of water. This
mixture will give you a higher cake ... a lighter, more tender cake
every time ... and a smooth, more evenly browned surface for icing. Cool
cake thoroughly on wire rack before icing.

    [Illustration: {Cake}]




                                Desserts


    [Illustration: Desserts]

_For heavenly sherbets and whipped desserts, use today’s Carnation like
whipping cream. It has far less fat calories!_

_These extra-special recipes are not only easy on the budget but easy on
the calories. Today’s Carnation whips even higher than cream!_

_These recipes are guaranteed to be light, luscious and failure-proof
when you make them with Carnation—the milk that does what cream can do,
with ½ the fat calories, and at ½ the cost._

                                 * * *


Easy Lemon Sherbet

_Rings the bell for every occasion ... melt in your mouth
“smoothie”...._

—Makes 4 to 6 servings

  1⅔ cups (large can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ¾ cup (6-ounce can) frozen lemonade

Chill Carnation in refrigerator tray until soft crystals form around
edges of tray (about 20 to 25 minutes). Whip until stiff (about 2
minutes). Add _lemon juice_ and whip until very stiff (about 2 minutes
longer). Fold in granulated sugar and softened lemonade. Freeze in
refrigerator tray until firm, stirring occasionally.


Tropical Freeze

_No luck needed ... and just watch your guests beam...._

                                                  —Makes 4 to 6 servings

  1⅔ cups (large can) _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  ¼ cup lemon juice
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  ¾ cup (6-ounce can) frozen orange concentrate

Chill Carnation in refrigerator tray until ice crystals form around
edges of tray (about 20 to 25 minutes). Whip until stiff (about 2
minutes); add lemon juice and whip until _very_ stiff (about 2 minutes
longer). Fold in sugar and softened orange concentrate. Freeze in
refrigerator tray or sherbet dishes 1 to 2 hours.


Cranberry Freeze

_Holiday favorite for year-round eating_

                                                  —Makes 6 to 8 servings

  1 cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  1½ cups (about 16 medium) diced marshmallows
  2 cups (1 pound can) whole cranberry sauce
  1 cup drained crushed pineapple
  ¼ teaspoon salt

Chill Carnation in refrigerator tray until ice crystals form around the
edges of tray (about 20 minutes). Whip until stiff (about 2 minutes).
Add lemon juice and whip very stiff (about 2 minutes more). Combine
marshmallows with cranberries, pineapple, and salt. Fold in whipped
Carnation. Freeze in refrigerator tray until ready to serve (about 3 to
4 hours).


Chocolate Mint Creme

                                                 —Makes about 6 servings

  ⅓ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 cup semi-sweet chocolate pieces
  1½ cups (about 16 medium) diced marshmallows
  2 egg yolks
  1 teaspoon peppermint flavoring
  ⅔ cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  2 egg whites
  ¼ cup chopped nuts

Mix ⅓ cup Carnation, chocolate pieces and marshmallows in 1½-quart
saucepan. Heat over medium heat until chocolate and marshmallows are
melted, stirring occasionally. Beat egg yolks slightly. Add to chocolate
mixture. Stir in peppermint flavoring. Cool. Chill ⅔ cup Carnation in
refrigerator tray until ice crystals form around edges of tray, (about
15 minutes). Whip until stiff (about 2 minutes). Add lemon juice and
whip very stiff (about 2 minutes longer). Beat egg whites until soft
peaks form. Fold egg whites and whipped Carnation into chocolate
mixture. Spoon into parfait or sherbet glasses. Garnish with nuts. Chill
about 2 hours until set.


Chocolate Souffle

                                                  —Makes 4 to 6 servings

  3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
  2 tablespoons butter
  1 cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  2 squares (2 oz.) melted bitter chocolate
  ½ cup granulated sugar
  3 eggs
  1 teaspoon vanilla

Prepare cream sauce by combining flour with butter over low heat.
Gradually add Carnation. Stir constantly until thickened (about 5
minutes). Add melted chocolate and sugar. Separate eggs. Beat yolks
until thick. Add small amount of chocolate sauce to egg yolks and return
to sauce mixture over low heat. Stir until thickened (about 2 minutes).
Beat egg whites until stiff. Fold egg whites and vanilla into chocolate
mixture. Pour into 1½-quart buttered casserole. Place in pan of hot
water. Bake in moderate oven (350° F.) about 45 minutes. _Serve at
once._

    [Illustration: Strawberry angel cake]


Strawberry Angel Cake

                                                 —Makes 8 to 10 servings

  1 large angel food cake
  1 package (10 ounces) frozen strawberries
  Juice from strawberries plus water to make 1 cup
  1 package (3 ounces) strawberry-flavored gelatin
  ½ cup marshmallow whip
  1 cup _undiluted_ Carnation Evaporated Milk
  2 tablespoons lemon juice

Prepare cake by cutting around cake ¾ inch in from the outer edge and ½
inch in from center edge. Cut to within 1 inch of bottom. Scoop out cake
between cuts with a fork. Defrost strawberries. Drain juice. Add water
to make 1 cup liquid. Heat to boiling. Place gelatin in large bowl. Add
hot liquid. Stir until dissolved. Add marshmallow whip. Stir until
blended. Chill to the consistency of unbeaten egg white. Chill Carnation
in refrigerator tray until soft crystals form around edges (about 10 to
15 minutes). Whip until stiff (about 1 minute). Add lemon juice and whip
until _very_ stiff (about 2 minutes longer). Fold strawberries and
whipped Carnation into marshmallow mixture. Fill cake cavity and frost
top with mixture too, if desired. Chill until firm (about 3 hours).
Slice and serve.

                                 * * *


FREE! Carnation Recipe Book

16 pages of “Failure-Proof Recipes”—meat and fish, sauces, cakes, pies,
desserts. Full-color illustrations. For your FREE copy, send your name
and address to:

                           Carnation Company
                              Dept. PS-34
                       Los Angeles 19, California




                                _FREE!_
                       _MODERN REVISED EDITION OF
                     “YOU AND YOUR CONTENTED BABY”_


    [Illustration: YOU AND YOUR CONTENTED BABY]

32 illustrated pages of authoritative information covering pre-natal and
post-natal care. Just send a postcard with your name and address to:
Carnation Company, Dept. PS-33, Los Angeles 19, California.




                           _FUN TO COOK BOOK_


    [Illustration: Fun to COOK BOOK]

48 pages of fun-filled recipes, especially written for girls 7-14. Hard
“stand-up” covers, big clear printing, bright pictures throughout. Just
send 25¢ in coin to Carnation Company, Dept. PS-32, Los Angeles 19,
Calif.

    [Illustration: Carnation EVAPORATED MILK
    _the milk you can use like cream—with ½ the fat calories_]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARTY SWEETS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


