The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Eames-Erskine case
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Eames-Erskine case
        A detective story

Author: A. Fielding

Release date: January 19, 2025 [eBook #75146]
                Most recently updated: May 22, 2025

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: A. L. Burt Company, 1925

Credits: Brian Raiter


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EAMES-ERSKINE CASE ***


The Eames-Erskine Case

A Detective Story

 By A. Fielding

 A. L. Burt Company
 Publishers New York

 Copyright, 1925, by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
 Published, March, 1925




Dedicated to
my dear mother
who first read and liked and
criticised this yarn



Chapter I

The door opened noiselessly, and four men came in. They were in plain
clothes, and one carried a large box.

“Evening,” said the first. “I am Chief Inspector Pointer from New
Scotland Yard. These are detectives Watts, Miller and Lester. What's
wrong?”

“I 'phoned,” a tall young man answered crisply. “I am the manager of
the hotel. This is Mr. Beale, an American gentleman to whom this room
was let a couple of hours ago. It really belongs to a young fellow who
is away for the week-end, but as there was no other room available we
assigned it to this gentleman for the one night. Mr. Beale has just
told me that there is something wrong about the wardrobe you see
there. Kindly investigate that large knot-hole in the back for
yourself, Inspector.”

The Chief Inspector peered at the hole indicated, ran a finger lightly
around it, and inserted it as gently as a mother feeling her baby's
tooth. His face showed no change of expression, but, stepping back, he
looked the piece of furniture over with the meticulous care of a
would-be purchaser hoping to find a flaw, before he got on a chair and
examined the top.

“Miller, take your coat off and be doing something outside. See that
no one lingers, and notice if any of the doors along the corridor are
open.”

“Yes, sir.” The man vanished.

“The wardrobe evidently stood back against the wall. I take it that it
hasn't been tampered with in any way before you rang us up, Mr.
Manager?”

“Not by me. This gentleman called me in because he fancied that there
was something wrong.”

The Chief Inspector looked Mr. Beale over almost as carefully as he
had the wardrobe. He did not strike the police officer as the kind of
man to be occupying just such an apartment, for the room looked
simple, and Mr. Beale did not,—not in the least. “Did you do anything
to it, sir?”

The well-dressed, well-manicured, middle-aged man folded his hands
over his ample front, pursed up a cruel mouth, and shook his head.
“No, Chief, not beyond moving it out and feeling around through that
gaping hole same as yourself.” His voice wrapped the Stars and Stripes
around him.

“I'd be obliged, gentlemen, if you will remain quite still for a few
minutes. Lester, I want the usual flashlight photos.”

“Yes, sir,” and the photographer got to work. The exposures were
quickly made.

“Now, then, help Watts to lift the top off, and we'll get the wardrobe
on its side. Gently does it.”

“Ah-h-h!” came from the two men watching, and the manager made an
impulsive forward movement.

“Stand back, sir!” The Chief Inspector's voice was sharp. “Now,
another flashlight, Lester.”

When this was done, the Chief Inspector unobtrusively picked up a wax
vesta which had tumbled out from the wardrobe while the huddled figure
inside was lifted on to the bed.

“Good God!” The manager stared at the placid young face bent stiffly
to one side: “it's the young fellow himself—Eames—who took this room
hardly a week ago. Why, I had a telephone message from him at five
o'clock saying that he was going out of town for the week-end.”

“And now it's nine-thirty. Humph! You can positively identify him?”

“Positively.”

The Chief Inspector took a letter which one of his men had just found
in the dead man's coat pocket. He examined it closely before holding
it out to the manager. “It's for you, sir.”

The manager started back, and turned a little pale. He did not seem to
care for the task of opening it, but after a moment's hesitation he
ripped the envelope and read in a low voice:

    “Enterprise Hotel,
      Aug. 4th.

  Sir,

  Enclosed please find £10 to pay for my bill, and the cheapest
  funeral possible. It may save time and trouble to know that I have
  just taken an overdose of morphia, after 'phoning to you to let my
  room stay as it is until Monday. I am now about to fasten myself
  into my temporary coffin. I have nothing left to live for. I only
  regret on your behalf that chance has made your hotel my
  stepping-off plank. For both our sakes do your best to keep the
  matter quiet.

    Faithfully yours,
      Reginald Eames.”

“Suicide!” The manager's voice sounded almost triumphant.

Mr. Beale said nothing. With his hands in his pockets he stood staring
down at the quiet figure.

“You recognise him too, sir?” Pointer appeared to have eyes in the
back of his head, for he stood with his face turned away from the
American, still scrutinising the dead man's letter.

Mr. Beale's small, piercing eyes, which gleamed like mica behind the
circles of his horn pince-nez, went dull.

“No, Chief, no. I'm a stranger to this wicked little village of yours.
I was just wondering what it is that makes young men throw away their
lives so easily for the first pretty face that comes along. I suppose
there'll be a girl at the bottom of this case, too.” He turned away.
“Any objection to a cigar all round?”

“Not unless they're lit,” and the Chief Inspector accepted one, too.
The manager came out of his abstraction. He had been wondering, among
other things, how to give the news of the occurrence to the Press in
its least interesting form. “Perhaps you could leave taking him away
till one o'clock?”

“Very good, sir. You'll find that we try to be as little in the way as
possible. Did he have anything in your safe?”

“No, nothing.”

“Now, gentlemen, if you'll both step into another room, I'll join you
later to hear any further particulars you can give me. First, sir,
kindly point out anything that is yours.”

Mr. Beale took up his top-coat and umbrella, while the manager picked
up a bag. Watts looked all three over very carefully inside and out,
his superior lending a casual hand.

When the police officers were alone they rapidly finished the
undressing of the young man. He seemed barely thirty.

“Done no manual work,” Watts laid a hand down gently, “or—I'm not so
sure. But at any rate not a dandy. No manicuring.”

“Has been in the habit of wearing a ring for years, judging by that
oval mark, very likely a signet ring. Found one in his pockets?” But
nothing was found in the young man's pockets except a handkerchief
marked R.E., a fountain pen, a pencil—at whose point the
Superintendent gazed meditatively—the keys of the wardrobe and the
chest of drawers, and a watch and chain.

The Chief Inspector held the inside pocket of the waistcoat to the
light.

“Look at that shiny place. He's been in the habit of carrying a
note-book there.”

“Very poor watch, and most expensive chain,” Watts remarked
significantly, “wonder if he's some kind of a hotel-rat?”

“His clothes aren't flashy,” Pointer pointed out, “good material and
cut, though well-worn. Ah, here's the doctor!”

The surgeon took but a few minutes before he straightened the sheet
again. “Dead not less than four hours—and not more than five.” He put
his thermometer away.

“Died between four-thirty and five-thirty,” wrote the police officers.
“Cause of death, doctor?”

“Morphia, as far as I can judge at present, and he didn't make the
mistake of taking too little. Everything points to a tremendous dose.
He drank it probably; so far I've seen no punctures. Autopsy will tell
more on Monday,” and the Doctor bustled off.

The two detectives turned to the wardrobe.

“Those back panels have been screwed on very badly, sir, and as for
this little brass bolt on the door inside—it's a shocking sight.”
Watts' father was a cabinetmaker and he spoke as an expert.

“Just so. The odd thing is that both seem done by the same bungler!”
Pointer was looking carefully at the two specimens of handicraft. “Now
Mr. Eames is obviously to be held responsible for the addition of the
bolt which was to serve instead of locking the door on the inside, but
he could hardly have been interested in the back panels, one would
think.”

It was quite half an hour later, when, leaving his subordinate at
work, the Chief Inspector stepped out into the little corridor.

Miller rose to his feet and pointed at the next door but one to the
room the Chief Inspector had just left. “That door was ajar, sir, when
I came out. It's stayed shut since.”

Pointer glanced at it. “Number eleven,” he registered to himself. The
room he had just left was number fourteen. There was no number
thirteen in the hotel.

“The manager said if you'd go down to the lounge, and knock on the
brown door to the right of the stairs, sir, he and the other gent.
would be expecting you.” Miller set to work again, extracting tacks
from the carpet and replacing them carefully.

Pointer seemed to have a good deal of difficulty in finding his way.
He roamed around the service-stairs which passed not far from number
fourteen, and even opened a door on the ground floor leading from them
into the street. Here a couple of muddy foot-prints kept him busy for
some minutes. He measured and traced them before he closed the door
noiselessly, and experimented with its locks and bolts. Only then did
he drift by a series of détours into the lounge and the manager's
private suite.

The manager poured out a whisky and soda, which the Chief Inspector
left untouched.

“I'm afraid I must take each of your depositions separately,
gentlemen. I'll take your statement first, sir, as I understand it was
you who called the manager to No. 14.” Pointer got out his book and
rapidly entered the date, August 4th—ten-thirty p.m.—Enterprise Hotel,
while the manager left to look up his registers.

“My name, Chief, is Augustus P. Beale. I'm a sub-editor of the _New
York Universe_.” The police officer inclined his head as though in
homage to the mighty journal's name.

“Came over on the _Campania_ for a year's holiday last month,—by the
way, here's my passport, but don't tell me that photo's a good one. We
landed July 20th. I've been in Paris most of the time since with some
friends, got lonely when they left, and came to London. Arrived this
morning by the boat train—Calais-Dover—and found everything full.
Worked my way around to the Enterprise, and was told that here, too,
every room was taken. Threw myself upon the manager's breast with my
credentials in both hands, and begged him to take pity on my grey
hairs and save me from a bench in the park. He thought awhile, and,
taking me by the hand, with a heavenly smile, led me to a room,
explained that it really belonged to a man who was spending the
week-end in the country, but that if I would let it go at that for one
night he would fix me up something better in the morning. I accepted
with tears of gratitude, and after dinner in their restaurant settled
myself down before a gas-fire with a cup of coffee. It was pouring, as
you know, and I sat warming my toes and putting down my expenses. A
shilling rolled under the wardrobe and I fished for it with my
umbrella. Couldn't get it, then I tried to move the wardrobe out. Its
weight surprised me. However, I got it away from the wall at last and
recovered my shilling. As I straightened up, the light from the little
electric torch I was using fell full into the knot-hole, and I caught
a glimpse of what certainly looked like a piece of human skin,—bit of
a cheek. I touched it. There's only one thing in the world that feels
like that, and that's a dead body. That was enough for me. I went off
post-haste for the manager, found him by good luck just outside in the
corridor, and brought him back. He sent for you. That's all.”

“Thank you, sir.” The Chief Inspector handed back the passport. “May I
ask the names of your friends in Paris, though I don't suppose for a
moment that there'll be any need to use the addresses.”

“I only stayed part of the time at private houses. Part of the time I
put up at the Crillon. I'm afraid I don't just see my way to giving
you my friends' names. You ask about me at the Embassy, Chief: they'll
set your mind at rest.”

“Thank you, sir, but my mind isn't uneasy. All these questions are
only part of the routine.” The Chief Inspector smiled that cheery
smile of his which the London underworld dreaded more than any frown.
“And now, this afternoon—let me see, where did you say you were?”

“The boat didn't get in till about five. The rest of the time till I
arrived here about half-past six I spent in taxis driving from hotel
to hotel. Anything else, Chief?”

The Chief Inspector assured him that there was nothing else, and
suggested that he might like to try one of the very comfortable chairs
in the lounge, and that should he meet the manager would he mind
asking him to step into his own sitting-room again.

The manager's story was brevity itself. He told of Beale's arrival
“about half-past six,” his appeal to him to get him some sort of a
shelter on such a night. “I believe he offered to share the dog's
kennel provided the beast didn't bite. Incidentally, he told me who he
was. Of course, I wanted to do my best for such a client, and thought
of the only vacant room in the house,—No. 14. It was fresh in my mind,
for I had been talking to the booking clerk when the 'phone came
through saying that Mr. Eames would be away over the week-end. Of
course as a rule we shouldn't dream of letting anyone else occupy a
room under such circumstances, but——”

“One moment: who answered the 'phone?”

“The booking-clerk.”

“Thank you, sir. Well, so you took Mr. Beale to No. 14. Did you have
the room freshly done up for him—I mean, fresh towels and so on?”

“Of course.”

“And then?”

“I saw him at dinner in our restaurant, and said a word to the head
waiter, then I saw no more of him till he stopped me in the corridor
and told me that there was a dead man in his wardrobe.”

“Could you repeat his exact words?”

“‘Excuse me, Mr. Manager, but do you know that someone's left a dead
man in the wardrobe of that room you let me have?’”

“How did he look? Excited? Frightened?”

The manager thought a moment. “Excited, I should say, and trying not
to show it.”

“And now you, sir, where were you this afternoon?”

The manager sat up.

“But look here, Inspector,—why, good God,—I thought it was as clear a
case of suicide——” The manager's eyes were almost out of his head.

“Bless you, sir, ten to one this is all only a matter of form. We
always do it. Police routine, you know.”

“I see. Yes, I see.” But obviously it took the manager some effort to
focus his mental gaze. “Well, I was all over the place.” He named his
various movements.

The Chief Inspector's pen flew over the paper.

“That's all, thank you, sir. Will you send me the booking-clerk—unless
I'm taking up this room?”

The manager's one desire was that the Chief Inspector should stay in
seclusion. Once let a suspicion get about in the hotel that the police
were turned loose in it—he thought of them as he might have of the
elements of fire or water—and gone would be the hum and stir as of a
prosperous hive which rose from all around them.

The story told by the booking-clerk was equally simple.

“Eight days ago—on July twenty-fifth—about noon, a young man carrying
a bag had come into the hotel and asked for a single room on the first
floor facing the front. None of these were free for the moment. He had
refused to take another, had deposited ten shillings, and asked them
to keep him the first one that should be free, giving his name as
Reginald Eames. He was back about six o'clock. Meanwhile one had
fallen vacant—number fourteen. He took it without looking at it, and
registered.”

“All your rooms are the same price, I believe?”

“Yes, all. Here's his entry.”

The Chief Inspector read, “Reginald Eames. Dentist. Manchester.” He
compared the writing carefully with the letter found on the dead man.

“I shall want to have that signature photographed,” was his only
comment. “Well?”

“Well, that's all. I saw him about a bit. He spent all his time in the
lounge. This morning I met him at lunch in the restaurant. Seems funny
that a man should bother with a meal a few hours before he intends to
chuck the whole thing.”

The Chief Inspector was not interested in philosophic abstractions.
“When did he lunch?”

“I entered at half-past one, just as he was leaving. That's everything
I know about the chap except that someone 'phoned up at five o'clock
to say that Mr. Eames, of room number fourteen, wished to let us know
that he wouldn't be back till Monday morning, as he was spending the
week-end in the country with a friend.”

“Are you sure of the time?”

The clerk shook his head. “Only there or thereabouts. It wasn't much
past, for the five o'clock post hadn't come in, nor much before, for I
come on duty at five after my tea, and I had just got back.”

“The manager was talking to you when the message came, I understand?”

“Was he? Possibly. I don't remember.”

“You think he wasn't?”

“I _thought_ he came up after the post got in. But, of course, I may
be wrong. One day's so like another.”

“But I understand that he, too, heard the 'phone?”

“He might have done that—the 'phone is to one side of the desk—but I
didn't see him.”

“Did Mr. Eames give any reason as to why he was determined to have one
of the first floor rooms looking into the street?”

“None whatever.”

“Were the rooms you offered him instead as good?”

“One was better.”

“Has he ever stayed in the hotel before?”

“No.”

“Sure?”

“Quite. I came here when the hotel opened.”

“Isn't there a balcony running all along your front rooms on the first
floor, and also along the rooms of the Marvel Hotel next door?”

“Yes. Both hotels belong to the same management.”

The Chief Inspector seemed plunged in thought for a moment. “By the
way, before I forget it, from which direction did the manager come
when he spoke to you after Eames' 'phone had been taken? I want to get
the whole scene clear in my mind.”

“From the direction of the stairs.”

“And now about the voice over the 'phone—it wasn't Eames himself, you
think?”

“Sure it wasn't. This sounded like an old chap with a cold in his
head.”

“Wheezy?”

“More than that. Funniest voice—sort of muffled—I should know it again
anywhere.”

“A disguised voice,” wrote the Chief Inspector.

“Had Eames any friends?”

“Never saw him speak to a soul.”

“Did any letters come for him?”

“Not a card.”

“How would you say that, generally speaking, he spent his time in the
hotel?”

“Smoking cigarettes in the lounge. Of course we've had rotten weather,
but I don't think Mr. Eames was out of the house for more than ten
minutes at a stretch.”

“Did he go out often?”

“Always after each meal. Acted as though he intended to live to be a
hundred. And to think that all the time he meant to commit suicide!
Why, he might have had any kind of a bust-up.” The booking-clerk
evidently considered that Eames had wasted a rare chance.

“Now about Mr. Beale's arrival?”

But there the booking-clerk could tell the Chief Inspector nothing
fresh.

“And now I want to know what luggage, however small, left the hotel
after mid-day to-day. I'm afraid I'll have to have the day-porter
routed out, too.”

“I can tell you from the books that there were no departures to-day
after twelve o'clock. As a matter of fact, not a bag left the hotel
after a quarter-past eleven. It's one of our strictest rules that
nothing leaves a room without first 'phoning down to the clerk to find
out if it's all O.K.”

“But what about the people in the hotel taking out their bags
themselves?”

“Oh, that,—of course—but not this afternoon.” The clerk thought back,
“You see it's a small hotel, and I'm paid to keep my eyes open. Nobody
took out any bag bigger than a woman's wrist-bag after one o'clock.
There's no business doing of a Saturday afternoon. The day-porter's
gone home and won't be visible till Monday.”

“What about when you're off duty, Mr. Page?”

“The manager relieves me for two hours at noon, from one to three, but
as the dining-room opens out of the hall, and my table is just by the
glass door, I'm as good as in the hall. At seven o'clock the
hall-porter takes my place till seven-thirty. But, as I say, I've my
eyes on the hall all the time, and if there's any crush I'm out in two
twos.”

The clerk yawned dismally, and Pointer, with a laugh, let him go,
after having him write down the names of any of the occupants of the
five balcony rooms which were not known to the management from other
visits. There were only two. Numbers eleven and twelve; and of these,
number eleven was “expecting to leave” daily.

“Now, who do I see about the service-stairs—who is supposed to keep an
eye on them?”

“The housekeeper. She's still up; I'll send her to you.”

The housekeeper assured him that at noon by Saturday the service-door
just beyond the manager's suite was duly locked and bolted. After that
hour it could only be used with her consent and approval. The lower
door in the basement—the delivery door proper—was, of course, another
matter. The key of the upper door hung in the maids' sitting-room just
opposite,—a small room used especially by the maid who waited on the
manager.

“That door leads to the maids' sitting-room and to the service-stairs,
doesn't it?”

The Chief Inspector pointed to a door opening out of the manager's
little lobby. He opened it as he spoke—not for the first time that
night.

The housekeeper looked surprised. “Bless me, sir, it doesn't take you
police gentlemen long to find your way about.”

“And that is the door leading into the street, eh?”

“Yes, sir.”

“It's not locked now.”

“Oh, yes, it is, sir.” She laid a confident hand on it to turn in
bewilderment as it opened easily.

“Why—why—someone must have undone it!”

“Just so,” agreed Pointer dryly. “And the key?”

She opened a door facing the street entrance, and switched on the
light. “There it is, hanging where I put it at twelve o'clock.”

Pointer raised a weary eyebrow, but he said nothing, and made his way
to the lounge, where, after asking both the manager and Mr. Beale to
hold themselves in readiness for any possible further questions
to-morrow morning, he joined Watts upstairs and spent a strenuous hour
with him.

“No key to fit his trunk—no sign of the bag which the booking-clerk
and porter saw him carry upstairs,—no sign of a ring,—no scrap of
paper nor any mark of identity beyond his signatures,—humph!”

The Chief Inspector dusted his knees carefully and went to the
mantelpiece. “Here's a box of wax vestas right enough, the same kind
as the vesta I picked up in the wardrobe, but that one was still warm
and soft. Burnt down to the last end and dropped burning into the
wardrobe when it scorched someone's fingers—whose, Watts?”

Watts shook his head.

“—Not more than half-an-hour before we came into the room, so Eames
couldn't have done it, for more reasons than one.”

“I saw you try the electric torch in that American gent.'s bag, sir,”
Watts threw in.

“Just so. It was out of order. He didn't say a word about that in his
evidence downstairs. You noticed those marks on the top of the
wardrobe, where someone had evidently passed a stiff brush over it,
presumably to do away with any finger marks or streaks?”

“I did, sir. And wasn't his—I mean Mr. Beale's—clothes-brush in a
fearful state. He did look put out when you picked it up first thing.”

The Chief Inspector nodded with a grim smile. “Aye, he did. He might
have thought it less of a give-away if he'd known that all along he
had a fine smear of dust on the under part of his sleeve. A smear that
could only have been got up there. The manager's coat was clean,
though that proves little. I hope you noticed the washstand before the
doctor washed his hands?”

Watts was an honest young fellow, and he flushed by way of answer.

“The towel was damp, so was the soap. So was the inside of the basin.
The jug was half empty, but there wasn't a drop of water in the pail.
Whatever water had been used had been flung out of the window. It's
been pouring so hard all day that a bit more or less would never be
noticed. But the fact is odd. Why should anyone mind pouring the basin
into the pail?”

“The water was too black after that wardrobe top,” laughed Watts. The
Chief Inspector was popular with his men, and Watts was, moreover, a
distant connection.

“Then that chest of drawers. You know the feeling of using a key after
a pass-key?”

“As though the lock were stuck, sir?”

“Just so. I turned the key very slowly, and each drawer had been last
opened with a pass-key, or rather locked with one. And that smell of
tobacco when we opened them—same smell as Mr. Beale's cigars. And that
dusting of cigar ash on one of the ties. I shouldn't wonder if this is
going to turn into a very funny case, Watts. I shouldn't wonder at
all.”

Watts' eyes brightened. A “funny case” from the point of view of the
police often leads to promotion, and though Pointer was the youngest
Chief Inspector at the Yard, Watts believed he could unravel any
tangle. Pointer lived in Bayswater. He liked its open squares and
clearer air. He shared three rooms there with a friend, James
O'Connor, now a bookbinder, but during the War a very successful
member of the Secret Service. Talkative, gossipy, and secretive was
the Celt. Only a few had any idea of the hard core of blue steel that
lay beneath his apparent easy-going cheeriness. Pointer was one of
these few. He and O'Connor had worked once together, the one openly
representing the law, the other secretly endangering his life every
moment of the day while tracking down a German-American-Irish plot.
O'Connor never referred to those days, though, had his means
permitted, he would have liked to continue his hazardous work; but
with peace he had to turn his attention to making a livelihood, and
being single-minded in all his doings, he refused absolutely to be
drawn into any of his friend's problems except as the merest onlooker.

It always gave the Chief Inspector genuine pleasure to step from the
little lobby into the huge living-room which the two men used in
common. He saw richer rooms often, but never one which suited him so
well, with its ivory walls and paint, kept up to the mark by his own
neat brush, the thick, short, draw-curtains of apple-green silk to the
four windows, the chair covers of a Persian pattern—green leaves
rioting over a cream ground, with here and there a pomegranate or a
blue bird—book cases in quiet walnut stood against the walls,
Pointer's large writing desk, and O'Connor's equally huge table,
filled the corners by the windows. In one open fireplace logs were
heaped, the other was kept free for burning papers. The soft
brightness of his home was like a friendly hand clasp to the weary
police officer after the rain outside.

O'Connor smiled up at him and pointed to the table.

“Mrs. Able is thirsting for your blood. I told her to leave the things
the last time she brought them in. I couldn't face her again.” He
turned out an electric hot-plate as he spoke.

A vegetable soup, a dish of Tatar _bitokes_—savoury balls of beefsteak
and marrow and seasonings pounded to perfection and browned to a turn,
a well-made potato salad, some crisp rolls, and a glass of light wine
made Pointer ready for another stretch of work if need be.

When the meal was cleared away by his landlady, who ruled the two men
with her cooking, he filled his pipe from a beautiful covered jar of
modern Japanese enamel where gold fish glittered among green waves.
Jim's tobacco lived in a dull blue pot at the other end, and in the
middle stood the room's one useless ornament, a carved Chinese
ball-puzzle, fine as a birch leaf and showing ball within ball in
tantalising glimpses of colour. It typified his calling to the
policeman. He picked it up again and turned it gently to and fro.

“Yes,” he said ruminatingly, “get hold of your key and you'll open up
all right. But _how_ to get hold of your key——”

“I thought the Meredith case was practically over,” murmured O'Connor
through clouds of smoke.

“Finished at eight. I've another case on now, and rather a stiff one,
or all signs belie it. It's a hotel case, and you know how I feel
about them.”

“Still, old chap, you did very well with that robbery down at
Ramsgate. It gave you your leg-up.”

There was nothing Pointer enjoyed more than talking his cases over
with his friend, whose discretion was as much to be trusted as his
own. Not that he often got an opinion out of the Irishman, but the
mere reciting aloud of the various phases of a problem in itself
helped to clear his mind.

“They are the very devil all the same. You never know where you are.
Take a private house—and the servants, the furniture, the rooms, the
very walls can give you points, but a hotel! How can you follow up a
hundred or so possible criminals? Personally, if I ever go in for a
murder I should never dream of choosing any other place.”

“A murder case, eh?”

“Did I say so? Well, see what you think. This is how things stand at
present.”

He told of his call to the Enterprise and the results of the inquiry
so far.

“Why don't you think it's a suicide, what's wrong with that letter?”
Jim handed it back. “You say the writing is the same as on the
register.”

“By the same hand you'd think, but this letter's been written with an
ordinary pen, same nib and ink as is supplied in the hotel bedroom,
yet Eames had a filled fountain-pen in his pocket. He signed the
register with it, why didn't he use it to write this letter with? It
wasn't as if he had been trying to disguise his handwriting. Then the
way he was huddled into the wardrobe looked as if his feet had been
shoved in first and the rest of his body afterwards. You'll see what I
mean when I show you Lester's photos on Monday. His coat and tie were
half over his head at the back. And where is his trunk key? You might
say that he got rid of his bag beforehand to save tracing his home,
but he left the trunk. Then why not leave the key? And the things he
had put into the wardrobe from his bed and washstand—pyjamas,
shaving-tackle, and that sort of thing—well, of course a man _might_
lock himself into a pitch-dark wardrobe and then proceed to tidy all
the articles neatly against the front, but it's difficult to see why.”

“Especially if he was drugged. Sure it wasn't an overdose of whisky?
That would explain so many puzzles.” O'Connor loved to impersonate
guileless curiosity at these talks. It moved the Chief Inspector to a
fury at times which the Irishman took as a tribute to his histrionic
powers.

“Any finger prints?” he asked after a moment.

It was Pointer's turn to get even. He gazed on his friend as on a man
past praying for. “Any finger-prints? How many things were there, do
you suppose, that that American and the Manager between them hadn't
pawed over? There was a regular finger-mark jam over everything. Now
I'll tell you another thing. His socks and small things were in the
two top-drawers. Nothing could have been tidier. Even his spare
shoelaces had rubber bands to keep them trim. His underwear, in the
top long drawer, looked as if it were ready for an inspection, but his
things in the bottom drawer—two pairs of trousers and a coat—seemed as
though they had been flung in during an earthquake.”

“Inference—someone was chiefly concerned in pockets.” Jim was so
interested that he forgot his rôle.

“Aye, just so. His trunk was in the same muddle. And remember, no
letters, no papers!”

“You said his trunk and underwear were all oldish and all marked
R.E.?”

“They are.”

There was silence for some time in the room. Then:

“I shall put a personal in all Monday's papers offering a reward of
three pounds for any information concerning his watch. Thank Heaven,
watches have numbers. That may lead us somewhere. Eames' clothes have
a Colonial look to me, and his umbrella has a Toronto mark on it, but
as far as I can see, the watch is our best chance to find out who he
really is, and where he comes from. He entered himself as a dentist,
but that pencil in his pocket was sharpened either by an artist or a
draughtsman of some kind.”

“What about the American?”

“Aye, what about him? And what about the manager, too?”

“The manager? You think he shares your opinion as to the advantages of
a hotel for—let us call it working off old scores?”

“I stopped on my way home to look up his record,” Pointer continued
unmoved; “it's his first job of the kind. But his father was manager
of the Metropole at Scarborough. There's nothing against his character
so far.”

“Ah, just let him wait till you have another go at him.”

“The Enterprise has always been a well conducted house under him.”

“Say no more,” begged O'Connor, “his guilt seems piling up with every
second.”

“I hope to trace that 'phone call on Monday.”

“Disguised voice making you think of the manager? Sherlock Holmes
putting two and two together after having looked at the answer in the
back of the book.” O'Connor laid down his tool to strike an attitude.

“The manager might have sent it, that's my only point so far.”

“And what about the American, the one you have your eye on because you
think he threw his wash-water out of the window? What else have you
ag'in him?”

“He recognised Eames. Or at least he knows something about him, about
his death possibly. I'll bet you anything you like I'm not mistaken.
His control over his face is what you'd expect from a big newspaper
man, but just for a second, when he thought no one was watching, he
looked down at Eames' face with—well, there was recognition of some
kind in his eye, and a lot besides—a lot! I had my small looking-glass
in my hand under my handkerchief and was studying him.”

“The Embassy seems a good reference. Perhaps he was bluffing when he
gave it you?”

Pointer shook his head. “I don't think so. Mr. Beale is a somebody all
right, or I'm much mistaken.”

“You certainly ought to know the genuine article. You see enough of
the imitation. And now I suppose some downtrodden underling of yours
is keeping a skinned orb upon both these desperate criminals?” Jim got
up and stretched himself.

“They are that!” responded the other fervently.

“Alf!” called O'Connor a little later from his opened bedroom door.

“Well?” came in a muffled voice.

“If it was Beale who searched those drawers why that jumbled haste?
Sure he didn't need to fetch the manager till he was ready? Same
brainwave applies to the manager and yourself.”

Pointer made no reply.

“Another thought. If Eames committed suicide why fasten himself up in
a hotel wardrobe. Why not choose a bench in the park?” persisted the
seeker after enlightenment.

The banging of the door between the two rooms was the only reply.



Chapter II

Pointer liked to be up with the lark though he spent his time somewhat
differently. It was barely six o'clock next morning when he took
himself to the Marvel Hotel.

“Look here, Gay”—the Detective Inspector was well-known to the
booking-clerk, who had a brother at the Yard—“strictly between
ourselves, there's some trouble in a balcony room next door.
Something's missing. Who have you got in your rooms that open on to
the same balcony?”

The clerk ran a finger up his register.

“Number two left early this morning, the rest are still abed I take
it.”

Pointer swung the book around. Number two was registered to a James
Cox of Birmingham. Profession—Medical student.

“At what hour did he leave?”

“About four.”

“Room empty?” asked the other quickly. “Good, I'll go up and have a
look at it.” Reaching for the key, he was half-way up the stairs
before the clerk had finished his nod.

Pointer found the room still untouched by the chamber-maid, and he
locked the door behind him with an air of relief. The bed had not been
slept in. On the corner of the table lay a wax vesta, the counterpart
of the ones already reposing in the Detective Inspector's black bag.

The linoleum in front of the French window showed where muddy boots
had walked up and down. Both the length of the stride and the size of
the marks spoke for a tall man. On the balcony outside, the rain had
washed away all chance of tracks on the stone, but on the waist-high
grating, which was all that separated the rooms of the Marvel from
those of the Enterprise, were a few small mud-clots close in by the
wall, and under the shelter of the iron roof. Room number fourteen was
nearest to the Marvel, and in front of its window even the rain had
not been able to remove all traces of the muddy feet which had
apparently stood first on one side and then on the other, as though a
man had been trying to peer in through the blind.

Looking in, Pointer saw Watts talking to Miller, who had been left on
duty in the room all night. Yet even so, those tracks on the balcony
could not have been made many hours before the rain stopped. Someone
had walked from one window to the other after he and Watts had left
the place.

He tapped on the pane, and Watts joined him outside. He had already
seen the marks.

“And look there, sir,” he pointed to a sodden heap of canvas,
apparently an awning, which, judging by its appearance, must have lain
for months between the windows of number fourteen and number twelve of
the Enterprise. There were a couple of deep indentations on it, one
beside the other. Pointer took out the sheet of tracings he had made
yesterday at the door leading out into the street from the
service-stairs. He and Watts tried them carefully. They could have
been made by the same feet.

“Smallish feet. They just fit Miller, sir, as I was pointing out to
him when you tapped,” observed Watts facetiously, and the two Scotland
Yard men stepped into the room where Miller was waiting to make his
report. He had been dozing in the easy chair when he had heard a
couple of light taps on the pane. Very carefully he had pushed the
blind aside and looked out. Instantly a torch was flashed in his eyes,
blinding him. When he got the window open, no one was to be seen.

“Of course, I couldn't hear anything, sir. You know what the wind was
like, though the rain had pretty fair stopped by them. It was exactly
twenty minutes past three o'clock.”

“Did you get any idea of who held the torch?”

“Only that he was a big chap, sir. Big as you.”

“Did you see anyone on the opposite side of the window?”

“No, sir.”

“Could you have seen anyone there?”

The detective was positive that he could and would, as he had looked
up and down the balcony, which was fairly well lit by the street
lights. He had not tried to investigate further, as his orders had
been not to leave the room.

On the balcony outside, the Chief Inspector stood for a second by the
heap of canvas. “Just run the blind down inside there, and turn on the
light.”

After a moment Pointer tapped, as a signal that the window was to be
opened again. “You can see better into the room from the other
side—the side nearest the Marvel.”

“You think it was someone from the Enterprise, sir, who wanted to be
sure of getting back unnoticed?”

“Looks that way.”

“You don't think that two men could have been out there together,
sir?”

Pointer did not reply as he stepped into the room again, and sent
Miller off for breakfast and sleep.

“Now, about that morphia taken. Of course we shall know for certain in
the morning, but I take it that there's no doubt but that it was
morphia all right. It's an odd thing that we couldn't find any cup or
glass from which the stuff was drunk. From what the doctor said as to
the amount, it's not likely that Eames could have washed up after his
drink, nor can I see the point. Let's have another hunt.”

And they did, with no better result.

“Could he have flung the glass over the balcony railing?” Watts
measured the distance carefully. “Yes, a man could, fairly easily.”

“After a heavy drug?” Pointer's voice was sceptical. “And what about
passers-by?” He picked up a bottle from the wash-stand labelled “The
Cough Mixture.” It bore the name of a near-by chemist.

“I tasted that last night, sir. It's some I often take myself. It
hasn't been tampered with in any way.” Watts' tone was as good as a
respectful hint not to waste time in a blind alley.

Pointer scrutinised the bottle through his glass, and finally wrapped
it up with special care, putting it in his black bag. He told Watts of
the match which he had found in room two of the Marvel next door.
Evidently Mr. Cox of Birmingham used the identical kind,—which was odd
considering its foreign origin,—favoured by someone in room fourteen
of the Enterprise.

“Mr. Beale spoke of having just come from France, didn't he, sir?”

“He did.”

“He may have forgotten that he had left his matches on the mantelpiece
after lighting one to see into the wardrobe. Perhaps it was he who
left the match you found in the Marvel. Anyone could get over that
tiny railing between the two hotels.”

“Quite possible,” and Pointer wrapped the box, too, carefully up
again, and locked his bag.

His next move was to interview the clerk of the Marvel as to the
appearance and general behaviour of Mr. Cox. He learnt but little. Mr.
Cox had arrived very late on Saturday night in a little two-seater
which proclaimed itself as hired at a glance. He seemed a very quiet,
unobtrusive young man, carried his own bag, and had barely attracted
one glance from the booking-clerk, who only gleaned a general idea of
a big young fellow with a pronounced limp, in a grey tweed suit and
soft grey hat. He had driven his car away without asking any
directions or making any inquiries as to a garage, and had returned
shortly on foot. This would have been about one o'clock. His room had
been waiting for him for nearly a week. On July 30th a 'phone call had
asked whether any of the balcony rooms were free. There were two
vacancies. The voice asked the numbers. They were two and seven.
Number two was chosen, and the hotel was asked to keep the room for a
Mr. Cox who would be there within the hour. This was about eleven
o'clock in the morning. Half an hour later a messenger boy brought a
letter for the manager, who passed it over to the book-keeper. In it
Mr. Cox stated that he might be unable to occupy the room immediately,
but wished No. 2 reserved for him. He enclosed four one-pound notes as
a deposit. The Chief Inspector annexed the letter. When Mr. Cox
finally arrived on Saturday, August 3rd, the room was still his, and
when about four a.m. he descended, still with his bag, and walked out
of the front door without saying a word, the hotel expected him to
return for some sort of a belated breakfast. Up to the present hour he
had not been seen again, but the day was still very young, as the
clerk pointed out.

“Did you see in what direction he went?”

But nobody had taken sufficient interest to watch.

Pointer pulled out a print of Eames' dead face.

“Before July 30th—before that room was 'phoned for—did this man ask
for a room here?”

The clerk recognised the face at once. “Yes, about an hour or two
before Cox's 'phone came. Seemed a nice, friendly sort of chap. Now I
come to think of it, he, too, asked for a balcony room, and went up to
have a look at two and seven. He didn't take either; I forget why.”

“Did the 'phone message you got later sound at all like his voice?”

But that the clerk couldn't remember. “Now I come to think of it, it
didn't sound like Cox speaking. Cox talked like a Colonial,—the few
words he spoke asking about his room, and saying that he had 'phoned
for one on July 30th and sent a letter with a deposit——”

“You didn't tell me that before, Gay: that's an important point. I
want to get hold of Cox if I can. Want to ask him a few questions.”

“Well, Mr. Chief Inspector, a chap can't think of everything at once,”
responded the clerk goodhumouredly; with which view of the limitations
of the human intellect Pointer agreed.

He arranged that a call should be sent through at once if the young
man returned to the hotel, and left feeling that he had found out
quite sufficient to pay him for his early Sunday morning. Eames had
been in to prospect for his friend—or his enemy, whichever Cox was—not
long after he had taken a room at the Enterprise for himself. The
letter signed “Cox” was very unlike that man's signature in the
register, but very like the letter left in Eames' pocket for the
manager; and whatever Pointer's doubts about it, he did not attempt to
deny to himself that the writing in that letter exactly resembled
Eames' entry on the hotel book, though perhaps, to his keen eyes, a
trifle laboured-looking. It would be a nice little problem for the
handwriting expert, but, to his thinking, there was an ease and a
freedom about this last letter—the one sent in Cox's name—which
suggested a genuine document. Had he been able to get a fair
description of the man, he would have sent Cox's description to every
station in England, for he did not share the hotel's belief in his
return, but, bar his size and the limp, which were the easiest of
disguises, he had no definite idea as to the man's appearance.

He glanced at his watch. Nine o'clock. Time to see if the manager and
Mr. Beale had remembered any fresh details. The manager was at his
breakfast, and Pointer thought that his manner had changed in some
subtle way from what it had been last night. Mr. Beale was apparently
not up yet. As Pointer particularly wished to question him, he sent
the hotel's one and only page to the room which had been assigned to
the American for the rest of the night—it happened to be the manager's
sitting-room—with a polite message as to the pleasure it would give
the Chief Inspector to be allowed a few minutes' conversation in room
No. 14.

The boy came back with bulging eyes.

“I believe the gentleman's killed hisself too, sir,” he hissed
melodramatically in Pointer's ear. Evidently the news about No. 14 had
leaked out among the staff.

For once the Scotland Yard man acted like any mere mortal, and bounded
from his chair. “What?”

“Well, there ain't no sound, and I can't make him answer, though I've
hammered and banged like anything on his door.” The boy was evidently
thoroughly enjoying himself.

“Idiot! Keep your mouth shut! Ask the manager to come here a moment,”
was the somewhat contradictory directions he received in a tone which
made Pointer's meaning clear.

The manager arrived, a trifle breathless, and the two men entered the
lobby into which both his bedroom and his sitting-room opened. They
tried the sitting-room door. It was locked, and no reply came from
within to voice or knock.

“There's a door into it from my bedroom. I have the key, and the
bolt's on the bedroom side.” The manager, who was very white, led the
way, and after a second's wait unlocked the door and flung it open. A
burst of fresh air met them. The window stood ajar. The room was
empty. The other door locked and bolted. A bag, half-open, stood at
the foot of the bed which had been made up on the couch, and which had
evidently not been slept in. A half-burnt cigar lay on the carpet by
the armchair, together with a novel. The electric lamp was still on.
Pointer felt the end of the cigar.

“Been out some time. Excuse me, sir, you're standing on a piece of
paper.”

The manager jumped away as though his companion had spoken of a live
coal. Pointer carelessly ran the little wisp of green and white
striped paper through his fingers as he looked at the sill, and out on
the pavement, which was on a level with the floor. Provided there was
the will, there certainly was an easy enough way. But why the will?
Why should the editor of an important newspaper leave by the window
rather than by the door, even though he were an American?

He looked Mr. Beale's bag over. Nothing had been taken. He saw in it
no paper to match the little end he had “absent-mindedly” stuffed into
his pocket.

“I thought I saw a piece of striped paper lying around”—he glanced
about him—“did it belong to anything of yours?”

The manager shook his head. He was even paler than he had been.

“Was it anything of yours, sir?” persisted the officer, peering under
the table.

“No.” The manager's voice was harsh.

“Odd sort of paper, too. Oh, here it is”—Pointer fished it out, “Did
you see anything like it in Mr. Beale's hands last night?”

“I suppose on a modest estimate I had near a dozen people in this room
yesterday.” The manager's voice was studiously level. “I should say
that the probabilities are that any one of them dropped that little
tag.”

“Shouldn't wonder,” agreed Pointer amicably. “Did you and Mr. Beale
sit up long together last night?”

The manager hesitated for the fraction of a second. “N—no, not beyond
saying good-night, after his refusing to let me give him my bedroom.”

“You didn't discuss Mr. Eames?”

“Not at all. Not at all.”

“Kindly look carefully around the room and see if anything is
missing.”

The manager obeyed, and Pointer with one deft swoop, while he back was
turned, emptied the contents of an ash-tray, which stood on a little
table between two easy chairs, into an envelope. Then he sauntered
casually into the bedroom, and watched the manager in a mirror, as he
aimlessly took up trifle after trifle, stopping now and then to stare
out of the window with a puzzled, worried look. Suddenly he seemed to
leave the world of speculations.

“I say, Inspector, this is all rot! Mr. Beale isn't a thief. You saw
his passport, and I saw a letter of credit and various other letters
of his.”

“Have you any idea, sir, as to when he left this room?”

“I dozed off about three o'clock. Last night's affair doesn't help a
manager to sleep any better than usual, you know. So I suppose Mr.
Beale must have left some time after that?”

“You had no idea why he left by the window?”

“I? Certainly not! I know no more than you do about the whole affair.
Probably not so much,” he added with a rather forced smile.

Pointer went carefully all over the little suite of three rooms, with
its lobby opening into the lounge and on to the landing of the
service-stairs with a door into the street. He found nothing to detain
him, and rapidly drafted a notice to be sent out to all taxi-drivers
describing Mr. Beale, and asking for news of any fare resembling him
picked up on Sunday morning or late Saturday night. Watts was off
duty, with his family at the Zoo, but the Chief Inspector had no time
for relaxation.

He sent Miller to find out which maid was responsible for the
manager's rooms and to send her up at once. Miller, who had made
himself quite popular in the staff breakfast-room, slipped away, and
within ten minutes ushered in a very fluttered young woman.

“Now, my dear, did you make up a bed in the manager's sitting-room
late last night?”

“Oh, no, sir. I was in bed when it all happened. Oh, dear no, sir.”
And she edged towards the door.

“Come, come, I don't bite, you know. Then did you do up his room this
morning?”

That was better. Kate twitteringly acknowledged that she had.

“Did you see anything of a letter I left on the bedroom table? The
window was open at the top, it may have blown on to the floor; anyway,
I haven't been able to find it.”

The maid had seen nothing of any paper, which was not surprising, as
Pointer had just invented it. “Besides, sir, the manager would have
been sure to see it. He didn't go to bed at all, nor even lie down.”

“Tut! Tut! Worried, I suppose, by all the bother. He generally sleeps
so well, too.”

He had learnt what he wanted to know, and the girl was allowed to
scuttle away from his terrifying presence.

Pointer next made his way to a window on the first floor landing. It,
too, looked on to the balcony. He examined the sill with his
magnifying glass very carefully, and bending out scrutinised the
boards below.

“Come here, Miller,” he called softly, “could you scramble out of that
window?”

The detective proved that he could, provided that he were helped, but
he found it difficult.

“When the manager, and that American gentleman, left No. 14 last
night, did you see them go on down the stairs?”

“I saw them turn on to this landing, sir, but I couldn't see this
window from where I was. I thought I heard their footsteps go on
down.”

“The wind was rather rough. One or both might have come up quietly
again and got out.”

“I don't think anyone could have opened that window without my hearing
them. And I think I should have felt the draught, sir.”

“Humph!” was all Pointer said to himself, as he walked on out of the
hotel and took a train to Streatham, where lived Doctor Burden, the
great Government analyst, expert in poisons, and reasons for sudden
deaths.

Pointer had barely pushed open the gate of the drive when the doctor
met him, swinging along, golf sticks under his arm. Too late he tried
to dodge behind a clump of laurels, the law was upon him.

“Just a moment, doctor. It's only for a second, sir,” begged the
police officer, with a firm grip on the clubs. “It really won't take
you more than one glance. All I want to know is whether a spot on a
label is morphia solution or not. That's all.”

“I know you, Pointer.” The doctor tried to wrest his irons free; “you
got me last time with that yarn, and tied me up in a thirty-six hour
job before I knew where I was. Never again!”

“But this time it really is only one spot of what I think may be a
solution of morphia that I'm after.”

He won, and the doctor, growling at his folly in having gone to
Service instead of straight on to the links, led him into his study.

Pointer unpacked the bottle of cough-mixture which he had taken from
the washstand in No. 14.

“Here, sir, where the writing has run a bit on the label. Could that
smear be morphia? The stuff in the bottle is all right, I fancy, but
it'll be sent to you to-morrow to test at your leisure.”

“Leisure!” groaned the analyst, “you're a wag. My leisure!” He took
the bottle and disappeared through a door to return in a couple of
minutes. “It _is_ morphia. And in a solution strong enough to kill an
elephant. Don't ask me for exact quantities, I'm off.”

“Very much obliged to you, sir,” grinned the Chief Inspector, as he
carefully replaced the bottle, and followed the doctor at a more
leisurely pace out of the garden.

“The case begins to move at last,” he murmured to himself with
satisfaction. He proceeded to jog along still further by ringing the
private bell of Mr. Redman, the chemist, until that gentleman opened
the door.

At the sight of the officer, whom he knew, his face softened a little
from its “disturbed-at-Sunday-dinner” severity.

“Anything I can do for you, officer?” He waved him into the passage.

“It's just this, Mr. Redman,” this time the print of young Eames was
produced. “Do you remember selling anything to this gentleman any day
last week, or say since about July 25th?”

The chemist shook his head.

“But my assistant hasn't gone home yet; he dines with us on Sundays,
we keep the shop open till twelve, you know—I'll call him.”

The assistant looked curiously at the snapshot.

“What did he die of?”

“Suicide. Inquest isn't till Tuesday or Wednesday,” parried Pointer.
“Do you recognise him? Ever sold anything to him this last week or
even yesterday?”

The assistant shook his head.

“Never saw him before.”

“Quite sure?” Pointer had not expected this.

“Oh, absolutely.”

“Humph. Well, what about this bottle? It was standing on the dead
man's washstand.” He produced the cough mixture.

The two men agreed that the bottle came from them.

“Could you call to mind any people you sold one like it to? It's a
very important point in the case.”

“But there's nothing whatever in that medicine,” began the two
chemists hastily, and perhaps more truthfully than they intended.

“I know there isn't. That's not the point. The point is who bought
this bottle?”

“Let me see,” Mr. Redman rubbed his nose reflectively with his
glasses. “We don't sell much of that at this season of the year.
Yesterday's crop of colds hasn't had time to mature yet—now let me
see, a woman bought a bottle on Friday, but it was the two shilling
size.”

“I sold a bottle like that early in the week,” the assistant spoke
with certainty, “to a tall young fellow, an American he struck me as
being. Said he wanted it for a chum of his who had a bad cold. I
remember now. It was”—he paused—“I know! It was Tuesday just as I was
shutting up— Seven o'clock that would be, or say three minutes past.”

“Could you describe him?”

The assistant could; and except for the fact that the man limped
badly, the description might have fitted thousands of young men.
Incidentally, however, it fitted Mr. Cox of the Marvel Hotel to a
nicety. “Tall, broad-shouldered, in a rather crumpled tweed suit, and
felt hat, clean-shaven, dark hair, dark brown eyes, and a square jaw.
I'll bet he served during the war.”

Neither the chemist nor his assistant had made up any morphia for over
a month. A glance at their poison-book confirmed this.

So last Tuesday evening—on July 30th, to be exact—Mr. Cox had
purchased the bottle of medicine for Mr. Eames—the same Mr. Eames who
on that same Tuesday, but in the morning, had inspected a room which
had later been taken by a letter which Pointer believed to have been
written by Eames, though signed in the name of Cox—. The officer
turned these tangled facts over in his mind as he smoked a pipe in the
Enterprise lounge. Was Cox a friend or an enemy? If he was the
criminal, why had he returned last night? Had he left some clue behind
him which he must recover at all costs? Or had he been disturbed by
some sound in the afternoon, and returned—unconscious that the dead
man had already been discovered—to complete his work? In this case,
what had he left undone?

At any rate, Watts would have a vague description to go on to-morrow
in his hunt for a possible purchaser of morphia.

Pointer spent the rest of the afternoon apparently gossiping with all
and sundry. Each conversation, however, resembled all others in that,
though it might begin with the weather or cricket, it invariably
finished up with the manager's whereabouts yesterday afternoon.

He had been seen about half-past three, and he had been seen just
after five, but in the intervals it seemed impossible to locate him
exactly. Pointer wished heartily that Eames' death had occurred at
midnight. It would have made no difference to Eames but a great deal
to the detectives.

Of Eames himself he learnt but little. The young man had apparently
made no clear impression on those with whom he had come in contact,
save that they all ascribed to him unusual powers of silence.

The maid had nothing to report beyond that “the gentleman of No. 14
left his room always at eight o'clock regular.” A couple of books lay
always on his table—not novels—thick, solid-looking books. Pointer
showed her two,—“yes, those were the very identical ones.” They were
works on dentistry, very new and unused, with “Reginald Eames” neatly
written in each. To Pointer they did not look as though their late
owner had spent much time poring over them. The maid went on to say
that any remarks of hers had been met with a brevity she evidently
considered amounted to silence.

“Don't think he knew how to open his mouth, but there, what with
meaning to take his life it's no wonder,—what I mean to say, you
couldn't expect him to go on like an ordinary young man, could you?”

Pointer agreed that to a woman of her keen perceptions a difference
might be discernible. Had she ever seen any letters lying around?

“Not lying about, no; but she had twice seen Mr. Eames standing by the
window reading letters. No, they hadn't looked like old ones—in fact,
once she had seen him opening the envelope. On each occasion it had
been shortly after breakfast, when she had brought in a carafe left to
be cleaned with the others on the floor. Each time Eames had looked
around as though not relishing the interruption. He certainly was that
sunk in his letters, though it was only a couple of those large square
sheets. What I mean to say, not real letters—_you_ know.”

The last time she had heard him lock the bedroom door after her had
been on Saturday morning. Yes, she was quite sure that it was
yesterday, because directly she heard of the suicide she had thought
of that letter. The time before might have been a Wednesday or
Thursday—she couldn't be sure.

“Had he looked worried when she saw him?”

No, only awfully keen, and eager, and though he wasn't smiling
exactly, he had looked distinctly pleased—this was on Saturday. She
had heard him whistling later on as she swept next door.

“Were the sheets typed or written?”

“Written in very close, tiny lines.”

Pointer showed her Cox's letter to the Marvel about his room. She was
certain that the writing had been much smaller, and also that the
paper was different. She had had to come quite close to put the carafe
on the table—“Trust you for that,” agreed Pointer mentally—and had not
been able to help seeing the writing, and the paper all in tiny
squares.

“Eh?”

“The paper, sir, all ruled in little squares—such funny paper!” She
was quite sure that she had never seen anything of a striped green and
white shiny paper such as the detective now showed her.

“Not at any time, sir.”

Questioned as to the exact hour when she had last seen Eames yesterday
morning, she put it down at about eleven o'clock—the occasion which
she had just been telling about when she had seen the young man busy
with his letter.

About the afternoon she could say nothing, as on Saturdays she helped
in the ironing room from three to six o'clock.

As to visitors, she knew of none. She never saw anyone entering or
leaving No. 14 but Mr. Eames himself. No, she had never heard any
voices in the room. Asked about a bag, she had seen one once on the
table when Mr. Eames was in the room, but never but the once. He kept
his wardrobe locked, and she had imagined the bag to be inside. It was
yesterday morning when she had seen it for the first and only time. As
to his door, he always kept that unlocked,—“I mean to say, unless he
was dressing or undressing.”

“Now, about Mr. Beale—the gentleman who had occupied No. 14 that
evening, had she ever seen him before?”

“Well, sir, I thought I had yesterday morning coming along the
corridor with the manager, but the housekeeper said it was quite
another gentleman, a Mr. Sikes she called him, but he certainly did
look very like the American gentleman, as I said to him myself.”

“Said to whom?”

“To the gentleman last night when I made up the room. He was sitting
by the window, and I said to him that surely I had seen him earlier in
the day—what I mean to say——”

“What did Mr. Beale say?” asked Pointer, feeling that flesh and blood
could stand but little more of this damsel's conversation.

She could not remember what reply her remark had called forth, which
was not surprising, since Mr. Beale, as a matter of fact, had received
it in silence.

He could learn nothing more from her except that the hour when she had
met the man whom she took to be Mr. Beale in company with the manager,
had been some time during the lunch hour,—between one and two-thirty,
in other words. All his skill in bringing the conversation around to
the manager brought him no reward. She knew nothing of anyone's
movements yesterday afternoon, so with a compliment on her clear way
of stating facts she was dismissed.

Alone in the room, Pointer unlocked one of the two top drawers whose
tidiness had struck him last night. He put his hand to the back and
brought out a little box wrapped neatly in green and white striped
paper. He compared it with the torn end which he had picked up in the
manager's sitting-room. It was identical. The square in which a small
box of pearl studs was folded was entire. It must have been from
another piece this corner came. Had it also been wrapped around
jewellery? He looked at the studs. They were small but good ones.
Genuine as far as he could tell— at any rate the gold stems and
general workmanship looked like a superior article. He took the little
box from the drawer and promoted it to a resting place in his black
bag, to be transferred on the morrow to his safe at the Yard. The
piece of paper the manager had stepped on so promptly he put into an
envelope beside it.



Chapter III

Pointer had been certain from the first that Eames must have had some
place not far from the hotel to which his correspondence was directed.
Moreover, early that morning he had marked a small tobacconist in a
poor street around the corner, quite out of the run of usual
passers-by, as the most likely nook to which Eames would have had his
letters sent. Since then he had learnt more. The paper, ruled in
little squares—suggesting a foreign origin—the small, close writing
like that used by Cox in the hotel register next door; Eames' eager
interest on the last morning he had been alive, his whistling later in
the same day, were all additional material for the mosaic the police
had to fit together. Downstairs Pointer learnt that the only Mr. Sikes
known to the hotel had been there a few times, but had never been seen
to come in merely as a visitor. Neither the clerk nor the hall porter
remembered seeing him yesterday. But as that had been an unusually
strenuous time of welcoming coming and speeding parting guests, Mr.
Sikes might have passed unnoticed, though both men thought this most
unlikely. He certainly had not made himself known in any way.

On the register he was entered as a cycle-maker from Coventry. His
description tallied with that of Mr. Beale as far as being a little,
stout, reddish-haired, middle-aged man, though both clerk and porter
ridiculed the idea of mistaking the one for the other.

The manager turned very sharply, almost as though with a start, when
the Chief Inspector stopped him a little later with:

“I believe, sir, that a Mr. Sikes of Coventry often comes to your
hotel. Was he here yesterday?”

The manager, as so often to-day, hesitated before answering the
officer.

“I don't—I don't think so. No, no, I'm sure he was not. But why don't
you look at the register?” This last in a tone of nervous irritation.

“Oh, he didn't stop in the house, but I thought he might have been in
just the same.”

“And what the devil has this Mr. Sikes to do with the affair which you
are presumably investigating, Inspector?”

Pointer did not seem to hear the question, as with quick steps he
passed on up the stairs and went at once in search of the housekeeper.

“Ah, I was on my way downstairs, but perhaps you can save me the
trouble, Mrs. Green—” he beamed at her, and she beamed back at him,
for he was a good-looking man.

“When Mr. Sikes was here on Saturday last, did you see him speaking to
Mr. Eames at all?”

The housekeeper looked a little uncertain of her ground.

“Well, sir, I don't know the gentleman you're speaking of—Mr. Sikes—I
haven't ever seen him.”

“Not know Mr. Sikes?” Pointer's tone, though casual, showed his
surprise.

“I've only been here two weeks, sir.”

“Then you don't know the gentleman I mean even by sight?”

“I saw the manager and a gentleman whom he told me afterwards was a
Mr. Sikes—but more than that I couldn't say, sir,” and Mrs. Green,
looking as though she would have preferred to say still less, tried to
walk on, but he blocked the way.

“Just a moment. I particularly want to find out any friends of Mr.
Eames, and I've reason to believe that he and this Mr. Sikes knew
each other. The manager—I've just spoken to him”—Pointer was always
glad to find even a crumb of truth which he could mix in with
business—“doesn't remember whether Mr. Sikes went into Mr. Eames' room
or not.”

“You mean afterwards, sir?” Mrs. Green's suspicions of the police were
again lulled. “The two gentlemen left Mr. Eames' room together and
went on into the other balcony rooms. Mr. Sikes was looking for a room
for his wife and family, but I had an idea—well, I thought the manager
didn't want it talked about: you know he has to make special terms to
some; but there, of course as he spoke to you about it, why, there
can't be any harm in my referring to it—but whether the gentleman with
him came back later and saw Mr. Eames or spoke to him downstairs is
more than I can say; and now I must go, sir, or goodness knows what
the girls will be up to in the linen-room.” And go she did this time.

A message reached Watts on his return from rescuing the family hats
from the monkeys which caused him to take the evening train to
Coventry, there to learn as much as possible about its doubtless
worthy citizen, Sikes.

Miller, who had been sent across to have a chat with the porters of
the large block of flats opposite, brought back no grist for the
official mill. But he had allowed it to leak out, in accordance with
instructions, that there had been a robbery at the Enterprise, and
that “the party interested” would pay for any information as to the
thief who had escaped, possibly with a bag, either by way of the
balcony or by the little side-door on Saturday afternoon.

“It's going to be a regular November Special,” Pointer said to
O'Connor on his return to his rooms, “or all the signs deceive me.”

“D'ye mean to tell me that the criminal is still at large after all
this time—close on twenty-four hours! Let me have the facts, Watson;
sure Sherlock Holmes will give you a leg-up with pleasure,” and
“Sherlock Holmes” assumed a judicial attitude.

Pointer carefully went over the knotty points unearthed during the
day. “There's Cox . . .” the Scotland Yard man was evidently telling
over his pieces, “who takes a room at the Marvel and uses it for a
couple of hours . . . he's in the centre of the puzzle. Yes, he's that
little gold ball you can just see.” He glanced up at the Chinese
puzzle above his head.

“Why d'ye place him there? Because you found that wax vesta in his
room?” grunted O'Connor, who was for the moment a profound pessimist.
His stamp had just slipped on a valuable piece of leather.

“No, partly because the two men who talked with him speak of him as
possibly an American. Mr. Beale is an American, and Eames' clothes
looked to me like Yankee cut, besides his umbrella. Thank God,
to-morrow's Monday. I'm a Christian man, but there are times when I
could do without Sundays—here at home. There is where the foreign
police score. I shan't forget that Avery case when I was sent to
Naples——”

“I know,” yawned Jim; “it rained all the time, and as for the famous
view of the Bay—why, Plymouth Harbour beat it by ten goals to none.”

“I don't wonder there are so many hasty marriages,” Pointer spoke in
sad soliloquy; “a man does feel a wish sometimes to come home to
something alive, something intelligent.”

“She wouldn't have much intelligence if she let you find her at home,”
pointed out his friend dispassionately, damping some leather with a
hot sponge preparatory to making a fresh start, and for a while there
was silence.

“When Cox tapped on the window of No. 14 who did he expect would open
it for him?” the Irishman asked suddenly. “Eames? Or d'you think he
knew that Eames was dead, and wanted to meet an accomplice there? If
so, who? Beale?”

“I've only one idea about Mr. Beale so far, but it's a fixed one,”
Pointer replied slowly. “For some reason he's playing a game of his
own. Judging by his eyes, it's bound to be a crafty scheme, and by his
mouth, it won't boggle at trifles. However, the shape of his head
guarantees that it'll be a clever one.”

“You're a wonder, Alf. Since you've gone in for those phrenological
and graphological lectures at the Kindergarden there's no hiding
anything from you. Can you tell me by the shape of my head what Mr.
Grey will say to me when he sees how that tooling has been done? You
can't! Well, I can! You might as well continue your sermon by the way.
I'm helpless, I must listen to it.”

His friend was far too canny to proceed.

O'Connor began again: “Was the crime, for of course you think it was a
crime, you hope it was one, you sin-hardened man-hunter, was it
_meant_ to be discovered by Beale, or . . . by someone else? Was
Eames' body placed in that locked wardrobe so that the wrong person
shouldn't find it, or so that the right person should?” O'Connor had
given up all pretence at working and tried to read the answers to his
conundrums one by one on Pointer's face, who finally answered a little
wearily:

“Only time can tell, but as I said last night, frankly I'm puzzled as
to what Mr. Beale with his position—for as I said I haven't a doubt
but that he's all he claims to be—and his dollars are doing in this
business of a shabbily-dressed young man who puts up in a single room
at the Enterprise. Miller found out to-day that Mr. Beale didn't make
any inquiries for rooms at the smarter hotels, but only applied in
Southampton Row.”

“Had he tried the Marvel?”

“No, he seems to've worked from the other end.”

“Look here, you don't suspect him of being the actual murderer, do
you?” O'Connor asked guilelessly.

Pointer pursed his lips. “Not the kind of man to do that sort of thing
himself, I should judge, yet the way the job was done”—he trailed off
into silence.

“Supposing it was he, and not Sikes, who was at the hotel earlier in
the day, why should he come back in the evening? D'ye suppose he
thought of those finger-prints of his which he had left everywhere,
and wanted to have a chance to make them openly, as it were?” Judging
by the detective's face he thought but poorly of this suggestion.

“You say the smaller footmarks, those on the canvas and on the
doorstep about fitted Beale's slippers, didn't you?” persisted the
other.

“As far as size goes—yes. Mr. Beale _could_ have—though it would seem
a mad risk to take—still he _could_ have gone back upstairs again,
when he left us last night in No. 14, and got out on to the balcony
through the landing-window. But to get out with an umbrella and a
raincoat would have been a feat he didn't look up to, though you never
can tell. When I saw him a little later in the manager's room he
certainly hadn't been clambering about in the rain.”

“Well, his departure looks to me very fishy,” maintained O'Connor in a
tone which suggested that Pointer had steadily upheld it as a proof of
the absent man's innocence. “What made him bolt out of the window?”

“I think he saw Cox pass by and recognised him.”

“Suppose he and the manager are in it together? It was the manager who
put Beale into No. 14. Perhaps Beale knew it was empty and the
inquiries at the other hotels were only a blind.”

The Irishman revelled in these talks early in a case, when there were
not sufficient facts to hamper his idle fancy in its flights.

“Ah, as for the manager—” Pointer walked up and down the room. “That
bit of acting about that green and white striped paper was badly
enough done.”

“So badly that it was creditable to him, eh?”

“. . . And as for not discussing Eames' death with Mr. Beale—well, was
it likely! When our expert tells me how much of that ash is Mr.
Beale's cigars and how much the manager's cigarettes—he doesn't smoke
cigars—I shall know better how much time those two spent hobnobbing
together. At any rate something has changed the manager overnight.
Then he acted like—well, if not an innocent man, then at least like a
man who feels himself safe.”

“Perhaps this bolt of Beale's has made the manager, too, think him
guilty.”

“He should tell us his reasons, then,” the police-officer spoke very
firmly. “Whatever it is, to-day he's all nerves, afraid to commit
himself as to the day of the week.”

“I wonder if he left some clue lying around in that room No. 14 and
has recollected it during the night?”

“He needn't worry if it's that,” Pointer spoke bitterly, “unless it's
tagged: ‘This is a Clue; don't miss ME!’ I shouldn't see it. Too much
fog about.”

“Oh, come now,” persisted his friend, “you've done jolly well so
far—going at once to the Marvel and ferreting out about Cox. I don't
know that I should have thought of that myself,” he added handsomely.

“Well, true, I've not fallen far below you as yet,” agreed Pointer in
a cheered-up tone of voice. “I've already lost Mr. Beale, missed Cox,
and can't find Eames' bag nor any trace of its whereabouts.”

The two men laughed.

“As for Mr. Smalltoes,—I mean the man who stood on the canvas and
walked out and then back through the little side door—I don't know
where to place him yet. Centre or circumference.”

“You mean Beale?”

“He may prove to be, but Mr. Beale picks his feet up as neatly as a
water-rail; this man dragged his along. Mr. Beale wears pointed shoes;
this man had on curious ‘reformed’ or ‘true-shaped’ boots. Straight on
the inside and curving sharply about in a semicircle. Here's the
outline.” He held it out to O'Connor, who asked:

“What are the manager's feet like?”

“Two sizes larger. Well, this case is going to make or break me. I
feel it in my bones.”

Next morning Pointer was early at the Yard mapping out the day's
campaign. As he expected, on telegraphing to the American Embassy he
was assured that Mr. Augustus P. Beale, a sub-editor and part
proprietor of the _New York Universe_, a small gentleman, very bald,
with reddish moustache, and gold fillings in his front teeth, was one
of the States' choicest ornaments, a man of vast wealth and many
interests. To clinch matters, one of Lester's snapshots was sent off
to the Embassy, who sent back an immediate reply that this was
undoubtedly the Mr. Beale whom all Americans abroad had been
instructed to honour. If he were missing, he must be missed, until
such time as it might please him to re-appear.

“Just so,” sighed Pointer as he hung up the receiver. His first outing
was to the small confectioner-tobacconist near the hotel which he had
marked in his yesterday's rambles.

“Any letter for Mr. Eames? He's ill.”

The man behind the counter stared at him suspiciously, but Pointer
planked down a half-crown “and if you'll look after any letters for
me, too—Charles Rowntree—for a while I'll be much obliged. Yes, Mr.
Eames' cold has got a bit too bad for him to come out.” Whistling
blithely, he bent over a comic paper.

The man behind the counter softened. “What name did you say, sir? Mr.
Charles Rowntree? Very good. Of course, strictly speaking, I might get
into trouble if it got known; but there, why not be obliging? That's
my motter. Mr. Eames' cold was pretty bad on Saturday, and what with
the rain Saturday night—” He laid a letter down. Pointer handed over a
penny, and bought a shilling packet of cigarettes before he left the
shop. Eames' future correspondence would be sent on to the Yard, but
any back numbers were equally valuable.

He opened the thin envelope, postmarked Dover, and drew out a sheet of
paper ruled in squares.

    “August 4th.

  Wire me what's wrong. Be careful.”

That was all, but the handwriting was the same as that on the Marvel's
register. This document was carefully placed in the Chief Inspector's
pocketbook.

At the Enterprise a man from the Yard was waiting for him with a wire
from Watts. It appeared that Sikes the cycle-maker had left Coventry
ten months ago. Should he try to trace him?

Pointer sent an affirmative reply, and listened to Miller's report.
This time there had been no disturbance of any kind during the night,
and the Chief Inspector could pass on quickly to the looking up of the
two women who occupied rooms Nos. 11 and 12, the rooms nearest to No.
14. As to the other numbers, who were known to the hotel, Pointer left
them to Miller.

Number eleven, nearest to the stairs, was occupied by a Mrs. Willett,
a brightly painted lady whose diamonds and startling dresses turned
every head, literally but not figuratively, as she tripped past on
stilt-heels. Her age was a subject of some speculation. It was
generally agreed, in spite of flashing teeth and gold brown hair, that
forty would be nearer the mark than twenty.

She told Pointer quite frankly that she had been a smart dressmaker
years ago, and now lived on the successful investing of her
profits—partly in London, partly travelling.

“To Monte Carlo,” he added mentally. She had been in the lounge nearly
all of Saturday morning writing letters, and all of Saturday afternoon
at the theatre. She had never seen anyone pass her window going
towards No. 14.

“We want to find out if the gentleman—Mr. Eames—had any friends or
acquaintance in the hotel. People often don't like to come forward in
a suicide case,” Pointer explained.

Mrs. Willett closed her black eyes convulsively.

“Don't,” she begged. “I'm leaving the hotel as soon as I can make
other arrangements. I had meant to leave Sunday morning, but some
friends to whom I was going have a child down with the measles; but
stay on here I can't—it's too terrible . . . such a shock . . . poor
young man!”

Pointer agreed that it was terrible, and bowed himself out, thankful
that the interview was over; for with her arch gestures, and frenzied
vivacity, and her screaming, high-pitched voice, she exhausted the air
of any room. He found the inmate of number twelve quite a change.
Low-voiced, gentle-mannered Miss Leslie was a hard-working young
actress, who had just got into a good part at one of London's leading
theatres by sheer merit and hard work. She had been away all Saturday
morning rehearsing, and all afternoon on the river with friends. She
had never heard voices from Mr. Eames' room since he had taken it, nor
had she ever seen anyone pass the window from Mr. Eames' room in
either direction; but as she had not returned from her Saturday outing
till seven o'clock, when she had taken off her sodden things and crept
immediately into bed, she had not been in the hotel during the
afternoon hours which interested the police most.

Much of this Pointer knew from his and Watt's examination of her room
and wardrobe, while she had been at her bath yesterday morning, and
from questions downstairs. Her wet clothes were noted in the little
book the Chief Inspector consulted now and again.

“You never heard any voices from next door, you say?”

“Not except Saturday evening. I heard men talking in very low whispers
late that night. I suppose you were one of them.”

“Humph! Have you a maid who might have been in here Saturday afternoon
while you were absent? We are trying to find out if Mr. Eames had any
acquaintances who visited him that last day.”

“I have no maid.” Miss Leslie spoke somewhat brusquely, and turned
again to her writing as a sign that the interview was over,—which was
a mistake.

Pointer returned to No. 14—until the inquest, which had been fixed for
Tuesday, the room was being kept by the police—and entered a few
notes. Then he rang for the Boots, a thick-set young man with a
humorous mouth and an intelligent eye. Pointer offered him a cigar and
a match.

“Look here, Seward, between ourselves, who looks after the young lady
in No. 12, Miss Leslie? She must have some sort of a maid surely.”

The Boots lit his cigar appreciatively.

“Well, I don't want to get anyone into trouble, I don't, and of course
I don't _know_ anything about it”—he paused dramatically, but the
police-officer said nothing—“and the housekeeper she really doesn't
know anything about it; but I have heard the other girls say that
Maggie earns a good many half-crowns from the lady for doing odd bits
of mending and hooking her in her dresses, and then waiting up for her
and hooking her out of them. But I don't want to get the girl into
trouble, and the housekeeper has put her foot down more than once
about the maids waiting on the ladies.”

“You won't get her into any trouble”; and when the Boots had gone
Pointer rang for Maggie the chamber-maid.

“Look here, Maggie, you were the greatest help yesterday, and now I'm
trying to find out more about Saturday afternoon itself. I can promise
you that anything you say to me won't get to the housekeeper's ears;
but were you ironing _all_ Saturday afternoon? Come, now, I know that
you _do_ act as maid to Miss Leslie.”

“Oh! she promised me not to tell—” began Maggie in a frightened voice.

“Weren't you part of the time in No. 12? It's your duty to speak up,
you know, and I've told you that it shan't get you into any trouble.”

She hesitated, then she began to cry.

“Oh, I know I ought to've told. I would have—I would have, reely, only
for that dragon. You see, sir, I got the housekeeper to let me off
part of the ironing on Saturday because of a headache, but after I'd
laid down a bit it passed off, and I remembered a dress Miss Leslie
particular wanted mended. So I didn't see why I shouldn't do it
instead. What I mean to say, sewing isn't like ironing, is it, sir?”

Pointer said it sounded to him like a totally distinct form of
occupation.

Maggie dried her eyes and began to recover her _aplomb_.

“What time did you go to Miss Leslie's room?”

He saw her eyes waver, and steadied her with, “It won't go any
further, you know.”

“Well, it was about ten past three, as near as might be, I suppose.”

From her half-sheepish tone he guessed that the lying-down had been
more mental than physical.

“And you were in the room till six?”

“Well-l, about that.” She gave her head a little toss. “I can't think
how you nosed it out.” Then her tone melted: “But there, I've wanted
to tell you about it, only I didn't dare. What I mean is, if the
housekeeper knew of my arrangement with Miss Leslie—” She paused.

“Tell me what you heard or saw on Saturday.” His tone invited
confidences.

“Well, I only heard Mr. Eames moving about, and then I heard the clink
of a glass on the marble washstand. I knew what that was—he was taking
his tonic as I'd seen him do in the morning the day before. Very
regular in his habits he was—the poor young gentleman.”

Pointer leant forward in his chair. “Maggie, shut your eyes and think
yourself back again in Miss Leslie's room. Don't forget anything,
however trifling: it might be of the greatest help in getting at Mr.
Eames' friends. Just shut your eyes and live Saturday afternoon over
again out loud. You've just heard the clink of Mr. Eames' tumbler on
the washstand——”

His rapt attention stimulated the girl. She, too, sat forward on her
seat, shut her eyes, and locked her fingers.

“—then I heard him give a sort of exclamation, or more like a choke—I
mean to say, it sounded like a bit of both”—she was evidently trying
to live the hours over again—“and then I heard him drop into his
armchair; it creaked as though he had fairly fallen into it. After
that I heard nothing more for a long while. You know how hard it
rained day before yesterday, and what a noise it made coming down,
then I wasn't paying any attention—I mean to say I little thought——”

“You heard him drop into his chair”—Pointer's voice was almost
hypnotic—“and next——?”

“Nothing for a long while. Then I heard his door shut. Ah, thinks I to
myself, he's gone downstairs as usual at four-thirty to the lounge for
his tea—tea is included in the board here, you know, sir,—but it must
have been him back after 'phoning to the office. Anyhow, I heard him
lock his door, and then moving about, opening and shutting drawers
very quickly and softly. Like this”—she jumped up and began to open
and shut the tabledrawer, with quite a pause between—“packing, I'm
sure, sir, which shows that he did mean to go into the country——”

“Never mind what it shows. Sit down and shut your eyes again. You
heard him opening and shutting drawers——”

“Oh, yes, and I heard him moving about, too, but so light! I couldn't
hear any footsteps, only all the floors here creak fearful. Then”—she
went quite pale and fixed a genuinely horrified stare on the Chief
Inspector—“I heard him pull the wardrobe out from the wall. I listened
to that, of course, sir, for that _did_ catch my ear—what I mean to
say, the furniture being my lookout, so to speak, I noticed the way he
tugged it. _That'll_ mark the carpet, I thought to myself. Little did
I——”

“After the pulling out of the wardrobe, what then?” Pointer's voice
was intentionally matter-of-fact.

“Well”—she seemed puzzled as to how to put her recollection into
words—“it sounded just as though he dragged the armchair about the
room, but so—so—as if it were so heavy, scraping and creaking, and
then—then”—her eyes dilated—“I heard the most awful sounds of the
chair straining and—and a sort of knocking sound, and yet sort of
dragging—oh, sir, I suppose he had just stopped his packing and taken
the poison then, and what I heard was his death agonies—if only I'd
known, I might have run for a doctor!”

“No, no, Maggie, no one could have helped him. He had taken too much
poison.”

“And to think I wondered what larks he was up to in there! Then all
got quieter, though I could still hear sort of rustling sounds—what I
mean to say, creepy sort of noises, so quiet-like; and then I heard
him shove the wardrobe back against the wall, scraping it more than
ever, and that's what I don't understand. How could he do that after
taking the poison and all?”

“He may have felt better for a little while,” suggested the man from
Scotland Yard.

“Well, I know I very nearly went in to speak about his hauling the
furniture about like that. I should have, only I was supposed to be
lying down. Then I heard the French window opened. I suppose, as you
say, sir, he felt a bit better and stood there for a breath of air,
but the rain was coming down so just then that I couldn't be sure what
I heard. I had the blind down, it had come over so dark, and was
working by the electric light. I didn't hear anything more, for which
I'm thankful; I mean to say, I don't think I could stand it to've
heard him shut himself into that wardrobe—it's quite bad enough to've
heard what I did. When I went in to get the room ready for Mr. Beale
the window-catch was open, though the window had blown shut. To think
that when I was getting the room ready I actually tugged at the door
of that wardrobe. My goodness, if it _had_ opened!”

“You heard nothing more?”

“Nothing, sir. Not a sound.”

“You didn't hear Mr. Eames walk up and down on the balcony or pass
your window?”

“The rain was pouring so just then, sir, that he might have shouted
and I shouldn't have heard anything outside. What I mean to say, it
really was a clatter which came on just then, so as you couldn't
hardly hear yourself think.”

“You didn't look out at all after the blind was down?”

“Oh, no, sir, I had a rush to get the dress done in time as it was.”

“Humph.” Pointer seemed in no hurry to speak. The Eames case was to
remain a “suicide” as long as possible.

“How were you sure it was Mr. Eames? I mean when you heard the glass
clink? It might have been some friend of his in there at first?”

“I heard him sneeze when I had scarcely sat down. He had such a bad
cold. I think myself that it was the influenza that made him go off
his head and drink poison and all. I mean to say I've read of such
cases.”

“It looks very like it,” he agreed, “and now, Maggie, I think I heard
Miss Leslie go out a little while ago?”

“Yes, sir. She's due at a rehearsal at the Columbine.”

“Then seat yourself in her room and listen. I shall drop something on
the table, then I shall drop something else on it. I want you to come
back and tell me which of the two sounds the heaviest. Listen
carefully.”

Maggie disappeared. Pointer could hear the wicker easy-chair creak
slightly. He dropped one of the dental works which Eames had always
had out on his table. Then after a pause he dropped it again. He and
Watts had already tested just how much could be heard through the
partition wall, but this time he was testing Maggie's accuracy.

She came back a second later, looking rather awkward.

“Well, sir, they both sounded alike. I mean to say I reely couldn't
tell any difference, not to speak of.”

“That proves they were both about the same weight, which is quite
likely. Now, Maggie, go back again; sit where you sat on Saturday
afternoon. I shall drop into this easy chair. I want to find out if
the chair makes as much noise with me as it did with Mr. Eames. I mean
to say”—the Superintendent bit his lip for a second—“that time you
heard Mr. Eames fall into it, after he had taken his medicine. Knock
once on the wall if it's not so loud, and twice if it's louder.”

He listened till he heard Maggie draw up her chair, then he dropped
heavily into his. Maggie knocked once. He let himself fall with all
his weight, and Maggie came in.

“That's as near as no matter, sir, to the sound poor Mr. Eames made.”

Pointer weighed fourteen stone and Eames he had guessed as under ten.
The drug must have acted very quickly.

“And now I want to move about the room and see if I can make as little
noise as Eames did later on—when you heard him come back and lock his
door.”

Maggie changed rooms again. Pointer took off both boots. He prided
himself on his light footwork, and walking like Agag he crept around
the room. Maggie knocked twice. He tried again. Again she knocked
twice and then came in.

“Oh, you made ever so much more noise, sir, but then you'd make four
of poor Mr. Eames. With him I didn't hear steps at all.”

“You didn't hear my steps either surely,” Pointer insisted, as he
relaced his boots.

“Perhaps not as steps, sir, but, dear me, with Mr. Eames on Saturday I
could only hear a drawer being pulled out ever so gently and then
shut, after a minute almost without a sound, as you might say. If it
hadn't been for the boards creaking and papers rustling, I couldn't
have believed there was anyone in there, part of the time.”

“Papers rustling. As though they were being scrunched up, or turned
over like this?” He illustrated both sounds with a newspaper.

Maggie nodded as he refolded a sheet and drew it out of a make-believe
envelope.

“That's the sound, sir, but there's the housekeeper's bell. And for
goodness' sake don't let her know that it was I who said anything to
you about that man who looked like the other gentleman. She told us
someone had been chattering and that the management wouldn't have it.
Of course, I said like the others that it wasn't me.”

“You mean about Mr. Sikes, whom you thought was Mr. Beale?”

She nodded. “Shall I come back here when she's finished giving out the
towels?”

But Pointer shook his head. “Hardly worth while. By the way, what time
did Miss Leslie get back the day before yesterday? Pretty late, wasn't
it?”

“I don't know when she got back, sir. I found her in bed when I came
to do her room, which I always leaves till last so that the water will
be fresher. She did have a time on the river in all that wet. Rotten
it must have been. I don't wonder she didn't want to stick it out.”

“What time did you go into her room on Saturday evening, did you say?”

“After I had finished doing this one up for Mr. Beale. About eight
o'clock.”

“Had you been in there after you left it at six?”

“No, sir.” The maid's eyes showed her wonder at the course of the
questioning.

“We're still hoping to find out Mr. Eames' friends, and it's possible
that someone may have been in here on Saturday to see him. That's why
I asked about Miss Leslie. She might have heard a knock.” He handed
the maid half-a-crown. “If you remember anything else let me know.
However insignificant.”

“I will, thank you, sir,” and Maggie closed the door behind her.

After lunch the results of the autopsy reached the Chief Inspector.
Morphia had been drunk in a quantity which made the police-officer
open his eyes. It would be difficult for anyone but a chemist to lay
his hand on such a solution. “There is one thing,” the doctor's
scribble finished, “that dose could never have had its taste
disguised. Or at least it would have been uncommonly difficult.”

All this was what Pointer had expected, but Maggie's account of what
she had heard in No. 14 gave, for the first time, a clearer pattern to
the kaleidoscope. Whoever had shut and locked Eames' door—about
four-thirty—had entered from the corridor and not by the window which
she had heard opened much later.

So, in general terms, from four to six was the time an alibi would
have to cover.



Chapter IV

Miller had nothing suspicious to report in the actions of those
inmates of the balcony rooms who had already visited the hotel on the
other occasions. He was told off to test Mrs. Willett's alibi as far
as that was possible from the hall-porter, while Pointer took a bus to
a smart little bungalow in Sheen, where he hoped to find a lady, whose
postcard, signed Mint, had been duly copied by the police and replaced
in Miss Leslie's little bureau. It had run:

“Jack will call for you to-morrow in the car at two o'clock as you
can't make it earlier, and we will be all ready for you in the launch.
Hope the weather will be fine. Mint.”

The “to-morrow” referred to had been the Saturday of Eames' death. A
few inquiries told him that the bungalow belonged to a Major Thompson,
whose record he promptly looked up in the local free library. The
Major was now working at the War Office, after distinguished war
services.

Mrs. Thompson was in, and very grave the Chief Inspector looked as he
bowed to that young matron.

“Mr. Deane?” She glanced up inquiringly from the professional card
sent in to her, which explained its owner as Mr. Deane, a solicitor of
Grey's Inn Road.

“Excuse my call, Madame, but a client of ours had a motor accident on
Saturday last,—August fourth. A car ran into his, and passed on
without stopping near Richmond Park. You may have heard of it?” He
looked at her with a legal air of being sure to find her out should
she attempt any prevarication.

“I? No!”

“My client believes that he can identify the car that ran into his by
the fact that he recognised a Miss Leslie in it, who is playing at the
Columbine Theatre. From inquiries made at the theatre it appears that
the gentleman who was driving the car in question must have been Major
Thompson.”

“But our car didn't run into anything,” protested the lady. “I drove
it myself all morning. And, besides, my husband and Miss Leslie
weren't anywhere near Richmond Park. What time is this accident
supposed to've happened?”

Mr. Deane looked pained.

“My client, Madame, was run into at between half-past four and a
quarter to five.”

“There you are!” exclaimed Mrs. Thompson in triumph. “Major
Thompson—he's out on the links this afternoon—fetched Miss Leslie
about two o'clock from the Columbine, and drove her here, where my son
and I were waiting in the launch. We had intended to go for a picnic
up the river, but the weather was so shocking that we gave it up, and
played bridge instead. Miss Leslie refused to let my husband or son
take the car out again, and took a taxi back to her hotel just before
dinner.”

“So Miss Leslie was here in the house at the time my client's car was
run into—about half-past four?”

Mrs. Thompson turned a deep red.

“Miss Leslie was here from two-thirty till she left about half-past
seven,” she said very distinctly. “If you care to go up to the golf
links you'll find my husband there and the car! You can examine both
at your leisure.”

“Madame, I regret to say that I do _not_ understand the affair at
all.” Mr. Deane stroked his grey moustache and spoke testily. “My
client told me that he recognised Miss Leslie distinctly, and at her
hotel, where of course I went first before venturing to disturb you, I
was told that she had arrived on Saturday in a condition—I refer to
her habiliments—which distinctly corroborated the idea of an
accident.”

Mrs. Thompson's foot was beating a light tattoo on the floor, and
there was a distinct sparkle in her pretty eyes as she looked at her
visitor.

“I suppose she had a break-down in the taxi; I only know that she left
here at half-past six, looking just as usual. She refused to borrow an
umbrella. And now I must really refer you to my husband. You can't
miss the links.”

Mr. Deane excused himself stiffly for the intrusion, and let himself
follow the road to the nearest telephone booth, at a pace that began
with Mr. Deane's leisurely stride, and finished up in Pointer's best
seven-leagued style. The number of the Sheens' golf club was in use.
He requested to be rung up when it was free, and passed the time in
entering notes in his little book. When he was put through he asked
for Major Thompson.

“He's out on the links,” replied a voice.

“Mrs. Thompson isn't quite sure if he got her message clearly.” He
heard an impatient tongue click.

“As I just explained to the lady, sir, the Major has absolutely
forbidden any messages to be sent on to the links. I'm very sorry,
sir.”

Pointer was not.

“I see. Mrs. Thompson couldn't quite make out your explanation. I'll
make it clear to her.” And Mr. Deane, smiling cheerfully, took a bus
to the club, which presented the usual picture of an August desert. He
announced that he was waiting for the Major, and ordered tea on the
balcony. Towards the close of his leisurely meal two figures clattered
up the steps. A steward approached the shorter and indicated the
visitor. The man came forward.

“I'm Major Thompson. You wish to see me? Shall I have tea at your
table, or will it wait till afterwards? Tea I must have.”

Mr. Deane strongly supported the idea of tea at his table. He produced
his card and spoke of his client's accident.

“I've just come from Mrs. Thompson; she requested me to see you.”
There was no doubt as to Major Thompson's embarrassed bewilderment.

“Oh—ah—I see. But didn't my wife explain—” he gazed wildly around for
his tea.

“No, Major Thompson, she did not. The onus of proof rests on you.” And
Mr. Deane fixed his pince-nez more firmly on his nose, and eyed the
man across the table.

“Well, but—by jove—my wife told me—I mean Miss Leslie”—the major saw
salvation and snatched at it—“you should see Miss Leslie. Miss Leslie
is the person——”

“Not at all.” Mr. Deane stiffened. “My client was only able to
identify the young lady, it is true, but she only comes into the case
as identifying or not your car.”

“I see. Well, then, it's all quite simple. I never was anywhere near
Richmond Park at the hour you mention.”

“Nor your car?”

“Go and have a look at the old bus. There isn't any paint on her to
scratch, but the mud of centuries ought to do as well. If you can find
any dent on her—ah, here's my tea. I see you had shrimp sandwiches,
too. Shows this isn't your first visit here, eh?”

But Mr. Deane was not to be diverted.

“My client,” he began with his dry, preparatory little cough, “fixes
the hour at about four-thirty, or a little later. If you will kindly
state—with, of course, some—ah—proofs—that neither you, Miss Leslie,
nor the car were near Richmond Park at the hour of the collision, the
matter would drop, as far as you are concerned. It must be, of course,
a simple matter for you to establish your whereabouts at the time in
question.”

The major drank long and deep. Then he placed his empty cup in its
saucer with something of a bang.

“I was playing bridge with my wife and friends at home, Miss Leslie
had gone on to some friends, and the bus was in my garage. I fetched
Miss Leslie, who is an old school-friend of my wife's, at two o'clock
from the Columbine, as you say they told you at the theatre, and drove
her home to Richmond. We had intended to go on the river, but my wife
refused to go out in the launch on account of the look of the sky, and
suggested bridge instead. Miss Leslie didn't seem to care for cards,
and decided to taxi on to some friends. So we put her into a cab—she
refused to let us take her in the car—and off she went about a quarter
to three. And as I haven't seen her since, she couldn't have been with
me at four-thirty near any park.”

Mr. Deane tapped his teeth reflectively.

“Um—m. I'm afraid—my client claims pretty heavy damages—his car's a
wreck, though he says that the one which ran into him was barely
dented. And about Miss Leslie—I understood that Miss Leslie said she
was with you and your wife all afternoon. I think there's some
mistake—I think there is.”

The major began to show signs of distress. He dropped a sandwich, but
Mr. Deane foiled that time-honoured device to gain time by instantly
bringing his foot down on it with a vigour surprising in one of his
deliberate movements. The major cast one sulky glance on the savoury
morsel adhering to his visitor's boot, and gulped down a word or two.
He took up the last sandwich, but after a glance at Mr. Deane's
general attitude of “ready,” sat munching it with a thoroughness which
would have moved the late Mr. Fletcher himself to admiration.

“Well, sir?” asked Mr. Deane tartly.

The major chewed on in silence. Finally there was no help for it; he
had to swallow the last crumb, but no shipwrecked sailor could have
done so more lingeringly.

“Well, of course, if Miss Leslie said so—of course she was. I suppose
I've got it muddled. As a matter of fact—now I think of it—of course
we all played bridge all afternoon.”

“_All_ afternoon?” repeated Mr. Deane, as though unable to believe his
ears.

“No, no, no!” corrected the hapless major, “just till about—about—oh,
hang it all, I never notice time when I am at cards. But as a matter
of fact, I believe we left off quite early—that is, relatively, you
know. Every's relative nowadays, thanks to old Einstein—what?”

Mr. Deane sat awhile in silence. The two were quite alone on the
balcony. He decided that the time had come for him to make way for the
Chief Inspector. It was a pity, for Mr. Deane had thoroughly enjoyed
himself. When he spoke, his voice had changed totally.

“I have something I would like to say to you, sir. Would you mind
walking out on to the links with me?”

The major gave him a penetrating glance.

“Certainly. Come this way.” They strolled off into utter silence and
safety from eavesdropping.

“C.I.D. man, eh?” asked the soldier. “Anything wrong at the Office?”

“No, sir, not to my knowledge. I am Chief Inspector Pointer, of the
Yard, as you guessed. I'm on a queer suicide case which has taken
place at the hotel Miss Leslie is stopping at—the Enterprise—in the
room adjoining hers, in fact. We hope to keep it out of the papers
till the inquest on Wednesday. Now, as you, of course, know, sir,
every case of suicide that isn't as clear as daylight has to be sifted
by us pretty thoroughly. Part of the sifting in this case is to place
the people's whereabouts who were on the same floor—the first floor.
It's a question, roughly, of the hours between four to six on last
Saturday afternoon. Miss Leslie is among the other people. You quite
understand, sir, that it's a mere matter of form, that we know from
the hotel employés that she wasn't in the hotel till much later in the
day; but that isn't enough. We must try to have alibis for everyone on
the floor between those hours, if it's a possible thing; and if it
isn't, we must know why it isn't. Now, sir, can you tell me where Miss
Leslie _really_ was during those hours?”

Major Thompson thought awhile.

“I don't know that I care to make any statement in so serious a matter
as this,” he said finally. “Miss Leslie will give you any information
you ask for—any that you have a right to—I am quite sure,” and he
turned away.

Pointer stopped him.

“Ah, but I can't explain things to Miss Leslie. Not a soul must know
that the case isn't a perfectly clear suicide. That's why I adopted my
little ruse with you just now, sir. I should have preferred not to
have told even you about the matter. Doubtless the young lady would
explain her movements on Saturday afternoon, if she knew _why_ I am
interested in them; but as I can't explain my reasons to her, I doubt
very much if she won't refuse to tell me anything.”

“I see.” The major again thought awhile. “Yes, I see your point,
Inspector, though I owe you something for pulling my leg in that
unconscionable way, and stepping on the choicest sandwich.”

Pointer repressed a grin.

“I'll be quite frank with you. There was Miss Leslie, my wife, my son
Henry, and my son's fiancée at the bungalow on Saturday afternoon. My
wife and the other young lady decided—very sensibly—that the weather
was much too threatening for an outing on the river, but Miss Leslie,
for some whim, tried to insist on our taking the launch out. Henry, of
course, backed her up, like an idiot. My wife refused to go, the young
lady refused to go—I kept myself out of it all by cleaning the
car”—the major glanced at the disreputable old Armstrong, stiff with
mud, which was standing a few yards from the two men—“and the upshot
was that Miss Leslie and Henry decided to go in the launch, while my
wife and Edith went into the house to get tea ready for them when they
would return. I saw the silly young optimists off, and we expected
them back within a quarter of an hour. But not a bit of it! Henry was
beginning to see what a fool he was, but a girl doesn't see reason so
quickly. It was nearly seven o'clock before the two returned, soaked
through, of course. Miss Leslie has some friends higher up the river:
they had pulled up there, had tea with them, and then made for home in
all that downpour! After that, she took a taxi from our house and went
back to her hotel; and if you know of a madder way of spending last
Saturday afternoon, I don't. My wife is furious with her, and Edith is
furious with my son.”

“I'm afraid I must ask for the name of the friends with whom Miss
Leslie had tea,” murmured Pointer.

The major reluctantly gave it him, and the two men parted on good
terms.

What in the world had induced a rising young actress to spend her time
in such an extraordinary manner, mused the police officer as he took
the bus on to the Blacks, where Miss Leslie had tea.

The villa was shut up, and, what was more, had been shut up since the
middle of July, so the nearest tradesman told him. The Blacks were
away at Cromer.

Again Pointer 'phoned to Major Thompson. This time to his home
address. The Blacks were “out,” he explained. Might he call and see
Mr. Henry Thompson?

“What's wrong now?”

“Nothing, sir. Merely that I want to get hold of someone who was
actually with Miss Leslie between four and six o'clock,” soothed the
Chief Inspector.

The major grunted.

“He's not here now, but I believe you'll find him at the Sesame Club
this evening about eight o'clock,” and the receiver snapped up.
Evidently the domestic affairs of Henry were not yet running smoothly.

In the Sesame lounge at seven-thirty Mr. Deane presented himself. Mr.
Thompson was in the writing-room, he was told.

Mr. Deane produced his card, and with it the tale of the motor
collision.

“I've met your father on the links this afternoon. Major Thompson very
kindly gave me your address here—he's certain that you can give Miss
Leslie an alibi for the hour in question at any rate. That would clear
matters up a great deal.”

“Of course she wasn't in our car. She wasn't in any car,” grunted
young Thompson; “no such luck. We were—having tea with friends,” he
finished lamely.

Mr. Deane raised an eyebrow.

“The Blacks' house has been shut up for three weeks.”

The young man swung around on his chair.

“It's a perfectly rotten affair,” he burst out at length; “my
stepmother thinks I ought to've let Miss Leslie go out on the river by
herself. But, you see, I knew,—I mean, I've known her all my
life—besides, the weather didn't look half bad when we started”; and
then followed a tale of a wilful young female dragging the reluctant
male into boat and tea-shop, where they partook of a chilly tea—their
friends' house proving shut up—and back home through the pouring rain.
The afternoon had apparently not gained any retrospective charm in the
young man's memory, but Pointer got the clue he was after. Miss
Leslie—according to young Thompson—hoped to meet Malcolm Black, to
whom she had been engaged before she had taken to the stage. Though
the family were away, she had seemed quite confident that the house
would be open, and that they would find Malcolm on the little island
summer-house which belonged to them.

When Mr. Deane had dexterously turned the young man inside out, he
left him, soothed by the sympathy of one man of the world for another,
and quite unaware of the operation to which he had been subjected. As
for himself, he had a possibly true explanation of those drenched
garments, over which he and Watts had paused more than a moment during
their investigation of all the wardrobes of the hotel.


The next day was the inquest—a purely formal affair, for the Coroner
agreed with the police as to the wisdom of leaving out all possible
details. He confined it, therefore, to the reading aloud of the letter
left by the deceased dentist, R. Eames, and to the doctor's testimony
as to the huge amount of morphia taken. The hotel employés were only
called on to identify the body, and then proceedings were adjourned
for a fortnight, ostensibly to allow of the family of the young man
being found and communicated with. The Chief Inspector also managed,
on the same ground, that of further identification, to get the burial
postponed until Saturday.

It was a busy day for the police. The work started yesterday of
looking up the names of all arrivals from the Colonies or the United
States in order to trace a Cox or an Eames, or any names fitting those
initials, had to be continued, and the seven 'phone calls which had
come through to the Enterprise about five o'clock were each minutely
investigated. Three came from within a stone's throw of the hotel; but
as the machine in question was in a large general shop, all efforts to
identify the occupiers of the booth at about the hour given were in
vain. Yet one curious fact came to light.

The lift-boy of Knotts, the shop in question, was certain that he had
seen the Enterprise manager leave the 'phone box at about that hour.

The manager, questioned casually on the point, maintained that it was
the day before—on the second—when he had 'phoned to his hatter, but
the boy persisted that it was on Saturday and not on Friday, as he
himself had his afternoon off on Friday.

The manager's hatter, when Pointer rang him up, could remember no call
at all from the manager during the latter half of the week.

Pointer put it to him that there must be some mistake; “and, frankly,
we want to weed out the telephone calls as far as possible.”

“Sorry, but I suppose some shop assistant forgot to make a note of my
message—or, stay, I do believe I didn't succeed in getting through.”

Inquiry proved that there had been another call occupying the hatter's
wire at five, and a little before, but the Chief Inspector wondered
whether this were merely a lucky chance or not.

A telegram came from Watts during the morning: “Found Sikes. Denies
visit to London. No alibi. Arriving four o'clock.”

And punctually to the hour Watts presented himself at Pointer's room
in the Yard.

“Sikes—revised version of Isaacs, I fancy, sir—lives in a handsome
villa at Brighton—garage and fairly good car. Maidservants. I told
him, as agreed, that a wealthy American had disappeared rather
suddenly, and the Embassy was making cautious inquiries; that he had
last been seen at the Enterprise Hotel, and that there was some doubt
as to the time of his arrival. I gave a very flattering description of
his looks”—Watts laughed—“and then said that the manager had given us
to understand that it was himself—Mr. Sikes—and not Mr. Beale who had
been seen at noon on Saturday in the hotel in company with the
manager; and as he very much resembled Mr. Beale's description, we had
come to him to clear the matter up once for all. I put it most
tactfully, I assure you, sir; but he got purple and banged the table.
‘Impudent lies! I never was near the place since March last. I don't
care what the management says; I never was near the place on Saturday.
Haven't been to London, except to a theatre, in months. Tell the
Enterprise people that if they make any future mistake of the kind
I'll have them up. I'll sue the manager, that's what I'll do!’ He had
heard about the whole business already from someone else, I'll swear,
and was fed up with it.”

“Humph! Well?”

“I got nothing more out of him, sir. I think his rage choked him too
much to let him speak. As to an alibi—he said that his word was a
sufficient alibi. He had gone early to town last Saturday, by the
eleven o'clock, in order to buy his wife a present, had gone the
rounds of the silversmith's windows, had seen nothing he liked; hadn't
gone in to any shops, and had wound up the day with a theatre, after
luncheon at Frascati's at one o'clock, and returned to Brighton by the
five o'clock. Asked if he had seen anyone he knew, he went off the
rails again, and shouted that he had made his money in business, and
not in gadding about town making acquaintances with idlers. So that's
that, sir.”

“You verified his trains, of course?”

“Oh, yes, sir. They were all O.K. He was well known at the station.”

“So that's that,” echoed Pointer as Watts filed his report.

“Nothing connected with the manager seems to be quite straightforward.
However— . . .” He told Watts of the shape the case had assumed since
his absence.

“Maggie thinks she heard the _room_ door—the corridor door—open.
Whew!”

“It's lucky there was someone in number twelve Saturday afternoon. But
for that, there would be no question of time. That medicine-bottle
could have been tampered with as soon as Eames had taken his morning
dose. Whoever did it poured out the medicine, poured in the morphia
solution, which they doubtless flavoured with a little peppermint and
eucalyptus like the medicine, and left it for Eames to help himself
to, at a time when they might have been chatting with the Archbishop
by way of an alibi. Then, when Eames was unconscious, someone enters,
locks the door, takes out the back panels of the wardrobe, and fixes
on the little brass bolt; shoves Eames in, dead or unconscious,
screwed the panels into place again, emptied the bottle on to the
balcony—it was pouring at the time—put back the last dose of medicine
which they had taken out earlier in the day, goes through the dead
man's papers and effects, and gets away with whatever the murder was
committed for in the bag, down the service-stairs, and out into the
street that way.”

“Clever scheme!” Watts breathed, who was following his Superior's
account with breathless interest.

“A simple one, for if it hadn't succeeded—if Eames hadn't drunk the
medicine, but had disliked the taste and thrown it away—the poisoner
could try again. As for Mr. Beale, we have had word from the American
Embassy not to bring him in in any way.”

“Do you think there's any chance of the affair turning out to be
political, sir?” asked Watts. “The manager, you know, is
Irish—Hughes—and Eames is an Irish name, and so is Beale.”

“Let's hope for all our sakes it won't be that! If there's one thing
that's calculated to break a policeman's heart first, and his career
afterwards, it's a political case.” The mere suggestion covered the
Chief Inspector's face with gloom. “Tails all over the place you
mustn't step on,” he added, after a long pull at his pipe.

“Seen the picture of Eames in the late editions, sir?” asked Watts,
laying one before him. “I don't call it a good likeness myself.”

“As unlike him as they could make it,” agreed Pointer. “We've asked
the Colonial papers to copy the picture, but much good a smudge like
that will do.”

“Something unforeseen may turn up from it, though,” suggested Watts.

“Not in this case,” corrected Pointer with conviction. “Everything
unforeseen will have to be looked for with a searchlight, in my
opinion;” and Watts was too much impressed by the medicine-bottle clue
which Pointer had picked out to answer.

“Now, then, Watts”—the Chief Inspector turned to business again—“I
want you to find out whether Beale, or the manager, or anyone
corresponding to the description of Cox, has been buying any morphium
in London. Take Eames' snapshot, too, though that's hardly likely to
be needed.” He went into careful details of the men and taxis he could
have to help him.

For two days Watts searched London, but found nothing to prove that
any of the three men had ever been near a chemist save Cox, that one
time when he had bought the fatal bottle. Meantime nothing transpired
at the Yard about Eames. Letters flowed in by the score purporting to
recognise the printed likeness, but all the patient investigations of
the police only proved that the recognition was mistaken. In Canada a
terrific forest fire was raging, and under the circumstances the Yard
could hardly press for larger space to be given to the picture of an
unknown Englishman. At the Enterprise there had been practically no
changes—at least from the first floor, and nothing had as yet
transpired which could give the casting hither and thither police any
definite trail.

“How's the manager developing?” O'Connor asked the night of Watts'
return. “Been getting any deeper into your black books?”

“I've had a man look up his record——”

“Ah, well, that would be about the same thing with a policeman. Heaven
help us all!”

“The report came in this afternoon. About a year ago he bought rather
heavily of securities which are to-day a mere fraction of what he gave
for them. He's slightly in the hands of money-lenders, and is
altogether by no means as happily placed as might have been expected;
for though the hotel is full, the running expenses are higher under
him than were allowed for, and as his salary is only paid on net
profits he must be pretty badly put to it sometimes. However, we've
not been able to trace any previous acquaintance between him and Mr.
Beale—not as yet.

“That scrap of green and white paper”—Pointer seemed to see it before
him: “the manager isn't particularly quick-witted, but he certainly
was quick-footed, for he was standing on it before you could say Jack
Robinson—on the one and only piece of evidence the room contained. By
the way, a jeweller to whom I showed Eames' studs says they're
unusually fine pearls—for their size. Question is shall we ever learn
what other things of value he may have had with him?”

There was a pause. “Our analyst reports that there were the ashes of
two cigars and twelve cigarettes in the little lot I took him. That
amount couldn't have been smoked in five minutes.”

O'Connor had risen and laid an old copy of the _Era_ before him. “I
thought I vaguely remembered something of the kind, so I hunted these
up. What d'ye think of them?” he asked in would-be careless tones.

Pointer examined them. They were pictures of Miss Leslie taken four
years back, in the character of an old man.



Chapter V

It was late on the afternoon of Thursday that the Chief Inspector
again went meticulously over every article of Eames' which he had in
his safe. The watch he lingered over longest. His advertisement had
brought in no helpful replies. He had taken the watch to a
neighbouring goldsmith, who had only been able to tell him that the
maker, a very poor one, had long ago given up work and life itself.
Pointer laid it on one side for a moment and took up the waistcoat. It
was a well-worn garment, with very small pockets, one of which—the
watch-pocket—had a permanent bulge. He fitted the watch into it. As he
looked at it attentively it struck him that the watch did not conform
at all to the outline supposed to have been made by it. An idea came
to the police officer. He put on a pair of magnifying glasses and
scrutinised the inside of the back of the case long and minutely.
Finally he rose, with a faint flush in his cheek, and took a taxi to
the largest watchmakers and goldsmiths in London.

“Sorry,” the manager said patronisingly when Pointer, after asking for
a private room, had shown him the watch; “it's not the kind of article
we ever deal in. Not our class at all.” He handed back the watch
contemptuously, and endeavoured to look over the other's head.

Pointer, unruffled as ever, opened the case again.

“Then you don't know that mark? Those crossed semicircles?”

He pointed to two almost invisible pin scratches.

The manager started, and took the watch again quickly.

“Two semicircles crossed? By Jove, so there are! The marks are so old
and worn that I didn't notice them. You've good eyes, Inspector.”

“I look at what is before me,” was the quiet reply, which the salesman
greeted as a sally of wit.

“Ha, ha! We all do that, I suppose. Well, to tell you the truth, that
happens to be an old private mark of our own.”

“Just so. You changed it some twenty years ago.”

“Oh—ah! You certainly are well up in your work! If you sit down again
for a moment I'll make inquiries.”

Some time went by before the manager returned.

“I can't trace the watch in the least. I think that mark must be a
mistake, or a joke, though it's our own mark right enough.” He was
obviously puzzled.

“Could it be a watch you lent a customer in place of one left to be
mended? Or what about your branch establishment in Bond Street?”

The manager left him alone again and returned to say that he thought
the Chief Inspector's suggestion highly probable, but that they had no
record, even so, of the watch on their books. He recommended him to
try their branch.

Pointer thanked him and took another taxi.

At Bond Street he found that the manager had 'phoned, and he was shown
at once into a little room where he found a salesman waiting for him.

“Chief Inspector Pointer? We've been going over our books. I think I
may be able to help you.”

The police-officer handed him his treasure. The man opened the case.

“Yes, this is a watch I let a young gentleman have”—he laid it down
and ran his finger along a ledger—“last Saturday morning. As a rule,
we furnish no watches to our customers, but in this case we supplied
him with one as a makeshift for his own very valuable repeater.”

“Was this the young gentleman?” Pointer held out Eames' photo. The
salesman identified him after a long scrutiny. “He wore a brown tweed
suit and a soft brown felt hat.”

“That's him,” muttered Pointer, drawing a deep breath.

“He gave the name of Eames. But his repeater, I have it here, has
another family's coat of arms engraved on the back. Do you know
anything about heraldry, Inspector?”

“A little.”

“Well, of course, we have to, and besides—well frankly, the repeater
was of a very superior kind, and the young man's clothes were not
quite in keeping, you know what I mean?”

Pointer secretly damned any interest in clothes just then.

“Oh, quite! And the crest was?”

“I recognised it at once, but as a mere matter of form I looked it up,
as I thought it is that of the Perthshire branch of the Erskine
family. Here is the repeater.” He laid it down beside the Scotland
Yard man. “And now, I presume, I may take back this. And what about
the charge for the spring we supplied?”

Pointer assured him that that would doubtless be settled by the
family. He asked the salesman how it was that he had missed the offer
of a reward for the watch, and whether he had not noticed any likeness
between his customer and the picture of the “Hotel suicide,” let alone
the name of Eames which had been given in the Press. The shopman
smiled a little wearily.

“Stocktaking,” was his laconic excuse, “and besides our three lending
watches don't go by number any more. They're too ancient for that.”

Pointer left the shop with a buoyant tread just as the shutters went
up.

The Yard has its own short cuts, and after a couple of hours of
strenuous trunk-calls, he was able to get into touch with a certain
solicitor, a Mr. Russell, of Russell and Son, of Perth, who, when
driven into a corner, finally admitted that he acted, since his
father's retirement, as legal adviser to the particular branch of
Erskines in whom the Yard was interested.

“It's about young Erskine who's come over from Canada lately——”

This seemed to galvanise the man at the other end. So much so that it
was some time before Pointer could get his query through the
Scotsman's ejaculations.

“He's dead. Suicide apparently. Could you identify the body?” With
many repetitions he got a general description of “Eames” over the
line. The watch clinched it. The invisible Russell said he would come
to town by the earliest possible train. Then followed a little
difference of opinion as to the exact meaning of that term, Russell
pointing out that he said the earliest _possible_, while Pointer
maintained time-tables to be the only standard. He won finally, and
Mr. Russell agreed to take the midnight express south, leaving his
office in the hands of his father.

He arrived at the Yard late the following afternoon, and almost in
silence the two men drove to the chamber where “Eames” still lay in
his patent ice-coffin.

Russell recognised him at once, and the Scotsman's air of almost
suspicious reserve—as that of a man whose valuable time might be
wasted—left him. Seated in the Chief Inspector's room at the Yard over
a glass of his own mixing, Mr. Russell told all that he knew of the
young man.

“You're quite sure, Mr. Russell, that you recognise the corpse?”

Pointer was writing swiftly. So was Watts.

“Aye, only too sure. I knew him as a boy well enough, and besides he's
the very image of his father.” He stared ruminatingly out of the
window. “It's not easy to know how much I ought to tell you, Inspector
Pointer. Under ordinary circumstances I should, of course, say nothing
till I had talked with Mrs. Erskine—poor leddy! poor, poor leddy!—but
as you say time is important—well, I've thought it over well coming
down here, and I've decided to tell you the whole family story as far
as it concerns young Robert Erskine. Their branch has been settled in
Perthshire since the battle of Flodden Field. His father—Mr. Henry
Erskine—was the owner of a fine bit of land and fortune. He sold all
the land long ago, all but a park with the dower-house in it which was
included in his wife's settlements. She had a property of her own,
too, and comes of an equally good house. She was an Abercrombie and is
still alive. The father is dead. The marriage, I fancy, was not an
over great success. She is a quiet, deeply religious body, and Mr.
Erskine—well, he liked concerts, and operas, and paintings, and
travelling. He had one younger brother Ian who had bought a large
ranch in Canada, and seventeen years ago—Robert was then twelve—Mr.
Erskine and his son went on a year's visit to this brother. While
there—I think it was only after a couple of months,—Mr. Henry Erskine
was thrown from his horse and killed. By his will—I have a copy of it
here with me—he left the use of his property to his wife during her
life-time with remainder to his son should he outlive her. In case of
Robert Erskine's death, before his mother, half was to become his
wife's possession absolutely, and the other half goes to found art
scholarships in Perth. In case both son and wife were dead, the
estate, it was worth about seven thousand a year at the time of Mr.
Erskine's death, and has since greatly appreciated—to be split up into
various art scholarships at Scotch towns. His brother, Ian Erskine was
a wealthy man, a bachelor, who had expressed his intention—in
writing—of leaving his entire fortune to his only nephew Robert. Do I
make myself quite clear?”

“Oh, quite,” breathed the two police officers, who were lapping up the
information thirstily.

“This uncle was appointed the boy's guardian, and Robert was to remain
with him until he should be of age. By that time Mr. Ian Erskine had
died, too, leaving his fortune as he had promised, I understand, and
Robert stayed on at the Four Winds Ranch near Calgary. We had very
little indeed to do with him after his father's death. I presume he
preferred to employ his uncle's man of business. I doubt but that he
takes after his father and is a bit careless with money, for over two
months ago, on May 20th to be exact, Mrs. Erskine instructed me to
send Robert £1,000. I was abroad for my holidays at the time, so I
went to see her. Mrs. Erskine lives in France for the sake of her
health. She left Scotland shortly after her husband and son went to
Canada and has a fine villa outside Nice. There she showed me his last
letter, in which he asked for the money to settle some card debt. I
gathered from Mrs. Erskine, more by what she didn't say than by what
she did, that he frequently applied to her for funds. I'm not saying
that she can't afford it, for owing to her profitable investments—she
has a rare head for finance—her income has been more like ten thousand
than seven these many years past. But, frankly, gentleman, it wasn't
the kind of letter I should have cared to write to my mother,—and her
a widow and frail. Well, we sent the one thousand pounds by a draft on
a Toronto bank, and received a scrap of a receipt on June seventeenth,
along with a sealed envelope marked ‘My Last Will and Testament’ with
instructions to keep it for him, and use it if need be.”

“Can I see the covering letter to his will?”

The solicitor held it out. It was the briefest of notes headed from a
Toronto hotel and dated June 4.

  “Dear Mr. Russell,

  I shall be much obliged if you will take charge of the enclosed. It is
  my last, and only will. Should I die kindly act on it at once.

    Faithfully yours,
      Robert Erskine.”

“You have the will with you, too, sir?”

“Aye, I have.” But Mr. Russell made no motion to produce it.

“Under the circumstances, as you have definitely identified the body
as that of Robert Erskine, you would save us all a great deal of
trouble, and yourself a long detention in London, by letting us have
it now.”

The lawyer pondered this for a moment. Then he drew out and broke the
seals of a grey envelope. In it was a half-sheet of notepaper. By to
Robert Erskine on June Fourth had left everything of which he might
die possessed to one Henry Carter, of 10401 Street, Calgary.

“Alias Cox,” was Pointer's silent comment as he passed it on to Watts.
Then he compared it carefully with a letter which he took out of his
safe, the note found on Eames' body. The writing tallied. He handed
the note to the lawyer, who read it with emotion. For he and the young
fellow in whose name it stood, were about of an age, and had known
each other as children.

“To think of it! To think of the Perthshire Erskines ending like this!
All their money and all their land to come to no better finish!”

Pointer pressed a button and had the will handed over to the Yard's
experts to be photographed and enlarged.

“Now about this Henry Carter, who is he?”

“I never heard of him before in my life. He won't be a Perthshire
man.”

The Chief Inspector played with his fountain pen for a while.

“Do you think Mrs. Erskine could come over for the adjourned inquest?
It won't be till a week from Tuesday?”

“I doubt it might kill her. She is a very delicate woman. Robert was
her only child, you remember. Nor can I see the point. In his letter
he says clearly enough that his intention is to commit suicide. And as
for identification—she hasn't seen him since I have. He's never been
back to Europe before. I know that.”

“Did you know that he was coming?”

“My dear sir, I know as little of Robert Erskine's movements these
last years as I do of the Pope. Barring that receipt for the thousand
pounds, and that envelope with his scrap of a will inside, we haven't
heard from him since his father died these many years ago. And at that
time it was my father who transacted the winding up of the estate. I
was but a lad.”

“Well, I hope Mrs. Erskine will come. I must run over to France, if
not. She may be able to throw some light on the reasons for her
son's—ah—end. Now, Mr. Russell, do you happen to know whether Mr.
Robert or Mr. Ian Erskine took any interest in politics out in
Canada?”

“I do remember a letter my father read me, in which Mr. Erskine—Mr.
Henry Erskine—spoke of difficulties his brother was having with some
Communist settlers near by; but what would that have to do with young
Erskine's suicide?”

“Nothing probably, but we must leave no stone unturned. Well, Mrs.
Erskine may know more. I should like to find out what Robert Erskine's
attitude on labour questions was.”

“But his letter—! Man, a young fellow is hardly likely to kill himself
for such like whimsies.”

“True again, Mr. Russell; but as there doesn't seem any reason lying
around on the surface why a wealthy young man should kill himself, we
must poke about for one. By the way, do you know how much his uncle
left him?”

“Mrs. Erskine wrote to the effect that he was now wealthier than she.
That's all I know.”

“Thanks.” The Chief Inspector drew Watts into another room.

“Cable to the Toronto police for full particulars of young Erskine and
Cox. And repeat to Calgary police.” Pointer turned to his desk with
the air of a man who has still a full day's work before him, whatever
the hands of the clock might say about it.

Mr. Russell cleared his throat, but his courage apparently failed him,
as with a bow and a “See you to-morrow at your hotel, Mr. Russell—at
eleven, if that hour suits you,” the Chief Inspector was gone.

Mr. Russell cleared his throat again.

“Mr. Watts—I wonder, now—I'm wishful to see the room where poor Robert
Erskine took his life. I knew him as a boy, you see.” There was
genuine feeling in the Scotsman's face.

The detective opened the door. “Chief Inspector!” he called, but his
superior was out of earshot.

Watts rubbed his chin.

“Well, sir, of course, strictly speaking, I should say no. But as
you're in the case as it were, and a friend of the family—well, as it
happens, I shall be at the Enterprise Hotel within the hour on
business. I'll pick you up in the lounge there if you like, and let
you just have a look at No. 14. The hotel doesn't intend to let it
till Monday.”

He was as good as his word, and took the solicitor up with him to the
threshold of the fatal room. Mr. Russell shook his head slowly.
“Pitiful, aye, pitiful indeed, to think of Robert Erskine come to such
a pass that he was glad to take poison and shut himself up in yon box.
Do you think there was a wumman at the bottom of it?”

“There often is,” agreed Watts. Not until the adjourned inquest did
the Yard intend a word to leak out which might suggest that the
“suicide” was a murder.

“Aye, just so,” murmured Mr. Russell as he tiptoed from the room.

On the stairs they met Pointer, who gave them both a baleful glare.
Watts would have explained, but his superior silenced him with a
gesture.

“Not out here. Mr. Russell, don't let us detain you, sir”; and the
lawyer left the detective to a grim little interview back in No. 14.

“My aim was to keep the man's identity a secret, as I told you.” The
Chief Inspector's voice lost none of its edge for being carefully
lowered; “and you bring the family solicitor to the hotel! Suppose the
criminal is still in the house—you give him notice that we know who
Eames was. Beale, or Cox, may both of them be staying under this very
roof as Jones or Smith for aught we know!”

Watts bent to the blast, and apologetically took himself off, inwardly
swearing that never again would he yield to a kindly impulse.

Pointer walked swiftly downstairs and knocked at the manager's door.
He was greeted with rather forced cordiality.

“Mr. Manager, I asked you once before if Mr. Eames left anything in
the safe. You said no. We have learned to-day that he may have had
some hundreds of pounds with him. Are you sure of the honesty of your
booking clerks?”

“Oh, quite! Absolutely.” There was no mistaking the conviction in the
manager's tones, but also no mistaking the fact that he had turned
very pale.

“You have the only key to the safe, I understand?”

“That is so.”

“I see.” Pointer was watching him intently and not disguising the
fact. “The night-clerk, Biggs, says that he happened to see you open
the safe several times during the days Eames was here, and noticed a
small sealed box, wrapped in green and white striped paper, on the top
shelf to the right. He is certain that he saw it last on the night of
the third—Saturday—when you opened the safe to give a Dutch gentleman
back his deposit. On Sunday morning the safe was opened at nine
o'clock to let a lady put in her jewels, and the box was gone. Can you
tell me anything about that box?”

“That box? Oh, yes, I remember now. That box belonged to me. I often
keep spare cash in the safe.”

Both men looked at the safe facing them cemented into the wall of the
manager's sitting-room.

“And the green and white striped paper? I showed the clerk the piece I
found in this room the morning after Mr. Beale's—ah—departure, and he
positively identifies it as similar to that which he saw in the safe.
Yet when I questioned you, sir, about that same piece you expressly
stated that it was not yours?”

The manager did not speak. He looked as if he could not, and after
waiting a full minute the Chief Inspector rose.

“You have no explanation to offer, sir?”

“What do you mean?” snapped the manager shrilly. “I have explained!
Good God, I am explaining! I may have wrapped a box up in any chance
piece of paper I found lying around without noticing its colour—its
stripes!”

Pointer waited again. Then:

“You have nothing further to add, sir?”

“No!” The manager passed his hand across his face as though to wipe
away an incautious word.

The Chief Inspector took out a small black book from an inner pocket
and held it in front of the other. “Do you identify this, sir?”

The manager's face glistened under the light.

“Of course. It's the safe receipt-book. You have no business with
that, officer. Aren't you overstepping your authority?”

“I think not, sir. Here are the entries up to July 25th—the date Mr.
Eames came to the hotel. Here are the entries up to August 4th, the
date of his death—and here are the entries from August 4th up to date.
Does nothing strike you about them?”

“Nothing!” The manager's voice was harsh. “They are all in perfect
order. Each entry initialled by me and by the visitor, and the dated
signed receipt in full when the article or articles were handed back.
What mare's nest have you got hold of now?”

“You have no explanation to offer of the curious fact that up to the
25th the entries are in a different ink from the receipts, and the
receipts themselves differ according to the pen used. But from the
twenty-fifth of July to August fourth inclusive, that is these ten
pages”—he held them up—“though the handwriting differs as before, all
the writing is done with one ink throughout and with one nib—a rather
pointed fountain pen? After August fourth again the nibs and the ink
varies as they do before July 25th.”

“What do you mean?” The manager stared truculently at his inquisitor.
“What are you insinuating?”

“Then, too,” continued the detective's level tones, “this book is one
of a class Straker habitually stock. But this one is twenty pages
short. Someone has evidently cut out the pages on which were the
entries of July twenty-fifth to August fourth, and the half-pages
which correspond further on, and filled in more or less complete
copies—more or _less_ complete”—he repeated meaningly—“of the pages as
they stood.”

There was a long silence.

“Here is a copy of the book, sir, but this one I am taking with me, as
you have no explanations to offer.”

The manager made a gesture towards the door and turned on his heel.

Saluting stiffly, Pointer left the room, and after a word to an
unobtrusive figure watching outside, swung himself on to a Bayswater
bus.

O'Connor received the news of the day's work with enthusiasm. The
police officer took a more moderate tone and pointed out that they
were only now where most cases started—that is, in possession of the
name of the victim.

“—but I'm not denying it's a step forward, chiefly because it's our
best chance of getting at the motive. And the motive will be the only
key that will unlock this puzzle.” He spoke with conviction. “If it
were a case of circumstantial evidence we might spend the rest of our
lives working at it. That balcony, that service-stair practically
throw the case open to all London.”

“What about Miss Leslie?”

The other stared a moment. “Well, what about her? Her alibi is fairly
good. May be true, what young ‘what's his name’ says.”

“You think it's the manager?”

“I wonder if I really do?” murmured Pointer sarcastically.

“Looks as though he were certainly in it for something, even if it's
only shielding Beale,” O'Connor answered for him. “Then there's
Carter-Cox. He has a direct inducement.”

“Very direct.”

“Curious will that!” O'Connor spoke almost to himself.

“But then the whole thing is odd.” Pointer puffed away in silence.

“True for you,” O'Connor nodded; “the separate slips—that will sent to
his old family solicitor, with whom he had had next to no dealings.
And then you spoke of his clothes——”

“They struck even the jeweller when he went about his watch,” agreed
Pointer. “All well enough in their way, but not at all those of a
wealthy young man.”

“And a mother with over seven thousand a year, and an uncle worth as
much, too—he must have made the money fly!”

O'Connor's tone of virtuous horror made Pointer think of Russell.

The next day was a Sunday, but the Chief Inspector arranged that
Russell should send off a wire to Mrs. Erskine breaking the news to
her that an accident had happened to Robert in London, followed by
another telling her that the accident had been fatal. By the afternoon
they had the reply from Nice: “Starting at once. Erskine.” On Monday
morning, however, came another cable from Mrs. Erskine, this time from
Paris: “Ill. Doctor forbids journey.” It was sent from the Gare St.
Lazare station. Mr. Russell and Pointer set out the same day for the
French capital. It was to Mr. Russell, naturally, that the task of
telling the mother the facts about her son's death fell. In any case
Pointer would have seen to it that the man who knew only the general
outline should be the tale bearer. He saw no good in harrowing Mrs.
Erskine's feelings prematurely with an account of the wardrobe and the
police certainty of foul play.

He walked about Paris the morning after his arrival, wondering, as so
often before, at the city's reputation for beauty. Charming in parts,
yes, but—to his mind—its general reputation rested on “mass
suggestion,” so unspeakably dreary and sordid did he always find the
greater part of it. The cafés with their comfortless chairs and tables
at which people drank weirdly coloured drinks, of which—still
according to him—the less said the better, were a back number compared
with a London tea-room. He was glad when eleven struck, and he was
shown into Mrs. Erskine's great bedroom. A thin figure, almost lost
among her pillows on the couch, held out a trembling hand. Its chill
told him how greatly Russell's story had drained the mother's
vitality. He murmured some words of regret as he took a chair. The son
had evidently inherited his mother's general air of pallor, and he saw
where the young man had got his one peaked eyebrow from. The
Abercrombie eyebrow, as Mr. Russell had called it. Mrs. Erskine had it
very markedly, and its unlikeness to its fellow lifted her pale face
out of the commonplace.

“Mr. Russell has just told me”—her voice was rather flat and
toneless,—“all the details. I can't quite grasp what has happened yet,
my only child. . . .”

Again he murmured a sentence of sympathy. “I wouldn't dream of
intruding, madame,” he said earnestly, “but we want to clear up the
motive for what has happened. Had Mr. Robert Erskine ever spoken of
putting an end to his life before?”

Mrs. Erskine did not answer for a moment or two. When she did it was
with a visible effort. The Chief Inspector guessed what it must cost
an evidently reserved woman to lay bare her lack of any affection from
her son. “Not exactly . . . but my unhappy son did not find in life
all he hoped from it, I fear. He liked gaiety—as youth always
does,—and perhaps . . . life disappointed him. His letters—he wrote
infrequently, naturally, his very popularity left him little time for
writing—his letters seemed to me to show but little real happiness.”

“Ah! his letters! May I see them?”

“Oh, I couldn't! My son's letters to me? Oh, no!” She shook her head
resolutely, but he insisted, pointing out in his kindest way that the
matter could not rest where it was, that some motive must have lain
behind that draught of morphia, and that the letters might furnish the
explanation. All of which was strictly true. Mrs. Erskine looked at
him tragically.

“I cannot do it! I canna!” she whispered brokenly, but finally he
persuaded her to draw out from under her cushion a leather
pocket-book.

“Don't—don't misjudge him,” she pleaded earnestly, looking away. “He
was a good son and loved me, but it's not easy for a lad to put his
love into words, is it?”

Certainly Robert Erskine had made but little effort in that direction.
The letters were only those of the current year, with the exception of
his last Christmas letter. Each was the barest of prefaces to a demand
for money to pay some pressing debt. In one he apparently
half-shamefacedly had added that the devil only knew where all his own
money went to. In another, evidently in answer to some suggestion of
his mother about living with an object in view, was a caustic line as
to the differing estimates put on objects by an old lady and a young
man; as for himself, he added candidly, it was to “squeeze the most
out of this rotten show.”

As a light on his character the four were damning in their clearness,
and in so far they gave the Chief Inspector a very good idea of the
vicious circle in which Robert Erskine must have lived; but they
mentioned no names and no facts. Not even an address was given. The
mother was directed to send the sums asked for, and very big sums they
totalled all together, to the Toronto main postoffice. There was never
a date or heading, but the Toronto post-mark on the envelopes supplied
some clue. Of coming to Europe there was no word. It looked much as
though young Robert's journey might easily have been a flight from
unpleasant consequences, for Pointer knew, none better, where such
paths as these could lead. He handed back the letters without a word,
except of thanks. Mrs. Erskine covered her face with her hands and
said nothing for a moment.

“You'll not—they don't do my poor lad justice—I shan't be called on to
show them again?”

“No, no, madame!” Pointer was thankful that he need not turn the knife
in a mother's wound. “No, there will be no necessity for any mention
of them. But his other letters, now——?”

“I didn't keep them,” she spoke in a low, pained voice, “you see, I
never dreamt that they might be all that I should ever have— I always
thought he would let me make my home with him some day—living alone is
hard when your son is so far away—but that was not to be.”

“You have no other letters from him, then?”

“None. I destroyed them each year. I make a practice of never keeping
letters long. My health is none too certain.”

“Did he ever refer to a John Carter in them?”

“You mean the John Carter to whom he left his money? Mr. Russell asked
me about him, too. No, I never knew him mention any names or places to
me.”

“You know nothing of a man called Beale?”

“Nothing whatever.”

Clearly it was no use putting any questions to her as to Robert's
political views. “Before I leave, could you tell me how much his uncle
left him?”

Mrs. Erskine sat silent awhile, evidently thinking deeply. She seemed
a very accurate person. “He did say how much it was, but I forget the
exact figures. I know he conveyed the impression that”—she bit her
lip—“well, that the ball of life was now at his feet. My dear husband
always spoke of Ian as a wealthier man than himself, but more than
that I can't say.”

It was a most painful interview. Pointer was thankful when he could
close the door gently behind him with a gesture symbolical of his
respectful pity.

Watts met him at Victoria Station, late though it was. The detective
was eager to wipe out the memory of Mr. Russell's visit to the hotel
room.

“I came across an interesting bit of evidence yesterday, sir,” he
began as soon as they were in the taxi, “in the manager's room. You
know that steel locked box in his desk? Well, he left his keys on his
desk for a moment. I slipped out of his bedroom, where I was keeping
an eye on him in accordance with your instructions, and unlocked it.
He rushed back a second later, picked up his keys, and hurried off. I
opened the box. There was nothing in it but a new cheque book for the
Chiswick branch of the Midland bank with one cheque gone. It was a
close shave, for I had hardly laid it back in the box and put it away
again in its drawer when he came back and went on with his writing. It
was an order for some repairs. I slipped out and down to Chiswick, and
there I had a bit of luck. Their doorkeeper is Higgins of the City
Police. He and I used to be on the same beat. So I showed him the
manager's photo, and had a chat with him. He said the manager gave the
name of Parsons, and called at the bank to open an account. Higgins
has been at the branch for fourteen years, so he has the run of the
place, and during the lunch hour he managed to get a look at the
signature book. There was only one Parsons in it—T. A. Parsons, of 8
Parma Crt., Turnham Green. He had opened a current account on August
6, but the amount Higgins couldn't find out. Off I went to the
address. It's a block of flats, and at No. 8 I asked for Mr. Parsons.
It seemed that on last Monday a Mr. Parsons had taken a room which had
been advertised as to let. The landlady asked for payment in advance,
so he paid for a week as requested, and called daily for letters,
saying that as his mother was ill he might not move in till later in
the week. She had not seen him since Thursday, when he had left a note
saying that he was giving up the room, as his mother's illness was
taking a turn for the worse. I showed her the manager's picture, which
she and the servant identified as Mr. Parsons. I pretended to be from
his bank, and said that there was some difficulty about a pass book I
had sent him which he had not received. Did she know his home address?
She did not. But both she and the slavey were certain that a thick,
sealed envelope, such as generally contains a pass book, had arrived,
with the bank's name on the seals, on the morning when Mr. Parsons had
left. That's all, sir.”

“Good work, Watts, though, of course, it won't prove anything. A hotel
manager will have a dozen excuses for a separate account, even under
an assumed name, but still—it all fits in—perhaps too well. At any
rate, it shows us what first class men we have trailing him.”

“It's Marsh and Ketteridge, sir: they're both sharp fellows; but they
say that the manager goes to his club and vanishes, or to some shop
they've never heard of, which turns out to have a dozen entrances. Oh,
he's clever enough!” They had arrived at Pointer's rooms, but he had
Watts follow him in and share a supper.

“What changes at the hotel itself?”

“Two of the first floor rooms have fresh occupants. Mrs. Willett is
still staying on. Miss Leslie is in bed with a bad cold.”

“Nothing odd noticed?” Pointer asked the routine questions.

“Nothing reported by Miller, sir.”

Only when the men had finished an excellent meal of gravy soup and
fried chicken did Pointer hold out his hand for any cables from the
Canadian police.

There were two. The first one ran:

  “Toronto. John Carter, assistant manager of the Amalgamated Silk
  Mills of this town. Served in the war. Promoted Sergeant. Had local
  reputation of trustworthy man, but disappeared July fifteenth,
  together with Manager Robert Erskine. Warrant out for both men
  issued July eighteenth for embezzlement of the Amalgamated's funds.”

This was quite along the lines Pointer had expected. He opened the
second. It ran:

  “Robert Erskine, Scotsman. Came Toronto seven years ago from Calgary
  as Manager of Amalgamated Silk Mills. Invested twenty thousand in
  Mills. Did well at first. Gone downhill since war. In hands of
  money-lenders. Disappeared June fifteenth, together with Assistant
  Manager John Carter. Warrant issued June eighteenth against both men
  for embezzlement of the Amalgamated's funds to amount not yet
  ascertained.”

Both cables were signed by the Toronto Police Commissioner.

Watts had already seen them when the Assistant Commissioner at the
Yard had sent them in. As no comment was made he ventured on one
himself. “It looks very bad for the partner Cox, or Carter, doesn't
it, sir?”

Pointer looked at him with the filmy eyes of deep thought. “Think so?
Possibly.”

“What do you think, Mr. O'Connor?”

O'Connor was quite willing to oblige. “Carter is a big chap by all
accounts, and Erskine's friend. Why should he choose a place so
certain to be discovered as a hotel bedroom? Why not take Erskine for
a run in a motor, stun him, and drop him into a pond? I can't think
he's such a fool as not to have been able to make some better
opportunity than that wardrobe.”

“Fit of passion, sir?”

“But,” objected O'Connor, “why the marks of tugging on Erskine's
collar which the photo shows?”

When Watts had taken a belated departure, O'Connor looked at his
friend.

“So they're crooks. I shouldn't have thought that somehow. Your
account of the honest marks of wear on Erskine's wardrobe made me put
him down as poor but honest.”

Pointer only smoked on, his hands clasped behind his neck.

“D'ye think some of your light-fingered friends have welcomed their
brethren from across the ocean and the lot have fallen out?”

“This doesn't look like the work of anyone I can call to mind at the
moment.” Pointer ruminated over the masterpieces he had come across in
the past. “Still you never know,” he wound up.

During the night a cable from Calgary arrived and was duly waiting on
his table at the Yard.

  “Calgary. Robert Erskine, Scotsman. Inherited largest ranch here,
  Four Winds by name, from his uncle, Ian Erskine, twelve years ago.
  Sold it seven years ago at a loss and moved to Toronto. Reputation
  of uncle and nephew of the best in every way.”

  “John Carter. Frequent visitor at Four Winds. Prospector and son of
  a Toronto Prospector. Good repute.”

Pointer meditated some time over this before he filed it. Another
cable was sent to Toronto asking for full particulars of the warrant
out against the two men, and the photos of both were duly posted for
identification.

Mr. Russell dropped in on the Chief Inspector at lunch, but beyond a
question as to whether he had ever heard that Robert Erskine was
interested in any business Pointer kept his own counsel. The solicitor
was evidently unaware that young Erskine did not still own the ranch.

“So you didn't get anything helpful by coming to Paris?” the solicitor
continued, as the two men turned in for a cup of tea. He himself had
been prostrated by the rough crossing the night before, and had hardly
been able to exchange a couple of words with his companion in the
crowded railway carriage.

“Except a general idea of the deceased's character as shown in his
letters.”

“Ah, yes, true. I had a long conversation with Mrs. Erskine and a very
trying one.”

“How so trying?”

“Aye, women, even the best of them shouldn't be trusted with money.”

The Scotsman drank his tea sternly. “She wants everything sold out and
put into an annuity.”

“She” of course referred to Mrs. Erskine. The Chief Inspector turned
the matter over carefully to see whether he could extract any grist
for his mills from it.

“Well, why not?”

“Eh, man, why not?” Then light seemed to break on the Scotsman. “Ah, I
see I hadn't made myself clear. The trouble is, she wants it done
immediately. You know how securities change. All of hers are good
enough. Some very sound, some industrials. For instance, she put quite
a large sum into some shares a few years ago which stood at twice what
they stand at to-day. We approved after a fashion, provided she was
willing to discount market fluctuations. But now she wants to fling
some thousands of shares suddenly on the market—it's madness. The same
way with some mortgages we arranged for her, you can't change that
class of security into cash at a moment's notice. Yet that's what she
wants. Of course, we won't do it. In her own interests we can't. I
didn't tell her that naturally, but she'll find that it takes more
time than she thinks to put a fortune as large as her half is into an
annuity.”

“I wonder why the hurry?” Pointer was deeply interested.

“I can't make it out.” Mr. Russell's curiosity was evidently at work.
“Mrs. Erskine has hitherto been such a good business woman. I'm the
last to deny that she has made most advantageous purchases at times,
but now to be willing to throw away at least one quarter of her
fortune, if not a half, just for some mad whim of speed—it's beyond
me. And an annuity, too! They're none so safe these days. Why not
Government gilt-edged stocks? That's what I've been recommending to
her, but no! It's to be an annuity and damn the cost. Man, I'm fairly
tired out with yesterday's argy-bargy.”

Pointer turned the whim of Mrs. Erskine over and over in his mind
while the inquest progressed next day, and finally laid the matter on
one side, “to come up if called upon to do so” at some future time
when it might fit some fresh fact.

The inquest caused a great stir among the papers, as any whisper of a
murder always does, and in the facts as laid before the public—in a
strictly limited dose—there was enough and to spare of the strange.
Mr. Beale was not mentioned, neither was Mrs. Erskine, nor were the
cables from Canada read, but a detailed account of the finding of the
body by the police in the wardrobe, and of its belated identification,
caused the evening papers to do a roaring trade, while the inquest
itself was adjourned for another fortnight so as to “allow of the
authorities in Canada being communicated with.”



Chapter VI

The very morning after the inquest a piece of news reached London that
made the Chief Inspector jump for his hat. A wealthy American named
Beale had been found bound and gagged in one of the leading Brussels
hotels. The room where he was discovered belonged to another American
named Green. Mr. Beale, on his release, had described to the reporters
how he had been lured to the room under the pretext of purchasing a
rare painting, robbed, and left tied up and gagged. The description of
his assailant tallied with the man wanted by the Yard as Cox, or
Carter. Pointer flew across within a couple of hours after opening his
morning paper, and found Mr. Beale surrounded by a knot of reporters.
Beale looked up at him with a saturnine grin.

“Yes, it's me, Chief. I'm too young and inexperienced for this wicked
world. Have a drink?” The American dismissed the reporters
good-naturedly but firmly. Then he smiled, showing his teeth in an
apparent merriment which never touched his eyes—cold and keen.

“Well, I guess I'll come across with the story. That man who called
himself Green is one of our cleverest crooks. He certainly doesn't
live up to his name! I was after him in London when I stumbled into
that queer story of Eames. Oh, I'm on my vacation all right, but
there's no holiday that would do me the good that getting my hands on
Green would. Personal reasons—always the toughest, eh, Chief?”

Evidently Mr. Beale had not yet had time to read the London news, for
the “Eames Case” had now become the “Erskine Murder.”

“By the way”—again came that swift baring of the teeth—“you haven't
asked me yet”—he underscored the “yet” with a glance—“how I came to
run away from the Enterprise without saying good-bye to anyone. Well,
I'll tell you. I had just got up from my cosy armchair and made a
start for bed when who should pass the window—I had opened it—but
Green. Yes, Green, the man my paper had tried so hard to get in N'York
and fallen flat over. He had an overcoat on his arm, and his grip in
his hand, so I just whipped out of the window and followed him to a
garage. Went in after him and arranged for a faster car than his
little two-seater. Picked up his trail without any effort, for he had
hired the machine and driver in Dover, and the man was to drive him
back for the boat. I did the same. We crossed together, and I followed
him here to Brussels. He doesn't know me by sight, so I laid what I
thought was a first class trap for him. Everything went according to
plan—except the end.” He made a grimace. “Behold me minus the crook,
my diamond ring, my pocket-book and my reputation for brains, to say
nothing of my night's sleep. You see, Green knew all the time who I
was, and I'm bound to say he's a hustler.”

“Why do you call him Green?” asked Pointer slowly.

“Why shouldn't I? It's as much his name as any of the others he uses,
I guess.”

“What others, for instance?”

“Well-l,—Shepherd, Smith, are two others.”

“What about Cox, or Carter?”

Just for a second Pointer saw a contraction of the American's pupils.

“Carter? Cox? Do you know him, too, at Scotland Yard?”

“Mr. Beale, may I ask you for the fullest possible details of the man
you call Green?”

“Better search our police files. A cleverer criminal doesn't snap his
fingers at our detectives.”

“Any murders to his name?”

“Well-l, I don't know about murders, but for robbery with or without
violence he's a master.”

“Will you describe him, sir?”

“My language might pain you, Chief, but here's the police docket of
him from N'York.” He handed the Chief Inspector a typewritten numbered
slip, which described one Henry Green, alias Arthur Shepherd, alias——
The description tallied exactly with the man Carter. The snapshot
appended was that of a clever face, full of daring and with a resolute
chin. The specimen handwriting was that familiar to Pointer both from
the Hotel Marvel and from the register below in the Lion Blanc.

He studied the slip very carefully. He noted that Carter, or Green,
had never yet been actually captured or stood his trial. All the
evidence against him seemed to be held back in the police hands.

“You can keep that if you like, Chief.”

“Thank you, sir. That's a great help. And now, sir, what made you
choose the Enterprise Hotel in the first place?”

“I had information that Green had been seen a couple of days before
going in there. Mistaken information, I guess. The fool mixed it up
with another hotel lower down.”

“You had never seen Eames before?”

“_Eames?_ Never. My reason for suspecting that something was wrong in
the room was exactly what I told you.”

He looked the police-officer squarely in the eye. Pointer had received
excellent witness of Mr. Beale's character and reputation, and yet—he
was sure that the other had recognised the corpse. He decided to blurt
out Eames' real name. “We have found out that Eames was really a
Scotsman named Erskine living in Canada; and to the best of our belief
the man you call Green, and speak of as a well-known crook who goes
under many aliases, is his partner, John Carter. Both are wanted for
embezzlement, we are told, though so far no particulars have come in.”

Mr. Beale looked the picture of surprise.

“You don't say!” There was a short pause. Pointer wondered whether Mr.
Beale was choosing his next words with care.

“Partner in what? Safe-opening? What kind of a business did this
Eames, I forget what you called him, run?”

“We hear that he was manager of the Toronto Silk Mills.”

Mr. Beale made no comment except to give a cluck of amazement. There
was a little pause, then the Englishman came back to the case in hand.

“May I ask, sir, why you didn't write and let us know where you were?
Your evidence was greatly wanted at the last inquest, and will be
absolutely necessary in two weeks' time.”

Mr. Beale raised his eyebrows. “It may be quite impossible for me to
come over,” he said coldly; “and as to writing—the American Embassy
was informed of my whereabouts, I guess.”

The police-officer rose.

“Then, sir, if I can be of no use here, I wish you a good-morning,” he
began formally; but Mr. Beale, having shown his superiority to any
police regulations, pressed him down into his chair with an affable
hand, and this time insisted on ordering a drink. Pointer chose tea,
which seemed to the other originality verging on eccentricity, and
took his leave as soon as he could escape. He made no mention of the
green and white striped paper. Mr. Beale was not the kind of man of
whom to ask too many explanations, but the Chief Inspector was
closeted for some time with a Brussels _confrère_, and if the Belgium
police were openly to hunt for the missing Green, the Yard received
the private assurance that they would also not forget to keep an
unobtrusive eye on the wealthy, well-documented Mr. Beale, who still
puzzled Pointer. That astute officer never for a moment forgot the
sketchy alibi, the cigar ashes over Erskine's tie, the emptied basin,
and various other puzzling odds and ends, such as the scrap of green
and white wrapping paper picked up in a room where he had spent many
hours. It was still Mr. Beale who struck Pointer as not fitting into
the picture. He thought that the American's presence gave an unreal
effect. That where he showed, an impartial scrutiny could dimly detect
different outlines and other colours beneath.

The adjourned inquest was duly held. Mr. Beale did not appear, but the
evidence against Carter, alias Cox, was given by Pointer and Watts, as
well as by the Enterprise manager and employés. Carter's photograph
was identified by the Marvel Hotel as that of Cox. There was the
motive as shown in Erskine's will, the purchase by him of the
medicine—the vehicle in which the poison was given—there was Carter's
flight and silence, and, lastly, his desperate effort in Brussels to
throw any pursuer off his track. There were the mud marks on the
balcony, and the wax vestas.

A verdict was brought in against the Canadian for the murder of his
partner, and his portrait was published in the papers, so that all
honest men could be on the watch for him. But Pointer was not
satisfied.

“I wonder if the whole investigation is on the wrong line—whether the
points have been missed somewhere, but where?” He asked O'Connor, who
only shook his head in silence, and left his friend to sit up smoking
and thinking long after he himself had gone to bed.

From the Brussels police came the news that they had not been able to
discover any trace of Green, but that Beale had gone to Lille, and so
was out of their jurisdiction. Watts was despatched post-haste to the
French town to pick up the American's trail, but before he came on it
a wire reached Pointer from the Editor himself.

  “Located Green-Carter. Come immediately.”

Pointer crossed that night. He had a little talk with a Frenchman in
plain clothes who seemed to be expecting him at the station before
Lille, and, descending on the platform of that prosperous town, was
met by the impatient Mr. Beale and by Watts.

“I thought you would never get here. Train's an hour late. He's
staying in a room in the Rue Sentier near here under the name of
Thompson. He's out just now, and we can wait for him there. The maid
thinks I'm a friend of his.”

The Chief Inspector nodded briefly and followed Mr. Beale to a corner
shop in a quiet street. A side entrance took them up a flight of
stairs to the first floor. Here beside the door of a flat was another
smaller one.

“That's his room.” Mr. Beale rang the bell of the larger door.

A French woman opened. Mr. Beale asked for his friend. Mr. Thompson
was out again, he was informed, but he would be in shortly. If
messieurs his friends cared to wait she would unlock the door for
them. She smilingly inserted a key. Pointer thought that the American
made as if to shut the door behind him a trifle quickly, but the maid
came on into the room and altered a chair.

“_Tiens!_ Mr. Thompson is leaving us? Ah, no; there is his trunk. It
is only his hand-bag that has gone.” And she left them alone.

“Want to examine the trunk?” asked the American. “I suppose your
warrant justifies that?”

“Quite. Funny about the bag, isn't it?”

“That's what startled me. We don't want to slip up on him again.”

Pointer thought that Mr. Beale had looked annoyed rather than startled
by the maid's question. He himself walked slowly around the room.
Watts had been left on duty below. He looked at a box of vestas on the
mantelpiece. They were the same as those found in No. 14 of the
Enterprise. Certainly for an expert crook the room was strangely bare.

A step sounded on the stairs. Mr. Beale jumped behind the door, ready
to close it. The police-officer seated himself facing the door. A key
was inserted, the door was flung widely open, and a young man with a
couple of heavy parcels in his arms entered with a decided limp, but
swung the door shut with one agile foot. It was the face Pointer had
seen photographed as Green. A resolute, strong face, set on a powerful
rangy frame.

He caught sight of the impassive figure by the table with the steady
eyes fixed on him and stopped. For a second he stood staring, a
curious grey creeping under his tan.

“I'm not alone, Mr. Carter, and even if I were, violence wouldn't help
you,” said the Chief Inspector, rising to his feet. He knew what that
tightened jaw meant. “I have a warrant here for your arrest charging
you with the murder of Robert Erskine in London on August 4. Of
course, as you know, if you wish it I must call in the French
authorities; but the end will be the same. It will save time if you
come quietly with me back to England and let me arrest you at Dover. I
must warn you that anything you say may be used in evidence against
you.”

The young man made no reply; his eyes were now fixed on the table. He
was evidently thinking hard. A bead of sweat trickled down his temple.

“A French prison is very uncomfortable, but please yourself.” Pointer
hoped the young man would take it sensibly.

Carter—to give him the name under which his warrant had been
issued—looked around the room. A flash came into his eyes as he caught
sight of Mr. Beale bolting the door.

“Pity I didn't kill _you_ when I had the chance!” he spat out between
clenched teeth.

Mr. Beale looked pointedly at the police-officer.

“You had better take it quietly. Talk of that kind won't help your
case,” that official warned, phlegmatically.

Carter sat down.

“May I smoke?”

“A cigarette of mine, or here's my pouch if you'll let me have a look
at your pipe first.” Pointer looked through the bowl and handed his
briar back to Carter, who filled it, and then, hunching his shoulders,
puffed away with his feet stuck straight out in front of him, his eyes
on his boots. The Chief Inspector looked at him keenly. The man really
was engrossed in calculations of some kind. Concentration oozed from
him. The police-officer was on the alert. He had seen something like
this once before, when a man had been arrested on a capital charge,
and the result had been a swift suicide.

“It's a pretty average frowst in here; can the window be opened?”

Pointer flung it open and stood squarely in the opening.

Carter gave a harsh laugh, like a bark.

“Suicide? Me? Not on your life!”

The other did not move away. “Well?” he asked. “Do you want an
extradition order?”

“I'll come. Got to. Handcuffs, I suppose?” His voice was suddenly
weary.

Pointer did not reply. He never permitted himself to have any emotion
towards a prisoner, but he felt sure that O'Connor would have been
sorry for the chap in front of him. He cut the strings of the package
on the table. Mr. Beale pressed forward.

“Ah, ha! Electrical plant. Something new in the safe-breaking line,
eh, Green?”

Carter bared two rows of strong teeth. He did not look pleasant. The
Englishman was conscious of an undertone as of a secret duel going on.
Was it merely that the Editor had run the criminal to earth, who for
so long had evaded justice, and evidently on some occasion tricked
him? He looked as keenly at Mr. Beale as at Carter. The Editor's eyes
were alight with triumph. Carter watched him dully, looking years
older than the young man who had flung the door open. He strolled over
to the window, and Pointer tensed himself, but Carter merely shot out
a long, thin hand and pulled the curtain across the shut half.

Mr. Beale, with a wonderfully agile spring—all things
considered—switched it back.

“No signalling to your accomplices, Green!”

Carter swore at him, and swore strongly.

“Come, come,” the Chief Inspector interposed sternly, “none of that!
Mr. Beale, may I trouble you to call up my man who's down below; and
where would you like me to meet you afterwards?”

Mr. Beale gave a half-shrug.

“Considering that I put the case in your hands, Chief, instead of the
French authorities, I think that I'm hardly being treated quite
fairly. Surely there can be no objection to my being present at the
search of the room. Remember I'm in a very responsible position.”

“Quite so, sir, and I'm sure I'm much obliged to you,” the other
bowed, “but I'm afraid routine work has to be done as routine.”

“I shall report what you say to the proper quarter.” Mr. Beale spoke
very quietly.

For a second Pointer hesitated. The case did owe Mr. Beale a
tremendous lot. He had notified the finding of Erskine's dead body. In
some equally mysterious way he had found the “wanted” man. But Pointer
thought that the American's _flair_ for discoveries betokened some
private knowledge which might alter many obscurities if he would
speak. So he contented himself with merely bowing.

Mr. Beale shot him one of his steely glances.

“I shall expect you at the depôt,” he said briefly. “I suppose you are
taking the four twenty-five back.” He strode off with as much dignity
as his short stature allowed. On the whole, the police-officer was
rather glad that he was annoyed, as he might be the less likely to
notice the French detective to whom Pointer had spoken on his way in
to Lille, and who was to follow the Editor's every step.

When the door closed, Carter flung a bunch of keys down on the table.
“You've got the grip. I suppose you didn't find in it what you are all
looking for! You won't find it in the trunk either.” His tone was
rough. His whole intonation had changed from that of a well-educated
man to something coarser.

Pointer signed to Watts to open the trunk. Leaving him to guard the
prisoner, the Chief Inspector himself searched it. One of the first
things he picked up was a London telephone directory; after that came
a list of Paris bankers. Just the literature to expect from a man of
“Green's” reputation. He ran his fingers among the clothes. His
practised tips encountered something in the lining of a coat. He drew
it out, made a slit, and, inserting a finger, brought out a long
string of pearls with an antique emerald fastening. He laid it beside
him without a word. Carter had risen from his chair and was watching
intently. When the pearls lay on the table he made a curious gesture
with his hands, and, sinking back on to his chair, covered his face,
which had turned livid. Pointer went on methodically. Several rings, a
diamond necklace, and a jewelled pendant were discovered. Finally the
trunk was turned upside down, and on the very bottom he pounced on a
twist of newspaper. Inside were a few screws. The two officers
examined them closely, then the Chief Inspector took out an envelope
and fastened them carefully inside.

“Any explanation you wish to offer, Carter? I have cautioned you
already?”

Carter shook his head.

The police finished their work, and in silence, arm in arm, like the
best of friends, the three walked to the station in plenty of time to
catch the Calais express. Pointer left Mr. Beale and Watts to sit
beside Carter in the reserved compartment Mr. Beale had ordered, and
went off to have a cup of coffee. A man selling postcards approached
him and saluted with an odd little jerk. The Englishman glanced over
his wares and picked out two. “Can you put them in an envelope for
me?”

“But yes, monsieur, but yes,” and the man slipped the cards into one
and passed on. Outside the café the Chief Inspector drew out a sheet
of thin paper. It was a record of Mr. Beale's movements from the time
he left Carter's room. “X went from Rue Sentier to the post. Sent
telegram to ‘M. Garnier, Notaire, Rue Bizet, Genève’: ‘Series
accepted. Editor.’ After that, X lounged the time away till he joined
you at the station.”

Pointer wired to Geneva for full particulars as to M. Garnier, and
took his seat in the train. Carter would be tried first in London for
the murder of Erskine, and, if acquitted, would be sent to Canada to
stand his trial there for embezzlement and, doubtless, robbery. The
young man seemed quite conscious of his position. For the most part he
sat with his eyes closed, only the tense look of his jaw and the pulse
hammering in his temples showing that he was not asleep. As for Mr.
Beale, Pointer would have gladly dispensed with his company, for there
was a gloating triumph in the American's whole attitude which seemed
to the police-officer positively indecent.

Back at the Yard, where he reported at once to the
Assistant-Commissioner, he found a cable identifying the photographs
of both Robert Erskine and John Carter as that of the two men,
respectively, who were wanted under a warrant taken out in New York by
the President of the Amalgamated Silk Mills, a huge concern which
practically held a monopoly of the silk spinning and weaving industry.
Defalcations extending over many years were spoken of, and cooked
balance-sheets, but up to the present the exact amount supposed to
have been taken by the Toronto manager and his assistant was not
known.

The Chief Inspector filed the information, and made his way to his
rooms, where, as he hoped, he found another cable, a private one from
a friend of his in the Canadian police. It was in answer to a long
cable from himself asking him to find out all he could about the
warrant for Erskine and Carter. Pointer raised his eyes at its length.
Wright was absolutely reckless of expense when he wanted to be clear.
The cable read:

  “We must stand well with Yank police because of coming Burton
  affair. Warrant issued New York on Heilbronner's sworn deposition.
  Heilbronner millionaire chairman of Amalg. Spotty reputation.
  Warrant gives no facts. Can. police passive. If Carter arrested by
  Yanks or you, and sent here, proofs of defalcations, etc., will be
  demanded before Can. police hand him over.”

The Burton affair, as Pointer knew, concerned a murderer who had
escaped into the United States and was very much “wanted” in his home.
So, like the robberies in which Carter, as Green, was supposed to be
implicated, there were no actual proofs of embezzlement made public.
Pointer had very little to say that night even to O'Connor, and early
next morning visited Carter in his cell. The Canadian had refused as
yet to see a lawyer. The long vacation was on, and his case could not
come up till the autumn. He seemed sunk in depression. And the case
against him was certainly black enough. The screws found in his trunk
were the mates of those which fixed the screwed-on panels to the
wardrobe. He gave no explanation of them. He gave no explanation of
anything, not even of the jewellery, which was to be identified by a
couple of American detectives who were coming over on purpose. The
Heads at the Yard were quite certain of his guilt on both counts,
murder and theft, but the Chief Inspector said as little as possible.
He had asked the Canadian to at least help him to trace what might
have been wrapped up by Erskine in that strip of green and white
paper, but after a second's flash of hope in the accused's sombre eyes
he had shaken his head and refused to speak.

Pointer had no sympathy whatever with this kind of an attitude. He
considered it not fair to the accused and not fair to the police. It
was all very well for his superiors to be so certain of Carter's
guilt. When the case came up for trial it was he and not they who
would have to pay for any mistake, and apart from this personal
consideration, the Chief Inspector had a high standard of fair play,
and the idea that he might be a party to injustice was intolerable to
him. Not that he by any means thought Carter innocent. As the Canadian
would not give any alibi, he apparently had had the opportunity to
commit the murder. The will was considered to be an additional motive,
besides wanting to get rid of an inconvenient accomplice, but what had
Erskine to leave? Mr. Russell had not been able to trace any
“available” funds. Yet the dead man would hardly have alluded to a
stolen hoard without giving any indications as to where such a hoard
might be found.

“And where does Beale come in, and what of the manager, whose back
garden you've been digging up so carefully?” O'Connor demanded
rhetorically one night, after enduring his friend's silence as long as
he could.

“The manager—humph! Mr. Beale?—He certainly must have a very strong
feeling against Carter. Yet he looks the last man to let his feelings
alone carry him very far. And why is he so keen on seeing Carter? He
makes every sort of an effort to get an order. I think he was amazed
when he found out that even a letter from his ambassador wouldn't be
of any use if Carter refused to see him, and refuse he does. You know,
O'Connor, I'd give a good deal to place Mr. Beale in all this.”

“You surprise me!” murmured the Irishman sarcastically.

“What gain is it of his if Carter is hung or locked up in gaol? I've
tried to get to the bottom of his game—for that he's playing one I'm
still as certain as ever, but I can't find a hook to hang anything on.
I've had report after report about him from America. He seems to be
beyond suspicion. He is on the board of that Silk Company which owned
Erskine's Toronto Mills, but that doesn't throw any light on his
feeling towards Carter.”

“Didn't he say that he had his knife into him because of some family
jewels Carter had stolen?”

“He did. Mr. Beale always has an explanation for anything. Why doesn't
he write to Carter if he's so keen on seeing him? He won't. Of course,
he may be quite straight in all this. That telegram of his to Geneva,
now—the man he sent it to is one of the most respected solicitors in
the town. I've absolutely nothing to go on——”

“What about Watts' idea that the crime might be political?”

Pointer shook his head. “Not a shred of evidence to bear that out.
Quite the other way. Well, I'm thinking of taking my holiday, which is
due this month, abroad. I shouldn't wonder if it led me to Geneva and
home by way of Nice.”

“Do you think you could pick up anything there?”

“Doubtful. Still, I like to cover the whole ground.”

But before the time for Pointer's well-earned leave, on an early
evening in September his landlady announced a young lady to see him.

The Chief Inspector laid down his pipe. O'Connor was away, and he
wheeled up his friend's capacious armchair for his caller.

An exceedingly good-looking, well-dressed young woman entered.
Undoubtedly a lady, and yet to his keen eyes with a something about
her he found difficult to place.

“Chief Inspector Pointer?” Her accent told him what it was that had
puzzled him. She was from the other side of the ocean. He bowed in his
most friendly manner, and pulled O'Connor's chair still more into the
light. She sank into it, and gave him the longest, keenest look the
police-officer had ever had from a woman. Obviously she was weighing
him carefully. Then she smiled.

“I'm glad I came. I made the manager of the Enterprise Hotel give me
your private address. My name is Christine West; I'm a sort of adopted
niece of Mr. Ian Erskine of Calgary. Here is my passport, and here is
a letter with another photo in it of mine from the Head of the Toronto
police. I got him to certify that I really am Miss West.”

The Chief Inspector was even more on the alert than before, if
possible, when he handed her back her papers and photographs.

“Uncle Ian was a bachelor, you know, and my mother kept house for him
after father died. That was twenty-three years ago, and Four Winds was
my home till Uncle Ian's death. A dear and happy home it was, too.”
Her eyes grew soft. “I saw about poor Rob's death in the papers a
little over a month ago, and about John Carter's arrest. My mother is
dead, so I'm my own mistress, and I set out right away to see what can
be done. For something has got to be done.”



Chapter VII

Miss West looked at the man sitting at his ease on the other side of
the fireplace with a very determined tilt of her chin.

“Now, Mr. Pointer—you mustn't mind if I call you that, but I'm not
talking to the Inspector of Scotland Yard just now——”

“_A_ Chief Inspector from the Yard—” he corrected modestly,
disclaiming the elevated rank she thrust upon him.

“I don't want to see _him_. I want a talk with just Mr. Pointer—a
man,—a human being—who can be sorry for folk in trouble, and not look
on them just as cases.”

“But you see . . .” Pointer's face was very kind . . . “any
information given to me is sure to be overheard by the Chief
Inspector, and he may feel it his duty to make use of it. There's no
use pretending he won't, miss.”

She sat a moment studying him again.

“Very well. Let him overhear what he likes, but all the same I want to
talk to you, and not to a police-officer. I want you, and not the
Inspector, to talk the case over with me, or we shall never get
anywhere. And that's just where the police are in this case.”

“Eh? Where?”

“Nowhere!” Miss West's eyes snapped; “nowhere at all with John Carter
in prison! Now, Mr. Pointer”—her smile was infectious—“you see my
position, don't you? A police-officer doesn't have any personal
opinions—how can he have? But _you_ have, you know.”

“Well?” Pointer was smiling.

Miss West jumped up and paced up and down the room. She walked with a
fine, free swing.

“I'll start at the very beginning. John Carter's father”—Pointer
noticed that Carter was to be more to the fore than Robert
Erskine—“was a prospector. He and Uncle Ian became great friends out
on a shooting expedition uncle took once, and after that Mr. Carter
used to regularly stop at Four Winds on his way out and back from his
trips. I don't remember him well. I was such a little tot at the time.
He was a widower, and once, after Jack had been ill, Uncle Ian
insisted on his sending him to stay at Four Winds for six months.
After that Jack used to spend his holidays from school regularly with
us, and when Uncle Henry—I call him that, though, of course, he wasn't
any relation to me, any more than Uncle Ian was—well, when Uncle Henry
and Rob came out from England we had great times together, we three.
Jack was the eldest, he was fifteen; then came Rob, who was twelve,
and then I, a year younger than Rob.” She paused a moment, evidently
back in the happy days of which she was speaking, then with a sigh she
went on: “Jack's father died when he was about eighteen. He went to
the Calgary College to study engineering, but of course he lived at
Four Winds. Mr. Carter had died, leaving awfully little behind him.
Uncle Ian would have paid Jack's college expenses, but he would have
none of that. He used to work just like any one of the hands on the
Ranch in his holidays, and took his pay just like them. Then before he
was through college Uncle Ian died. Dear, kind, generous Uncle Ian! We
found out that he was fearfully badly hit by some wheat speculations
he had got into, which did well at first and then let him in for
thousands. He had mortgaged the ranch up to the last fence rail, and
though it all went to Rob, there was fearfully little money for him to
carry on with. Well, of course, after uncle's death everything was
different. I didn't see much of the boys at this time. Rob decided to
sell the ranch. Mother moved to a sister of hers in Toronto, where I
was studying, and after college I got a post in the High School there.
Finally Rob put the money from the ranch into the Silk Mills at
Toronto and came on there as their manager. He did well, too, and was
quite one of Toronto's smart young men. Then came the war.” She paused
for a minute or two. “Jack enlisted in the Princess Pats. and went out
with the first draft; he was frightfully injured at Vimy trying to get
his officer back from between the lines. He was in hospital in France
for months and then was invalided out, but he stayed on in France till
the armistice, giving engineering courses in the Y.M.C.A., I believe.”

“And Mr. Robert Erskine?”

“Rob didn't go out. The factory was turned into surgical supplies, and
he thought he could do as good work there as in Europe. Besides, he
had lost his heart to a girl who was practically German, a Miss
Heilbronner. That was how he originally got his chance as manager of
the Silk Mills. Old man Heilbronner was the head of the American
syndicate which owned the Toronto factory and mills.”

“Was Mr. Erskine engaged to Miss Heilbronner?”

“For a time, just before and at the beginning of the war, I think he
was—sort of on probation, if he could keep on making good. I saw her
once or twice out motoring with Rob, and she didn't look the kind to
do life on the cheap. Then something happened—I don't know what—which
seemed to come between Rob and the Heilbronners. You see,” she turned
to the other, “mother and aunt and I didn't belong in the least to
Rob's real people. I mean—well, of course, I called Uncle Ian ‘uncle,’
but we were just plain farmer folk same as Jack Carter. The Erskines
were quite different, and though Rob never changed an iota himself,
his circle and mine didn't mix. Well, Mattie Heilbronner got engaged
to another man, and old man Heilbronner was out to get Rob's scalp, so
I heard people say; and certainly the factory, which had done so
splendidly up till then, didn't seem to do so well after the trouble,
whatever it was. But Rob kept his end up till after the armistice,
when it was turned back into silk weaving again. Then Jack came back
from Europe, and he insisted on coming in to help Rob. Wouldn't take a
cent except out of profits, and they thought they were going to pull
through in spite of Heilbronner's millions against them. But things
went from bad to worse. They were just being squeezed out, so folks
that knew said, and—” She came to a dead stop.

“Mr. Pointer, I've read the dreadful things they say of Jack Carter in
the papers here. Are they true? I mean, did you _really_ find all
those jewels in his trunk? You yourself? And does he still refuse to
explain?”

Pointer was quite honest with her. He told her exactly what the papers
knew, but he did not add that the American police claimed to know
Carter as Green.

She said nothing for a minute or two, but sat down in her chair again,
propping her chin on her hand, looking out of the window. She took up
her story as though she had not asked any question.

“And then on June nineteenth the Toronto papers were out in head-lines
that both Rob and Jack had disappeared, and that a warrant was out for
their arrest for embezzlement. And that's all I know.”

“All?” asked Pointer very quietly.

She flushed.

“I had a letter from Jack and one from Rob sent me on June fifth from
Toronto. Just a line—literally—to say good-bye and that I should hear
from them again.”

“Have you the letters?”

“No, they were each marked ‘Burn,’ and I did so at once.”

“And—did you hear from either of them again?”

“Not a word. I saw Rob's death in the paper. I didn't recognise him in
that picture as Eames, and then I—I read of Jack's dreadful trouble.”

There was a long silence between the two.

“And Mr. Beale? Where does he come in?”

“Beale?” She repeated the name questioningly. “Who is he? Never heard
the name that I know of.”

“Humph! And Miss Heilbronner, what of her?”

“She married still another man, so someone told me, shortly after the
armistice. But Mr. Pointer, you're thinking of Rob Erskine. I'm not.
Not for the moment. It's John Carter we must save. Poor Rob is killed,
but Jack—” There were tears in her eyes which she winked resolutely
away. “Mr. Pointer, you're a fair-minded man, one only has to look at
you to see you wouldn't have a hand in faking up a case against an
innocent man, and the case against Jack _is_ faked.”

“Then why doesn't he speak out, Miss West?”

“I can't imagine. I can't imagine!” She spoke as one who had tried
hard enough, “but he's no murderer, far less a thief.”

Pointer was sorry for her, and stirred uneasily in his chair.

“You see, I knew him as a boy, and knew him as a young man. You can't
make a mistake as to the very foundations of a character you've known
so long and so intimately. Uncle Ian, too, loved him. He loved him
better even than Rob, and Uncle Ian couldn't have cared for anyone who
wasn't straight.” Again there was a silence between the two. Then she
leant forward and laid a hand on Pointer's sleeve for a second.

“Do _you_ think he's in danger, too, Mr. Pointer?” she whispered.

“Unless he speaks out, and can clear himself with a good alibi, I do,
indeed. I'm speaking only of the murder charge—the other doesn't
concern us over here. Now, Miss West, you think the charge against
Carter is faked. That means he must have a bitter enemy. Robert
Erskine was murdered, not by Carter, you say. He, too, had a bitter
enemy. Could the same enmity link the two? Can they have a common
enemy? Do you know of any event in their lives, common to both, which
could have roused any such feeling on the part of anyone?”

She sank into deep thought and then slowly shook her head.

“Of course, one's first thought is that they were partners together,
disappeared together, and were accused together of embezzlement. Could
Mr. Heilbronner be in it for anything?” probed the police-officer.

“Mr. Heilbronner has been touring Europe for his health since July. I
heard by chance on the steamer I crossed on that he was staying in
Geneva, but I can't think of him as caring for anything but his
money-bags—at least judging by his looks.”

“Humph, not always a safe guide. Now about his daughter. Was Mr.
Carter a friend of hers, too?”

“No he never met her. That I know.”

“And you can think of nothing, absolutely nothing, which will give us
any clue as to an enmity for one or both of these two men?”

“The Amalgamated Silk Society—but that sounds too silly to suggest,”
she said hesitatingly.

“I don't know about silly, but as they wanted both men for
embezzlement I can't see the point in killing one. And Miss West, you
can't separate one man in this case from the other, since Carter won't
speak out. It is the charge of killing Erskine that's Carter's danger.
Now suppose you tell me more about Carter. We have been told by the
authorities in Toronto that even though he was Erskine's assistant he
would absent himself from the town and the works for months at a time.
Can you guess why?”

“Rob said he was prospecting.”

“And what did he himself say?”

“He refused to talk of where he had been.”

“Miss West, why don't you believe that he really had been
prospecting?”

For an appreciable second she hesitated, then with a lift of her head
she looked up at him.

“I'll be quite frank. I _know_ the truth can only help Jack in the
end. He never came back looking in the least as a prospector does
after a trip. Face and hands burnt and cracked. Hair all rough, and a
gait that doesn't lose its stiffness for weeks. There's an
unmistakable look about a man who's been away in the wilds that you
can't mistake out there. But Jack always came back paler than he went,
and with his hands not sunburnt in the least. Nor has he ever been
able to walk much since the war. It was his leg that was so mangled.”

Pointer thought of “Green's” New York record.

“Now once more about the breaking off of the engagement between Robert
Erskine and Miss Heilbronner. I wish you'd tell me all you know about
it.”

“I never got to the bottom of it because Rob was too cut up to talk of
it. Perhaps it was only that old man Heilbronner didn't think the
mills were turning out enough money for his daughter. He tried his
best to get the place away from Rob, but Rob wouldn't let it go. There
was some sort of a clause by which he could purchase it, so much down
at once and the rest yearly. He had paid the sum down out of the ranch
sale, and I guess the old man was always hoping he'd trip up on his
payments, but Rob held on for seven years in spite of all, and then
they—he—failed on the last instalment. Oh, Mr. Pointer, it was cruel!
He first, and then Jack with him, had worked so hard. They had done
without everything, pleasures, or enough sleep, or even”—she
choked—“enough food those last months, and they just slipped up on it.
He needed five thousand pounds, and so, though it cut him to do it, he
wrote to his mother for the loan of the money. She sent one thousand
pounds and he couldn't scrape the rest of the money together, try as
he could. No one in Toronto would give him any help. That was the
doing of the Silk Amalgamated. So he lost the mills and they even
tried to turn him and Jack out of their positions, but Rob and he
refused to leave. And that”—she sprang to her feet again. “I'm sure
that is the _real_ reason for the charge of embezzlement—just to break
Rob and Jack because they dared to stand out against the Amalgamated.
Mr. Heilbronner swore that they had been cheating the company out of
its percentages for three years. Said that the Amalgamated had proofs
of big orders carried out at the Toronto Mills which weren't entered
on the books and on which nothing had been paid.”

Pointer tried here and there to come upon something approaching a
clue, but finally he saw Miss West into a taxi, and promised to call
upon her next morning. Then he sat up till far into the night trying
to clear up the new tangles which she had introduced.

Why—among many other ways—had Erskine given no idea of the nature of
his work to his mother? He had only written infrequently, but even so
he never referred to it. He only asked for funds and wrote as an idle
young man about town. Why had he told Miss West that he had asked for
five thousand pounds, when Pointer had read his own letter asking for
one thousand pounds exactly. Where had the rest of the money gone
which the young man had asked for and received, at the rate of about
two thousand a year? As yet Pointer had been able to find no proof
that Erskine speculated, though had he done so under another name it
would be difficult to trace it. However, the Chief Inspector went to
bed with a clear plan as to how Miss West would work into his schemes.

When he saw her next morning the wily man began by regretting that
there seemed no way in which she could make herself of actual service
such as she wanted to be engaged on, and only when Miss West was in a
sufficiently subdued frame of mind at the idea of not being able to
help after all did he advance his suggestion.

“I hope you won't mind my asking,” he began, “but is there any—eh—tie
between you and Mr. Carter?”

“He won't let me consider myself engaged to him, but if ever he gets
enough money to marry on, he and I are going to be married. I have a
little income of my own, but he won't let that count.” She gave a
proud little smile.

“I see.” Pointer looked reflectively at his gloves. “I see. I was
wondering if there isn't some way we could use your offer of help, but
there is only one and you might not care for that.” He seemed to
dismiss the idea. She leant forward eagerly.

“Oh, but I'll do anything. _Anything._ I would for Rob's sake, let
alone in the terrible position Jack is in. What is it, Mr. Pointer?”

“Well, it's this. I wonder if you could go to France and look up Mrs.
Erskine's circle? As a sort of relation, well then a friend of the
family, her solicitor, Mr. Russell, would give you a letter of
introduction, I know. If possible I should like you to stay in the
house and try to find some clue which might clear up all this game of
cross-purposes, for that's what's going on, Miss West. There's no
_one_ case so tangled as this. What's happened, I feel sure, is that
half-a-dozen ends have all got knotted up together. Now the real one
may lie in the far past—back of Robert Erskine, or even of his father.
I can see no other way of possibly stumbling on it than by trying to
piece it out of his mother's recollections. Mrs. Erskine thinks
there's nothing to tell, Mr. Russell says the same, but it's the only
chance for a fresh cast as far as I can see. Will you go?”

As he had foreseen, the idea did not appeal to Miss West in the least.

“You mean,” she hesitated, “you mean to go and stay with Mrs. Erskine,
if she will let me, and be a sort of spy in the house?”

“Just so. No, I was afraid it wouldn't do. As a matter of fact, I wish
I could have had someone in her villa weeks ago. Only the Yard won't
run to needless expenses, you know, and—well, there it is.” He smiled
cheerily.

“You think it so important as all that?”

He was quite honest.

“I think it may lead to nothing, but I certainly think it worth
trying. If you cared to go, you would be the very person. Mrs. Erskine
used to have a companion long ago, I'm told. She might like to have a
bright and, if you'll permit me to say so, Miss, a pretty face about
her.”

Christine made her decision.

“I'm not going to pretend that it's what I wanted. And I don't think
you'd be in the least deceived if I tried to hoodwink you. But I'll
go, and if Mrs. Erskine asks me to stop with her I'll do it. I suppose
I can always write to you?”

“I should want you to write a report every day and post it to my home
address. I may not answer, but I shall get your letters all right, and
if there is anything special I want, or that you can do, I shall let
you know. You must arrange with some shop in Nice to keep your letters
for you. Remember, Miss West, you mustn't forget that there may be
enemies in the very household of Mrs. Erskine herself. I have no
reason whatever to think so, but you must act as though there were.”

“Do you know anything about her household?”

Pointer read her a letter he had received weeks ago in answer to one
he had despatched to the Nice Préfecture. Mrs. Erskine lived a quiet
but not secluded life in her charming villa, entertaining a little,
and altogether enjoying the respectful esteem of the authorities. Her
household was very simple. One man servant who was gardener and
chauffeur, and one woman, his wife, who did the work, together with a
first class cook. Mrs. Erskine only lived on one floor of her villa,
the other two floors being let.

“I'm afraid I shan't be of any use,” Christine said warningly; “it
sounds quite out of my line.”

The Chief Inspector would have preferred, as he had told her, to send
a trained detective, but Christine was the only woman who would be
able to enter under the ægis of a letter from Russell, and willing to
work for the truth, so he encouraged her with the prospect of coming
on some unconsidered piece of news which might set machinery in motion
which would ultimately liberate Carter.

Finally she decided to go up to Perth personally and see the
solicitor. Pointer looked up her train, and 'phoned about her to the
Scotsman. Then, taking a hearty farewell of her, for the two liked
each other, he went to the nearest 'phone and rang up for the second
time that morning an American reporter friend of his on the London
staff of the _New York Herald_.

“Pointer speaking. Have you looked her up? Good. Well, who did she
marry? Beale, did you say? Mr. Beale? Oh, Mr. Edward Beale, only son
of Mr. Augustus P. Beale, an editor of the _Universe_. I see. Eh? I
only said I see. Thanks very much indeed;” and Pointer hung up the
receiver and walked away, frowning deeply. So Miss Heilbronner, Robert
Erskine's one time fiancée, had married Mr. Beale's only son. Did this
stand for anything in the puzzle? If so, what?

Christine meanwhile was speeding towards the rooms of Mr. Mortimer
Meukes, the young solicitor to whom she had brought a letter of
introduction from Canada yesterday afternoon.

“Did you see him?” she asked almost before she had shut the door
behind her.

“I did, Miss West. He has agreed to retain me as his counsel, but I am
bound to say that he refused to give me any information whatever.” The
young man gave a vexed laugh.

“Frankly, if I hadn't promised you to take the case, I should hand you
back your retaining fee.”

“I don't think you would.” Christine spoke entreatingly. “You would be
much too conscious of the fact that Mr. Carter is in a terrible
position. He doesn't speak, obviously because there is some good
reason why he can't, not because he won't.”

“He doesn't even give that much explanation;” but Mr. Meukes' tone was
less indignant.

“If you think Mr. Carter is a man to tamely or lightly submit to being
broadcasted as a murderer and a thief, you can't have had a square
look at him. Does he look a rabbit?”

Mr. Meukes hastily agreed that he certainly did not, for Christine had
spoken with warmth.

“Did he give you no message for me?”

“Yes, he told me to tell you, in strictest secrecy, that he was
thankful you had come, and that if you could remain on this side of
the Atlantic, as you told me to tell him you would, he might be very
glad of your help later on. He was really most awfully touched by your
coming and by your having sent me.”

Christine told him that she was going abroad for some time possibly,
unless Carter would prefer to have her stay closer at hand. She gave
Mr. Russell's address to the solicitor and asked him to wire her
Carter's reply.

Mr. Russell, like Pointer, took a liking to the Canadian girl. He sent
off a letter at once to Mrs. Erskine recommending Miss West to her,
and gave Christine a letter of introduction to hand her personally.
“I'm sure she will welcome you. After all, the poor leddy has little
enough that she knows about her only son.”

Christine looked down her nose.

“I shouldn't build on that. Mrs. Erskine must be an iceberg.”

Mr. Russell opened his eyes.

“My dear young leddy, anything but! Let me assure you she spends far
too much on charity. Far too much.”

“She let her ‘only son’ have a fearful struggle for years and years
when she could have helped him, and never missed the money. She let
the Mills for which he had worked so hard slip through his fingers at
the last moment.”

Mr. Russell was amazed.

“She sent him large sums of money regularly. I've seen his letters
thanking her for the sums sent and asking for more and always getting
it. Aye, _always_ getting it. As for the last thousand pounds, he only
asked for one thousand. I know what I am speaking of. The Chief
Inspector could have told you the same.”

Christine was bewildered. So bewildered that she held her tongue.

“Did you ever _see_ the letters Robert Erskine wrote. I mean see them
yourself?”

No, Christine had to acknowledge that she never had.

“Or any of Mrs. Erskine's letters to him?”

Christine had again to acknowledge that she never had seen one.

Mr. Russell nodded his head. “Just so. Just as I thought. Mrs. Erskine
is a quiet, still woman. You might think her hard if you didn't know
what lies behind her manner. My father could tell you of case after
case of charity and goodness which he found out, after she had left
Perth, of which she never spoke. She's not one to wear her heart on
her sleeve, like all her family now dead and gone, but it's a heart of
gold.”

Christine bade Mr. Russell good-bye, and picked up a telegram from
London in which Carter sent her word that any distance within a week's
journey of London would serve him perfectly. She travelled up to town
and on to Dover resolved to meet Robert's mother with a more
unprejudiced mind.

It happened to be a singularly cold September, so that Mrs. Erskine
had already returned from her Eze summer cottage to Nice, which
presented a more animated appearance than usual, considering the
month.

Villa des Fleurs was a beautiful house standing in a handsome palm
garden where roses bloomed all the year, and Christine rang the bell
of the first floor wondering what sort of experience lay before her.

She was not often nervous, but she hardly noticed who was in the
balcony to which the smiling French maid led her, until a white-haired
woman, quietly but richly dressed, held out her hand.

Mrs. Erskine told her how pleased she was to see anyone who had known
her husband and son in Canada, and asked Christine to stay at the
villa for a fortnight.

“Though Nice is still quite deserted,” she added.

Christine suggested that her wardrobe might not be quite up to Nice's
standards, but Mrs. Erskine smiled faintly at the idea. She insisted
on sending to the station where the luggage had been left, and Marie
the maid showed the Canadian, after a delicious tea, into her room.

“We dine at eight o'clock,” her hostess had told her. “The other
people in the villa are friends of mine, and we have all our meals
together. There is a Mr. and Mrs. Clark, who have the ground floor,
and are splendid tennis players—you may like to practise with them of
a morning—and then there is Major Vaughan, who has the floor above
this. He is rather an original, but as an old bachelor, as well as an
old friend of my husband's, I humour him.”

The room assigned to Christine was very barely furnished. After a bath
in a luxurious bathroom, she opened the door next to her own by
mistake, and stepped into a really beautiful bedroom, all silver and
petunia shades. Closing the door hastily, she raised her eyebrows a
little as she stepped on into her own very comfortless nook. Mrs.
Erskine might be delighted to see her, but, though she had had ample
warning of her coming, she had certainly not been over concerned with
her guest's comfort. At dinner, which was of a quality and served with
a luxury Christine found a revelation, she met the other inmates of
the house. Mr. and Mrs. Clark were a cheery, rather noisy couple, who
seemed to consider all life a great joke. Christine decided that the
lady had once been on the stage, from her partiality to paint and
powder and richly tinted locks, but there was a breezy good nature
about her which offset Mrs. Erskine's chilly manner. To Major Vaughan
she took an instant aversion. His light eyes stared at her insolently,
from the simple hair-dressing to the hem of her equally plain little
frock.

“An almost-relation”—he repeated Mrs. Erskine's introduction; “you
must adopt us, too, Miss West. We are all one happy family here, you
see. Having everything in common.” Christine thought she had never
seen a more odious smile. She refused to talk to him, but all through
the Clarks' chaff she could hear his biting speeches and neighing
laugh. Mrs. Erskine's answers were chiefly monosyllabic, and before
she joined the others at bridge under the palms and roses on the
terrace she turned a rather weary face to the young woman.

“The Major is so brilliantly clever, when he cares to exert himself,
that one has to overlook his little moods. After all, we shouldn't
live like this if we didn't fit in very well together.”

Which was more than Christine did. She sometimes thought it was her
guilty conscience, the secret purpose which had brought her to Nice,
that the villa seemed an uncomfortable place to her. Wherein lay the
discomfort she could not analyse, even for Pointer's benefit. Mrs.
Erskine took no interest in the open air life beloved by the Clarks,
but lay for the most part on a chaise-lounge. The Canadian girl had
heard of Scotch taciturnity, but her hostess was the most reserved
person she had ever met. Only point-blank questions would bring out
any of the remembrances on which Pointer had built his hopes.

Of her husband she spoke with a certain old-fashioned respect and
affection that touched Christine. About Robert as a baby she spoke,
too, and equally tenderly, but of his life after he left with his
father for Canada, she either had nothing to say, or refused to say
it.

“I would rather not discuss my son,” she said once in her low, prim
voice. “I am thankful that his murderer has been caught, but I dread
what revelations the trial may bring to light.”

Christine kept silence only by an effort. Rob had been no saint, but
neither was his mother perfect. Shortly after her arrival her hostess
had suggested that they should drive into Monte Carlo to make some
purchases.

“There's a milliner I've heard of who's having a bankrupt sale of
stock. I'm told there are really some good bargains to be got.”

Christine and she drove down to where they were received by a very
pale young woman, with dark shadows under her eyes, who looked as
though a square meal would be a novelty. The hats were very moderately
priced, indeed. Mrs. Erskine decided on a couple, and then began to
dispute the price. Christine marvelled as she listened. It was a
shabby scene, heightened by the air of triumph with which the
Scotswoman turned to Christine when they were again in the car.

“They were bargains anyway, but I felt quite sure that I could get
them still cheaper.”

“She looked very sad, and so young,” Christine said soberly.

“It takes capital to succeed in Monte Carlo,” was Mrs. Erskine's
rejoinder. Something in her companion's face arrested her attention,
“You mustn't think me hard”—Christine did—“but I consider it wrong to
spend a larger sum than necessary upon myself. Three-quarters of my
income is needed for my charities, and the remaining quarter I
consider I should stretch as far as possible.”

Christine said nothing for a few minutes.

“It must be very nice to be able to give away so much,” she said
musingly, “but for that, I don't see that wealth has much to offer.
Which is as well”—she turned to Mrs. Erskine with a smile—“as I am
never likely to have much of it.”

Judging by Mrs. Erskine's face, she did not share Christine's
philosophical point of view in the least.

“A gipsy woman read my hand when I was a tiny tot and said that I
should die a wealthy woman, and years later I had the same thing told
me—that I should die possessed of great wealth.”

They drove home in silence. Christine turned over in her mind what she
had just learnt as to her hostess's division of her money. At first
she was a little sceptical as to its literal truth, but after a week
in the villa she took this suspicion back. Mrs. Erskine did live
apparently on the scale of one thousand a year. Apart from the villa
and its furnishings, which she had evidently purchased years ago, and
the motor-car and meals which all the household shared, she spent but
little on herself.

Of anything that could help John Carter Christine learnt nothing. Mrs.
Erskine, though she had never heard of him before his arrest, now
proclaimed his guilt as firmly as though he had already been tried and
convicted. There was only one startling fact, after close on a
fortnight, which the villa had revealed to Christine, and that was
that Mrs. Erskine was afraid of something. She herself openly alluded
to the fact, when discussing a case in the paper, that she slept with
a loaded revolver under her pillow.

“Day or night I always have one close at hand, and I'm quite a fair
shot.”

“In the midst of life we are in death,” cackled the Major, who had not
shown himself for several days.

Mrs. Erskine looked at him with one of her frosty smiles, but said
nothing. It suddenly struck Christine that here might be the reason
why Mrs. Erskine kept the Clarks and the Major with her. They were
even in the habit, she learnt, of sharing the summer cottage together,
yet Christine did not think that Mrs. Erskine cared any more for them
in her heart than she did for herself—Christine—whom yet she had asked
to extend her visit for at least another fortnight.

Were they all not so much friends as a bodyguard? If so, from what
danger were they intended to shield their hostess? She puzzled over
the matter greatly. It seemed to her the one point of interest she had
unearthed. As for Pointer, he wrote no comment, only that she was to
watch every detail closely that came under her notice. True, she
remembered Robert saying that his mother was timid, a timidity which
he himself had inherited, just as he had her one uneven eyebrow, and
also a little mannerism of the wrists which Christine never saw
without remembering him with a pang.

Poor Rob, lying, after little but struggle and failure, in his family
vault! If the living man and his danger meant more to her than the
dead, not for that reason did she forget Robert Erskine's murder.



Chapter VIII

Christine had not accepted Mrs. Erskine's invitation to stay for
another fortnight, but decided that another week at the villa would be
the utmost she could afford to waste in futile efforts to learn some
clue in a past to which no one referred. She was glad of her caution
when one morning towards the close of her stay she found a letter for
her at the shop where she had all her correspondence delivered. It was
from Mr. Meukes. She tore it open with a beating heart, and read:

  “Dear Miss West,

  I have had an interview with our friend. He was well, and sends you
  the following message which I have taken down word for word:—‘Please
  be in Lille by September twenty-fourth. Do you remember my little
  contribution to your Toronto flat-warming party years ago? Go to
  that street. The number of the street you want is the age you were
  that birthday when we all got upset in the river. Go at midnight.
  Secrecy is vital, for the house may be watched. On the third floor
  ring the bell. Give no name, but ask for M. Meunier. He knows why I
  cannot come, and has instructions, left with him for just such an
  emergency when Rob died. In them I stated that in the event of my
  death you are my sole legatee, and that if I am incapacitated or
  prevented in any way from being present in the house at Lille on
  September 24th, you have full power to sign any documents for me. I
  enclosed your photo and a sample of your signature. He agreed to
  accept you as my proxy. For your further identification I wrote a
  password in the letter. It is the name we three gave our island at
  Four Winds, and he is to reply with the name of the rock on it. You
  can sign any papers M. Meunier hands you without reading them; there
  will probably be only two. M. Meunier will then give you a slip of
  paper on which he will have written “Yes” or “No.” Enclose this in a
  letter, but send me (Meukes) a wire to say which word has been
  handed you. If all goes as I hope, I may soon be able to clear
  myself of at least one of the charges hanging over me. If you are
  detained, wire Meunier at the address and sign yourself “Minuit.”’
  There, Miss West, is the message he sends you. He is still as
  obstinately silent on what interests us as ever, but I do not wonder
  that you are fond of him. He has a way with him. Will you allow me
  to wish you good luck in your errand? I shall be glad to have a wire
  from you to say that this is received and burned.

    Very truly yours,
      Mortimer Meukes.”

Christine read the note very carefully. Entered a few notes in her
shopping diary under the heading of last January, and as though they
concerned dress items, and burned the letter in the shop woman's stove
before she turned back towards the town itself and the villa.

To-day was the eighteenth. Her visit would be up on the twentieth. She
decided to spend the days between its end and the twenty-third at
Avignon, among antiquities which would well explain any lingering
should eyes be on her. She would have liked to go direct to Lille, but
in a town she did not know she doubted her ability to remain unnoticed
for so long.

Of Mrs. Erskine and the inmates of the villa she took a friendly
farewell on the twentieth, and caught the train to Avignon as she had
mentioned in conversation. Here she browsed among its Roman remains
and suffered its Roman wind till the twenty-third, when she motored
out to the next station on the P.L.M. beyond Avignon and caught the
Paris express, and on to Lille. Arrived at Lille early in the
forenoon, she took a tram and saw the sights like any stranger. Only
for lunch did she allow herself to drift into the Rue des Muguets. A
café-restaurant almost opposite to No. 15 was her choice. She seated
herself discreetly in an obscure corner, and had hardly finished a
very good meal—Christine was no believer in a poached-egg day—when in
walked Mr. Beale. She had his photograph inside her note-book at the
moment. He paid no attention to her, but took a window-seat facing No.
15, and not only faced the large building but watched it intently.
Once or twice he looked around, included her in his casual glance, and
returned to his close watch. She laid down her paper.

“Isn't that M. Voiron?” She named a popular cinema actor as she paid
her bill. Her tip made the waiter willing to linger.

“No, Madame,” he obviously regretted to shatter an illusion, “that is
un Anglais. He comes here lately daily and always to that table.”

Christine seemed to be barely listening. That the house was also kept
under observation by others for the rest of the twenty-four hours was
obvious. She emptied her letter-case under the table into her
hand-bag. It was a plain black leather case.

“I ask, because I saw him ahead of me in Rue Albert just now. He
dropped this case. Will you please give it him at”—she glanced at the
clock. It was exactly five minutes to two o'clock—“at two o'clock
precisely. I do not want him to thank me personally, so please wait
till two.”

“As it strikes!” The waiter assured her heartily, “Madame can count on
me.”

Christine saw that her watch and the clock were to the second
together.

At exactly one minute past two she crossed the street and entered the
door of No. 15, a door with many signs chiefly of insurance companies,
and the men of the law in black and gold outside the handsome portals.
She had noted how far into its open throat anyone on the opposite side
could see. Just beyond this she flashed a glance backward. As she had
hoped, Mr. Beale's head, with its fringe of reddish hair, was turned
quite away from the window to the black-haired waiter standing beside
him—her waiter.

She passed up the stairs in her silent galoshes. On the third floor
was a sign: “Beauregard et Fils.”

She looked at the landing from above. There was only one large door on
each floor. No one was about. It was the sacred hour of noon repose.

She tried the top floor. This, too, belonged to a business firm, but a
trap door on to the roof gave her her chance. It was a very dirty
roof, but it had a high coping all round, and there was a place where
she could sit down. She fastened down the trap-door, and made herself
as comfortable as possible, with a novel she had with her, under her
umbrella. At seven o'clock she lifted the flap gingerly and listened.
Feet clattered down the stone stairs below her. Bang, bang! went the
house doors far in the depths. The clerks were leaving. At eight
o'clock she carefully crawled to the top landing and bent over the
banisters. All was silent. She crept below. From the third floor came
the sound of a typewriter. It was very dark inside the building, and
she decided to remain on the fourth floor landing, at any rate for the
present.

A little before nine o'clock she heard a key inserted in the hall door
and steps ascending—cautious steps. They stopped at M. Beauregard's
and out of the darkness came a gentle tap. Only one. Christine dared
not risk a glance over the banisters. She was back against the wall
above, listening intently. The door opened and shut swiftly.

She heard a man's voice say in English with a foreign accent: “The old
idiot's working late, but he'll soon be gone. Everything is ready.”

“The men understand their job, do they? Sure?” asked another voice
with a distinct twang to it.

“If you come at twelve-thirty, monsieur, you will find that their job
has been understood and perfectly carried out. Your birds will be
trussed and waiting.”

“You're still certain that you are not suspected?”

“Who, I? But no, monsieur, but no! A temporary clerk who is open to
reason will witness the signatures as well as myself. All goes well,
allez!”

The men separated, one letting himself back into the flat and the
other moving softly and slowly down the stairs.

Like a shadow Christine slipped after him. Near the house door she
heard a click, and Mr. Beale switched on an electric torch for a
second which gave her a glimpse of his face, before he swung open the
door and shut it noiselessly behind him.

Another half-hour passed and she heard M. Beauregard's door again
opened. This time it closed with a bang, and firm steps echoed down
the stairs—no conspirator this apparently.

The minutes dragged by, till at exactly a quarter to twelve the front
door was again unlocked, someone with an electric torch was coming up.
A tall man, well muffled up, for the night was fresh. Christine
slipped down to the door of the third floor flat, but keeping out of
the ray of his steady light. The stranger come on, evidently making
for the same goal. He got to the mat and extended his hands towards
the little push button.

“Ne sonnez pas, monsieur, ne sonnez pas!” she murmured, touching his
right arm.

“Hein?” He wheeled to face her, at the same moment the door was flung
open and a clerk stood there bowing courteously.

“Come in, monsieur and madame. We did not expect a lady, but pray come
in. I am M. Beauregard's head clerk.”

M. Meunier entered briskly. For a second Christine hesitated. But what
might be the effect of calling in the police? She stepped in, too. The
door shut.

“This way”—and the clerk bowed them into a cheery office. “I go for
the other witness.”

Christine had exhausted her stock of French. She whispered hurriedly
in English.

“M. Meunier, I am Christine West. There is something wrong. That man
has confederates and a Mr. Beale is in it, too. After the signing——”

He gave her a reassuring glance.

“We, too, are prepared. The password, mademoiselle?”

“Suneverup. And yours?”

“Piratekeep.”

The silly names from out her childhood seemed doubly incongruous just
then, but as she looked him over, she guessed that M. Meunier would be
a good man in a scrap. Tall, resolute, grey at the temples, and a bit
red in the face, but with an eye like a boy's, and every short hair on
his head bristling with vitality. Without a word he fastened his
electric torch to the wall over by the door. She followed his example,
hanging hers where he silently pointed beside a second door. She lit a
candle which stood ready with matches and sealing wax on a desk in the
middle of the room.

The head clerk entered, with a big stout German-looking man.

“M. Kaufmann, who will witness the signatures with me.” The head clerk
looked in surprise at the extra lights.

“It is said that there may be a strike of the electricians quite
suddenly to-night,” said M. Meunier shortly.

“Tiens!” muttered the head clerk, who did not seem to find the
arrangements particularly welcome.

M. Meunier drew out two long papers from an inner pocket.

“We will sign now, mademoiselle, if you are ready. These are
duplicates of one another. I shall keep the one, and the other will in
due course reach our friend. I will sign first, and then if you will
write your name here in this blank and then here”—he pointed out two
blanks—“these gentleman will witness them both.”

Christine watched his firm signature flourish. “Charles Bonnot”—the
name of a member of the famous Lyons Silk house.

Then he handed her a pen and drew out a chair for her.

“Do not be nervous, mademoiselle,” and his hand pressed her shoulder
for a second to reinforce his meaning.

Christine felt her heart beating violently. It was all very well for
him to reassure her, but they were but two against unknown odds.

She signed, and made way for the head clerk, who stood waiting for his
turn, with one hand pressed on his waistcoat, and with a face now red,
now white.

He, too, signed twice, and then moved away to the other side of the
room. The burly M. Kaufmann bent over the table. Christine stared down
at the first neat signature.

“You can go now, Kaufmann.” The head clerk nodded to the door of an
inner room on which his eyes had been riveted.

“Bon!” said the stout man obediently, “bonsoir madame, bonsoir
monsieur.” He held out his hand to the chief clerk, who snatched at it
automatically.

There was a click, an oath from the head clerk, who stood twisting his
wrists with handcuffs on them.

“Don't be alarmed, Miss West. It's me, Chief Inspector Pointer. I saw
you read my name. M. Meunier and I thought we would let this gang hang
themselves. As for the chaps he's shouting for, they're safely under
lock and key in one of the cupboards, out of sight and sound. I can't
have them taken away yet because of our friend, Mr. Beale. He's such a
suspicious customer, and it's especially him I'm after.” He turned to
the clerk.

“Now look here.” Pointer spoke excellent French—a war benefit. “If you
want a lighter sentence assist the law now.”

The man was utterly cowed. He burst into a flood of protests, excuses,
and accusations of Beale, whose money had corrupted an honest man.

“Now look here,” Pointer said again. “When Mr. Beale comes, open the
door to him exactly as if nothing had happened. Close and bolt it
behind him, and leave the rest to us. If you do this M. Meunier may
put in a word for you to the police.”

M. Meunier, who evidently believed in not interfering with another
man's job, now nodded assent.

The clerk tremblingly assured them that he would do his very best.

M. Meunier again nodded. “It will be a question of twenty years for
you if you do not,” he threw in.

The Chief Inspector went on to amplify his instructions.

“When Mr. Beale comes, show him in as I said. This room will be empty.
I want him to talk before witnesses. Say that both messieurs—Mr. Beale
need not know anything about this lady till afterwards—are tied up and
are being guarded by the other men. Ask him for payment before you let
him have the papers. Be sure and tell him explicitly that these are
the papers taken by force from M. Meunier. You are a lawyer's clerk
and understand what is wanted. We wish Mr. Beale to incriminate
himself hopelessly before witnesses. We shall be listening with the
door ajar. I shall open it wider when you are to hand the papers to
the American. You understand?”

The frightened man said that he did and would do his best.

“It may make all the difference in your life how good your best is,”
M. Meunier warned him grimly.

Christine took an impulsive step forward.

“Oh, Mr. Pointer, what have you found out? Will it free John? Will it
free him?”

“As to freeing him, that depends on himself, as you know, Miss West.
If a man _won't_ speak, _won't_ give an alibi——”

“Ah, but he will now,” put in M. Meunier; “the brave Carter! He can
speak now. He signalled to me by means of the half-drawn curtain when
he was arrested that he would say nothing till I gave the word. It was
part of our contract, and vitally necessary, but the time for silence
will have passed once these papers are in safe keeping, as they will
be before morning. See, here is ‘Yes’”—he handed her a slip of paper
from his pocket-book—“that means just that to our friend—‘Yes, you can
speak. Yes, a great, an immense fortune is yours. Yes, all is well,
and if we get M. Beale——’”

“Hush!”

A light ring sounded at the door.

Pointer glanced at his watch.

“That's him. Now, then, Daru, see that you play your part well.”

The man nodded eagerly. The three took their places inside the room
which opened out of the one they had been in.

“But why aren't they in here? And the papers—the papers, where are
they? Quick!”

“I have them,” the head clerk answered calmly. He was acting most
convincingly. “I have the papers, monsieur, but I think we should have
a little further understanding before I hand them over. I think you
should raise the price you promised if all went well. All has gone
well. What do you suggest?”

Mr. Beale looked at him a moment in silence.

“Not one cent more will I pay. You don't know whom you're talking to.
I'm not a man to browbeat. Our terms were generous and you accepted
them. I don't say that we won't add an extra something if the papers
are what we think, but that will be after they are in our hands, not
before. And now, no nonsense, my man; I'm armed.”

“Here are the papers, then,” the clerk said sulkily.

Mr. Beale snatched them from him, then he spun around on his heel.

“Who signed—what—” his eyes had fallen on the signature of the second
witness, “Alfred Pointer, Chief Inspector, New Scotland Yard, London.”

“Evening, Mr. Beale.” The signatory in person stepped into the room,
bowed civilly, and passed on through the other door. “Come this way,
Daru. M. Meunier wishes to talk with the gentleman.”

Christine made a motion to follow, but the Frenchman stopped her.

“By no means, mademoiselle. You represent the interests of your
friend. Pray be seated here. Now, monsieur, let us have an
understanding. These papers belong to me. Thank you”—as he took them
over—“They are worth much to you?”

“It's a trap.” Mr. Beale looked dangerous. “I see! It's a damned
trap.”

“But exactly! And behold you in it! In the very middle of it; and the
trap, my friend, is a good one, very strong. Now, to begin again—on
the one hand there is the 'phone there by mademoiselle, and the
Préfecture, and a French prison——”

“I guess not! I'm an American, an editor of——”

The Frenchman shrugged amused shoulders.

“You may be an American, Monsieur, but I am a Frenchman, and this is
France. I can assure you that we are no respector of persons here. You
have broken French laws, and in a French prison you will assuredly
stay for an unpleasantly long term unless you are shrewd enough to
accept my terms.”

“Well?” jerked out Mr. Beale.

“Mademoiselle, do you understand the position?”

“Not in the least.”

“This man is a director in a very large silk spinning and weaving
concern in America. Your fiancé has made a marvellous discovery—an
invention, epoch making, of an electric shuttle and a circular loom
which permits of silk being turned out at about one-tenth of its
present cost. When the first step of the idea came to him, he offered
his patent to the Amalgamated Society. They did not understand its
importance then, neither did he. They what you call ‘turned it down.’
He went on from that first step to other steps, and offered the patent
to us. We could not believe it possible at first, but accepted it
provisionally, provided it worked out as claimed. Meanwhile the
Amalgamated had learnt something of the new discovery. Some tracing of
a part must have fallen into their hands. They decided to kill it, for
it is a revolution, this idea of Mr. Carter's. Mr. Carter met me
secretly in Brussels and worked at a loom I built to his instructions.
At first there were hitches, now here, now there, but at last has come
absolute success. That was when Mr. Beale stepped in, and had him
arrested for robbery. Diamond rings—pendants—bah! A huge fortune was
already all but assured Mr. Carter. My firm could not finally sign,
however, until a full trial at our own works had gone off
successfully, and until we had had time to dispose of our existing
stocks of silk. All this needed absolute secrecy. Mr. Beale, being in
silk, knew this too. Part of the plans he may have, but the vital
parts he could not be in possession of: Carter always kept those
himself. Hence this night's planned robbery. He has had me watched, he
has bribed my own secretary—so I have learnt from that clever police
officer of yours, and now he thought the prize would be his; but,
thanks again to Inspector Pointer, it is not so, but quite different.
Now, Mr. Beale, here is my offer:—To forget this night's scene in
return for a signed confession, given of your own free will, of
course, that the jewels were being taken care of by Mr. Carter at your
own request, which you had forgotten. That”—M. Meunier referred to his
note-book—“M. Heilbronner withdraws his accusations and”—again he
searched his notes—“and his warrant. That you both acknowledge that
you have nothing against Mr. Carter in any way. Refuse this offer, and
mademoiselle will ring up the Préfecture de Police.”

Mr. Beale glared at his finger tips as though he would have liked to
bite them.

“We have witnesses of the best,” purred M. Meunier.

“I'll write it.” Mr. Beale sat down at the desk, and rapidly filled a
sheet of blue and white crossed paper which M. Meunier handed him. It
was a clever piece of writing. Facts had just come to light, so wrote
Mr. Beale, which entirely altered the case against Mr. Carter as far
as the accusations of theft or embezzlement were concerned. The
jewellery found in his trunk had been handed to him for disposal by a
member of his (Beale's) family, unbeknown to that gentleman, and a
careful examination of the books of the Toronto Mills showed that,
though there had been errors in the book-keeping, there was none
whatever in the percentages paid to the Amalgamated, which therefore
gladly withdrew all claims against the managers, Robert Erskine,
deceased, and John Carter, and were cancelling the warrants taken out
mistakenly against them.

“Heilbronner'll sign it, of course, if I tell him to,” Mr. Beale
observed laconically. “One copy goes to our New York police, and one
to Scotland Yard. Is that what you want?” Mr. Beale was certainly a
good loser.

“_Parfaitment._” The Frenchman opened the door and called in the Chief
Inspector, who witnessed the American's signature, together with Daru.

Mr. Beale rose. “There, I'm through. I guess I'll go to my hotel.”

“To mine, Monsieur, to mine, until Mr. Heilbronner signs these—you can
post these to him to-night with a letter explaining your plight. Till
then you stay with me, and M. the Chief Inspector he stays, too,
_hein_?”

“I'm on my holiday,” assented Pointer equably, “and Lille is quite an
interesting town. Go on ahead, Monsieur: Watts is below; he'll get a
taxi for mademoiselle.”


“Why didn't you stay and hear what M. Meunier had to tell about Jack,
and the Amalgamated, and his wonderful discovery. To think he thought
that he was no good at engineering!” Christine had asked Pointer to
breakfast with her. She looked the ghost of herself after the
excitements of the past night, but her eyes were alight.

“I didn't dare to go to sleep for fear it should be a dream.”

“My dear Miss West, I haven't the faintest idea of what M. Meunier
talked to you and Mr. Beale about,” the Chief Inspector said very
seriously. “Mr. Beale's written retraction was given quite freely, an
all-important point which we, none of us, must forget.”

Christine digested this in silence.

“But how did you come to be there—how did you know about it all?”

“Routine,” Pointer explained blandly; “routine took me to Geneva,
where lived the _avocat_ to whom Mr. Beale had once telegraphed, and
where I found Mr. Heilbronner. From information which came to hand”—a
vision of himself piecing together minute scraps from a dustbin made
Pointer speak with unction—“which came to hand, I found that Mr. Beale
and he were extremely interested in a M. Meunier. I followed up this
and that clue, and found that M. Meunier was M. Charles Bonnot of
Lyons. More information coming to hand led to the belief that Mr.
Beale, and incidentally Mr. Heilbronner, meditated getting hold of
some important papers from M. Bonnot and yourself in Lille last night.
M. Beauregard—one of M. Bonnot's men of business—took me on two days
ago as an extra clerk for some special late work. Being an Alsatian
explained my French, and no one suspected me.”

“But—how did you know that _I_ should be there?”

“I couldn't think of any better or firmer friend of Mr. Carter's.” The
Chief Inspector gave a little laugh, and Christine laughed too, and
plied him with questions.

“What are you going to do when Mr. Heilbronner has signed? I suppose
he will sign the papers?”

“I fancy he will. Mr. Beale is the strong man in that team.” And
Christine did not notice that he left the first part of her sentence
unanswered.

“And what about that clerk?”

“Daru? Oh! M. Bonnot is letting him off very well. He will have to
leave his present post, of course, but a place will be found for him
at Lyons, where he can work up again. Mr. Beale offered what was a
fortune to him, and he has a wife in hospital, so altogether M. Bonnot
inclined to a very merciful view of things.”

Christine herself waited in desperate anxiety. She could not go to
England without knowing. The slip with “Yes” had been despatched to
Carter, but she had been told to say nothing of the unexpected turn of
events which Mr. Beale's detection had brought about.

The next day's post brought the papers signed by Mr. Heilbronner. Mr.
Beale delivered the papers to M. Meunier with a wry smile.

“Satisfied now? Can I go to my hotel and leave this blank, blanked
country?”

M. Meunier nodded, and Mr. Beale stalked from the room and drove off
to his own suite in the Meurice. As he entered his sitting-room a
figure rose from a chair. It was Pointer.

“Good afternoon, Mr. Beale.”

“What does this mean? What the devil are you doing in my rooms?” There
was no mistaking the fact that Mr. Beale's nerves were getting frayed.

“A few questions that we want cleared up,” said Pointer imperturbably.
“Shut the door, Watts. These papers, Mr. Beale, were found in your
flat at Lyons.”

“Well, suppose they were?”

“May I ask how they came into your possession, sir?”

“Bought 'em.”

“From whom, sir?”

Mr. Beale's eyes travelled slowly from the papers to the officers and
back from them to the papers.

“Off an agent of mine. His name would mean nothing to you.”

“I must ask for it all the same, sir.”

“Godard.”

“I think not. Godard—Levinsky is his real name—told us, when we
interviewed him at Lyons, that the papers in question were shown him
by you, and that he made copies of them from which he worked.”

Mr. Beale looked sallower than usual.

“I suppose it's got to be the truth. I took them out of Carter's bag.”

“We have been in telegraphic communication with Carter about them. He
says that these papers belonged to Robert Erskine.”

“Quite possibly. But I got them out of Carter's bag just the same.”

“Carter denies that absolutely. Mr. Beale, your situation seriously
calls for frankness, as I'm sure you see for yourself. Things are very
awkward. You have no satisfactory alibi for the hours from four to six
on August fourth. Those screws which were found in Carter's box must
have been put there by you. M. Meunier and two of his engineers give
Mr. Carter an absolutely satisfactory alibi. They were with him all
that Saturday afternoon and went down to Ostend in the train with him
and saw him off on the boat. Those screws, these papers of Erskine's,
and his note-book, look very ugly, taking into consideration the
reason your firm had for getting Carter and Erskine out of the way,
and the fact that you and the manager, together or separately, were in
No. 14 for a considerable time on that Saturday afternoon.”

Mr. Beale's sallowness became tinged with green.

“It's like a Sunday-school story,” he said after a pause,
“illustrating the way of the transgressor. I guess I know when the ice
won't bear me. Chief, those papers and that note-book are Erskine's.
You're right there. But I didn't get them off his dead body, nor yet
kill him, either before or after. I bought them from the manager. Yes,
sir, from the manager, and for one thousand five hundred pounds in
notes. I had the sum on me, for I hoped to meet Carter and do a deal
with him. Now, as to the motive—you're talking nonsense and you must
know it. Carter was our man. Erskine staked him, but Erskine's death
wouldn't have helped us any. It did quite the other way. We didn't
want all that limelight turned on us, I do assure you. As to the
screws—well-l, possibly I did let them drop into Carter's box by
mistake. We wanted him fixed up a bit, as he wouldn't deal. Mind you,
he only had to speak out to've left his prison the next day. If he
chose to stay there that wasn't my fault. I guess he was afraid to
speak, for if you _really_ think Carter had no hand in Erskine's
death—well, your brains aren't what I assess them at. As to my
alibi . . . I spent the time exactly as I told you. Trying to locate
Carter, who was in one of the Southampton Street hotels. I gave up
trying to find his name, guessed that he was using another, and,
acting on a belief of my man's that he had seen him go into the
Enterprise, tried there. I took room number fourteen without an idea
as to whose it really was, and the rest happened exactly as I told
you, except that I lifted the top off the wardrobe after what I had
seen through that knot-hole, but I couldn't see Erskine's face because
it was turned sideways and downwards, as you remember. Also my torch
had given out. Had I guessed whose corpse was in—but there . . . The
match I lit I took from those vestas on the mantelpiece, and I dropped
one into the wardrobe. I saw you salvage it, Chief.”

“Did you wash your hands in the basin?”

“Sure, and threw the water on to the balcony. It looked as though I
had washed my boots in it. The top of that wardrobe would have made a
first rate flower-bed. Well, to continue my tale of sin, curiosity
made me have a look among the dead man's effects. I carry a pass key
because of that damned Carter. I saw nothing interesting, and went for
the manager, whom I found prowling about outside in the corridor. He
seemed fairly knocked off his perch, but I sometimes wonder—However,
he certainly would have had to have a nerve to put me into a room with
a murdered man, if he knew anything about it. Yet—well, I don't quite
know what to think; he and Carter may have had an understanding of
some sort.”

“Humph!” There was a long silence. “You hadn't been to the hotel
earlier in the day, then?”

“No.”

“Did you step out on to the balcony at all?”

“Not once, but I thought I heard someone moving outside the window
while the manager and I were talking, just before you arrived, and I
pulled up the blind. As I did so I think a window clicked shut beside
me.”

“Beside you? Which side?”

“The Enterprise side. It sounded like the next room, but I couldn't
swear to that.”

“Humph! How did you come to buy those papers from the manager?”

Mr. Beale thought a while.

“He offered them to me. I said that though I didn't know Eames
personally yet I knew that he was mixed up in a business swindle. Said
I'd be mighty glad, had I known who he was, to've had a look through
his papers. He sat still a moment, then went out and came back with
that pocket-book and those papers you have there, done up in a neat
little green and white packet. Didn't say how he got them, and I
didn't ask. No, sir, I didn't ask!”

“Humph! Well, Mr. Beale, you've only yourself to thank for your
position. I shall leave two of my men to accompany you till we look
into matters a little more, and you'll have to stay in England.”

“Under arrest, am I?”

“Not at all, sir. Under close supervision—at present. Of course, if
you were to try to escape . . .” The Chief Inspector left the
consequences to Mr. Beale's alert imagination; “but you'll find Watts
here and Duncan know their work, and will cause you as little
inconvenience as possible.”

“I see. Well, I know when a game's lost,” the American retorted
bitterly. “Say, you spoke of Carter's alibi just now. I suppose he's
free, and all that?”

“He will be by to-morrow”; and Pointer, after reading over Mr. Beale's
account and getting it signed, made off for the nearest telegraph
office, while the American looked after him with an ironical smile.
“Carter to be set free to-morrow. Well, well, the brains of the
British police!”

Christine was the first to arrive in London, where she was met by a
pale, gaunt-faced young man. Pointer, carrying the signed paper which
Mr. Beale had staked so much to obtain, followed, and with him, though
in a different compartment, travelled Mr. Beale and his valet.

The Chief Inspector, after an interview with the authorities at the
Yard, went on to the Enterprise Hotel. The manager was in, and he
practically repeated his opening words to Mr. Beale.

The manager might or might not be made of better stuff than the
American, but he certainly was of softer. He sank back into his chair,
looking as though he saw the hangman already entering his cell.



Chapter IX

The Chief Inspector gave the manager no time to collect himself. He
went rapidly over Mr. Beale's accusation that it was Mr. Hughes who
had offered the papers of the dead man to him.

“I'm in an awful hole.” The manager poured out a glass of whisky and
soda with a shaking hand.

“Pretty bad,” agreed the unsympathetic police-officer, “but perhaps it
might be worse.” His glance around the room pointed his meaning. The
tumbler was set unsteadily back on the tray.

“I'm a ruined man in any case. I might as well have thrown up the
sponge when you came last time——”

“Perhaps,” murmured Pointer.

“—but here's the true story. You can take it down, and I'll sign it
here before we go to the police-station, or you can arrest me first
and have it afterwards.”

“Let's have it here.”

“Well, the case was exactly as I told you up to that moment when Beale
and I sat here after you had gone, talking over the suicide. I jumped
up, for I suddenly remembered after all that Eames—I mean
Erskine—_had_ given me a cardboard box to keep in the safe. I had
joked him about it, saying it looked like a box of chocolates, and he
had said it wasn't much more important, but still he wished me to take
care of it for him. Without thinking—for it is one of my strictest
rules that I never go to the safe without the booking-clerk or the
hall porter with me, and never in the presence of a visitor, I
unlocked the combination and opened it. That shows how rattled I was
by what had just happened. I pulled out the box——”

“Wrapped in green and white striped paper?”

“That's the one. And I said something about ‘Good God, I forgot to
speak of this to the police.’ I moved towards the door when Mr. Beale
stopped me. He was tremendously excited, and said that as soon as he
had seen Eames' face in the full light he had recognised him as a
dangerous crook whose partner, and doubtless murderer, he (Beale) was
after. In fact, he stuffed me with the same yarn he filled you up with
when you arrested Carter.”

The Chief Inspector gave no sign that he felt the dig.

“He declared that the box would contain plans and signals in cipher
for the use of the gang. Would I let him have a look at it? I
finally—well, I refused at _first_”—the bitterness of the manager's
voice told the whole story—“but you know what a way Mr. Beale has with
him. He claimed to recognise the plan of his own house in the
note-book, and then—I'd just been letting myself go a bit about what a
blow the suicide would be to the hotel, which was having its work cut
out to keep its head above water—he referred to that. Said that he
wanted a scoop for his paper. Finally he offered me one thousand
pounds down on the table for the box, and I let him take it for
another five hundred. Mind you, I'm not trying to clear myself, but I
believed his story. And of course when you arrested Carter I thought
what a Quixotic fool I should have been to have acted differently.”

He stopped and had another drink.

“But that isn't all that you have to tell.”

“You mean the pages torn out of the receipt-book. You know about
them.”

“No, I don't mean them. I know all about that, as you say. I mean
something else.”

“Do you want my confession as to how I killed Eames?” asked the
manager sardonically.

“I want to know first who the man was you showed over the balcony
rooms, including No. 14, at midday on Saturday, August third?”

“That was Sikes. He lends money strictly on the q.t. and at only seven
hundred per cent. But the mere idea that his little hobby might get
about infuriated him so that after you sent that blundering chap of
yours down to investigate he broke the whole thing off. He's aiming to
get into Parliament: that's why he's Sykes with a ‘y’ now.”

“Humph! And had you never seen Erskine before?”

“Never.”

“Nor Mr. Beale?”

“No. I assure you, Inspector, that I had never seen either man
before.”

“And now about those 'phones on Saturday at five o'clock?”

But the manager could only repeat that he knew nothing more than he
had already told the police. He could not recollect 'phoning at all
about five o'clock; but if he had, it had been a vain attempt to get
through to his hatter.

The police-officer asked him to sign his statement.

“We _may_ not have to use it——”

The manager drew a deep breath.

“—but, of course, you must keep yourself within touch of our people.
And now, Mr. Manager, what can you tell me about what has become of
the occupants of rooms eleven and twelve?”

The manager looked over his papers.

“Mrs. Willett left an address in Devonshire to which her letters were
to be forwarded. The hall-porter has it, I suppose.”

“Yes, but Mrs. Willett did not go there. The Devonshire hotel has no
knowledge of her whereabouts beyond the fact that she wrote from here,
and engaged a room on August 16th.”

The manager was unable to help.

“Now as to Miss Leslie, the occupant of number twelve. She left here
on September seventeenth, and all inquiries at the theatre only show
that no one has her address. Apparently she has gone away in the midst
of an engagement without leaving a trace of her plans.”

Here, too, the manager was not able to offer any help.

Pointer swung himself on his homeward bus, not over-pleased with his
men. He had given orders that the occupants of the balcony rooms were
to be kept under constant surveillance, and the two most important
ones had slipped away into the unknown. Miss Leslie he had tried to
trace through the Thompsons, father and son, and even through the
Blacks, but all to no purpose.

“Mrs. Able has very tactfully chosen roast veal,” O'Connor jibed as he
took his seat at the table. “Now, wanderer, what of thy goings to and
fro?”

Pointer merely raised his eyebrows and asked what was under the other
cover, and not until the meal was well out of the way and he had lit a
pipe did he give a rapid review of his “holiday tramp.”

O'Connor thought that the green and white scrap of paper backed up the
manager's rather than Beale's version of the selling of the papers,
and Pointer agreed that it might, but he did not say how much of the
rest of the tale of either man seemed to him likely.

Next morning he had a long interview with Carter, and found that, as
he thought, the Canadian had arrived on July twentieth in London. He
had expected to go straight to a hotel as near Erskine's as possible,
but on arrival at Liverpool Street Station he had been handed a
telegram from “Meunier,” instructing him to come on to Brussels at
once. Erskine had come to meet the train, after engaging a room for
him at the Marvel and one at the Enterprise for himself. The
connecting balcony was too good to lose, so at their hurried meeting
in a corner of the refreshment room, where they posed as strangers,
one of whom handed a newspaper to the other and discussed the weather
for a moment, it was arranged that Erskine was to write to the Marvel
in Carter's name, enclosing enough money to retain number two, while
Carter rushed off to Dover and Ostend. Ten days later Carter had to
come back to London to buy some special tools he could not get in
Brussels, and had spent a couple of hours with Erskine. It was on his
way to the night boat-train that he had bought him the cough medicine.
When he had returned again on the fatal Saturday night of August 3rd
it had been for the express purpose of telling his “pard” that success
was certain. The sight of the policeman when the window opened warned
him that something was wrong. After an interval he had crept out on to
the balcony again and peered into the room. He could see only an empty
bed and Miller on guard. Full of anxiety, he had to start back for
Brussels at once, followed, though he did not know it, by Beale. Then
came hours of torturing uncertainty, and finally the few lines in an
English paper telling of “Eames' suicide.” Carter could hardly bear to
speak of it. But they had each bound themselves before starting from
Canada that in case of danger they would separate at once, and in case
of any accident to the one, the other would “carry on”; also he was
under the most solemn pledges of absolute secrecy to M. Bonnot. So in
bitterness of soul he worked on, only determined to avenge his
friend's death some day.

“And that day's now, Inspector. I won't rest till I find out who it
was that killed Rob, though, mind you, I don't have any doubt as to
the man's identity. But I'll work night and day to get the proof.”

“You think it's——”

“Beale. Of course. So do you, I guess. He didn't know how few papers
Rob had on him. Just because I thought it was dangerous, I didn't give
Rob anything of real importance, and those few I did let him have were
only because he insisted on our sharing the risks together. Of course,
Beale murdered him after he found Rob wouldn't do a deal, which I
don't doubt he tried first. Then he did his best to get me out of the
way, because he knows well enough that I won't find life worth living
till the man who did it is hung. When I came home that night in
Brussels earlier than usual from my work and found Beale at my desk I
wish to heaven I had killed him instead of merely trussing him up and
beating it to Lille. But my pledge to Bonnot tied my hands. They're
free now.” Carter stretched them out along the table. Long, lean,
nervous hands. “At Lille, the little ferret fastened on me again and
pretty nearly did for me.”

“Pretty nearly,” agreed Pointer.

“It was a facer,” Carter repeated sombrely. “You see, I didn't know
whether I had an alibi for Rob's murder or not, for I didn't know what
hours were the vital ones, and I had been back in London, I had been
on the balcony, I remembered even the couple of boxes of vestas I'd
left Rob, and wondered if they would help to trace me out. And suppose
I got clear of the charge of having murdered my pard, I was done for
by the American frame-up. Only your catching Beale, and the way M.
Bonnot handled him, saved me. They wouldn't have let me off under
twenty years over there. Beale has tremendous political influence
through his paper. The police officer who put the warrant through was
some sort of a hyphenated Yank out for a political job.”

“Just so. Yes, I see.” Pointer turned to his note-book. “Now, to go
back to Erskine. Can you tell me what was the cause of the split
between him and the Heilbronners?”

“Rob never told me in so many words. He was in love with Mattie
Heilbronner, you know—Christine told me she'd given you the points of
the case as far as she knew them—but it was some trouble at the
factory at the beginning of the war that started it all. He believed
that he had stumbled on some devilish German plot to poison the
bandages. The mills were turning out hospital supplies, you know. He
was certain that old Heilbronner was at the back of it, and after that
all was over between them but the burial. Yet even so, when I had
knocked my first idea into workable shape, he insisted that the fair
thing to do was to offer it to the Amalgamated. They turned it down
and began hounding Rob and me out of the business. I won't go into it
all, but it only stiffened us. I worked my ideas into something better
and tried Bonnot of Lyons. It was really while I was lying in the
hospital there that I had come across a replica of an old loom which
gave me my first glimmering of an idea. Bonnot told you himself how he
took the thing up—cautiously at first and then enthusiastically. The
difficulty, however, for Rob and me was to get to Europe. We decided
to use Mrs. Erskine's money for that purpose, as it wouldn't save the
mills, and started away by different boats under assumed names. And
now, Inspector, will you let me help you? Or must I try on my own, or
with a private detective, to solve the how and the why of Rob's death?
_Who_ did it I feel pretty sure of, as I said.”

Pointer decided quickly. He could easier keep Carter under observation
in France than in England. To have had a hand in his partner's death,
that death that removed from him the necessity to repay past loans,
that left him in undisputed possession of a huge fortune,—he must have
had an accomplice. Any effort to communicate with the actual poisoner
would be far more difficult to carry out undetected in Nice than in
London.

“Thank you, Mr. Carter, for your offer. I am starting as soon as I can
get away for France—for Nice. I shall be very glad if you care to
come——”

“Care to come! You bet I do!”

“But you understand that it may be some time before I can ask your
help. There is a good deal of clearing up work—mere routine—to be done
first.” His tone implied that when a stroke of real genius was felt to
be needed, Carter's hour would come.

“I quite understand. As long as I can hope to be of any help—at any
time—I'll come. Christine feels as I do. We can't marry until this
thing is cleared up. She's as keen on seeing justice done Rob as I am,
or nearly so. He wasn't her partner as he was mine. If you'll come
downstairs we'll go around to her hotel and hear what she says for
herself.”

Christine had treated herself to comfortable rooms in a quiet hotel
near Baker Street. She was as emphatic as Carter that the one thing
for them to do now was to find out and bring to justice the murderer
of Robert Erskine. “Though I certainly wasn't much of a help to you?”
Her voice made it a question.

“Oh, I don't know about that. I don't deny that I hoped you might have
got hold of some direct clue while at the villa,—but that's always a
matter of luck, and Mrs. Erskine looks the kind of woman to keep her
own confidence—or the confidence of another, even supposing she knows
more than she chooses to say. Besides, remember you gave the very
important tip of the loaded revolver which she keeps at hand, and the
suggestion about her body-guard, as you think her friends may be.”

“You don't agree with me?”

The police-officer laughed. “Pointer's away on his holiday.
Impenetrable official reserve is the order of the day now, and on your
and Mr. Carter's part absolute, unquestioning obedience. Is that a
bargain? Thank you; I was sure that you would both see the necessity
for my making that an essential of your co-operation. And you must be
patient, Miss West. As I told Mr. Carter, there'll be a lot of spade
work to be done, if we are to discover any clues at Nice, before there
can be any question of either of you helping.”

Like her fiancé, Christine said she did not care how long she had to
wait, if only she could be of some use.

“Very well, then, we quite understand one another.” Pointer seemed
regardless of the fact that Carter's real thoughts were a subject of
much doubt to him, and that some of his speculations about them were
very far from being understood by that young man—“and agree that no
plan can be drawn up until I have reconnoitred thoroughly.”

“Would it be a help,” asked Christine, “if I were to stop with Mrs.
Erskine again?”

“I can't say yet.”

“I don't think I like the Chief Inspector as much as I did Mr.
Pointer.” Christine's smile robbed the speech of its bluntness.

“Oh, don't say that!” implored the officer. “Do be original and have a
good word for the police! But now about our going. Mr. Carter can
start at once. I shall follow by the day after to-morrow at the
outside. If you”—he turned to the Canadian—“will put up at, say, the
Negresco or the Angleterre, I shall find your name at once and be able
to get into touch with you. Should we meet by chance, we are, of
course, strangers. And you, Miss West, if you will let Mr. Carter know
where you are stopping near Nice——”

“It won't be Avignon!”

“—you could meet quietly. But not more than once a week, please, and,
naturally, always at different places and on different days. Through
him I shall have your address, and if you'll excuse my addressing you
inside any letter or telegram or 'phone as Miss”—his eyes fell on an
open magazine—“Miss Gladys——”

Christine shivered.

“—you will know that the message is from me. What name are you going
by, Mr. Carter?”

“Crane.”

“Good, and you are starting?”

“To-night, if I can get a ticket. But for God's sake don't let Beale
slip through your fingers. Mark my words, _he's_ the man!”

“He won't slip.” Pointer shook hands and walked briskly away. He had
arranged matters to his liking and his plans were in his own keeping.
He wired to the Nice police to be ready to keep an observant eye on
Mr. Crane. He would have been glad of the Canadian's immediate help,
but he intended to take no risks of confusing the trail.

Pointer's first act on arriving at Nice was to 'phone up the Canadian
at the Negresco. Over the wire he obtained a minute account of the way
he had spent his two days on the Côte d'Azur. Then he rang up his
police friend, and Carter's account of himself was verified in every
particular. So far so good. He next presented himself at Mrs.
Erskine's. That lady was lying down with a severe headache when his
card was taken in to her, but she sent him out word to please call
back later, as she very much appreciated his having come to see her.
Pointer found her quite full of questions—for her—as to Carter's
release. She evidently feared that the police had been hoodwinked by
some plausible villain.

“I'm not a revengeful woman,” she explained with her plaintive Scotch
accent, “but I do not want the murderer of my son to escape.”

The Chief Inspector had apparently no explanation to offer beyond the
fact of Carter's belated, but absolutely water-tight, alibi.

“Well, of course you must know your business best,” she murmured from
among her cushions, “but it would take more than a Frenchman's word to
have made me set that man free!”

She asked very kindly after Christine, and he did not mention the fact
of that young lady's coming marriage to the object of Mrs. Erskine's
suspicions.

Mrs. Erskine evidently feared that it would be quite useless, but she
had not the slightest objection to his going over again all the
Erskine letters in her possession.

“But Robert's letters are missing. You remember the packet I showed
you in Paris?”

Pointer did.

“When we returned here—Mrs. Clark came to fetch me: she thought I was
too ill to be left to Marie's care alone—the letters had gone. I am
sure I placed them in the top of my trunk, or saw Marie put them there
just before we started. I had them under my pillow before that. But
when Marie unpacked here there was no sign of them. On the whole, I am
not sure that their presence was not more of a grief than their
absence. But I confess the thought of those letters, sacred to me by
my loss, having been lost by some carelessness—” She paused with a
worried frown.

It was nearly half past eleven before Pointer made his appearance on
the following morning.

Mrs. Erskine had had an old trunk brought down from the attic in
which, as she sent him word, she kept everything belonging to family
matters of any kind.

There were several letters from Mr. Henry Erskine which were new to
the officer. They were all affectionate in tone. It was quite clear
from them that he only contemplated remaining away a twelvemonth on
his brother's ranch. In all of them, however, there was no faintest
clue, no hint of any mystery. The rest of the box concerned the
Abercrombies more than the Erskines, and the Chief Inspector gained a
very good idea of the stiff but honourable upbringing of Margaret
Erskine from them. He went through them and the old books, old bills,
and personal trifles which the trunk contained with amazing speed and
thoroughness. Then he shut the lid and stood awhile in thought. As he
stood there, he heard a soft thud in the next room. To a practised
ear, there is only one thing which makes that sound. A safe-door was
being closed in the wall adjoining. A few minutes later he heard Mrs.
Erskine speaking from the room beside him. She told Marie to be on
hand to let out the gentleman—she had referred to the Chief Inspector
as connected with her firm of lawyers—as soon as he should be
finished. She did not mention refreshments, he noted, though the day
was hot, and the work dry and dusty. Like Christine, Pointer saw that
the good lady did not encourage unnecessary expenditure.

He heard her deliberate steps cross the marble hall and the front door
shut. He heard Marie go into her mistress's room. Like a shadow he
stepped into the drawing-room, of which the door stood open. From an
oriel window he looked down at the car waiting below. There was a man
sitting in one of the front chairs and a handsome, painted, plump
woman on the back seat, dressed in the very height of fashion. Pointer
eyed her keenly through his glass from a discreet position behind the
curtains. Her black eyes were fastened on the front door. These were
evidently the Clarks, and even after Mrs. Erskine had taken her seat
he kept his glass levelled until the car turned up the drive and
purred out of sight.

He slipped back into the little room where the trunk still stood, and
when the maid looked in, after tidying the bedroom next door, she
found him apparently hard at work. He glanced up cheerily, to meet a
very gloomy stare.

“It's going to be a long job, eh, monsieur?”

“Looks like it. By the way, I forgot to say something to madame. At
what hour does she return?”

“Only just in time to dress for dinner. There is a great charity
bazaar on at the Castle at which madame has promised to help. She gave
us all tickets for the grounds.”

“Were you going, too? I heard that there were to be all sorts of
amusements.”

“I was going, but, if you wish it, I can stay . . .?”

Hope shone in her face again. Perhaps the jaunt would yet come off.

“No! no!” protested Pointer in genuine horror. “I may be here for
hours.”

A bank note was slipped into her hand. “Go and enjoy yourself, _ma
fille_, and drink my health at lunch.”

Marie was in the seventh heaven, what with the chance to get off for
the day after all, the twenty francs, and the compliment to her thirty
years. Within a quarter of an hour a _voiture_, with Marie, her
husband, the chef and Mrs. Clark's maid, drove off briskly; for, as
Marie said, in what better hands could the villa be left than in that
of a gentleman connected with madame's solicitors?

Pointer bolted the doors, and then walked rapidly through the house
from cellar to attic. Major Vaughan and his man were away at Monte
Carlo, the maid had told him, and he had it all to himself. He took
his coat off, and after his rapid general survey examined the rooms in
detail. Finally he came to Mrs. Erskine's bedroom. The walls were of
grey silk, with here and there grey velvet medallions. After a little
measuring he made for the panel beside the window. As on all the
others, oxydised metal traceries ornamented the oval. He pressed an
ornament which looked the shiniest to his keen eyes. A very few
experiments taught him the trick, and the panel swung open on its
hinges. At the same time three gongs clanged in muffled fury. Pointer
had spent some of his minutes, as he went over the house, to good
effect in stuffing sofa cushions around all electric alarums, or the
din would have been terrible. The telephone bell beside the bed rang
insistently.

“'Ello! 'Ello!” he called in answer; “yes, it is I, Guillaume, and not
a burglar. It was as well I had that little chat with you this
morning, eh?” and he hung up the receiver. Then he turned back to the
safe. A few minutes went by before even his skilled eyes found the
right knob which should have been turned first to silence the alarums.
The safe had been bought off a firm which had spared no expense in its
installation evidently. It was the only one on the premises, and he
hoped to find some interesting things in it. He looked at the safe
sitting like a shrine deep in its little niche with great respect. “So
it's an Aglae. Humph!”

The Aglae safes, turned out very sparingly by Creusot, are the last
word in their line. He knew them well. There was one in the
Commissioner's office at the Yard. They are pretty to look at. No
cumbersome, easily detected combination lock here. A little slit,
looking as innocent as a slot-machine, faced him, but any key, whether
of another Aglae or not, which was not the right one would set a
powerful alarum ringing against the light metal of the outer door
which no cushion could deaden, and it would ring until the right key
was inserted, if need be for thirty-five days. If a burglar, caring
nothing for keys, tried his usual tactics of cutting, he would find an
outer case which let itself be opened with ease, and out would stream
a volume of gas calculated to render anyone unconscious who stood near
it, even though the windows were open. Some Aglae had an alternative
plan by which a revolver emptied its six cartridges in the direction
where the first cut was made. Altogether, a slight acquaintance with
an Aglae was distinctly advisable for any up-to-date cracksman if he
wanted a chance to show his talents elsewhere.

Pointer whistled softly. There was only one man in Europe who could
help him. In Barcelona, at the foot of Tibidabo, lives a Catalan, a
Senor Foch, who works in a simple little shop with his son for the
police of seven countries; and lucky it was for the police that
honesty had been the motto of the two men, for there is nothing that
can be done to lock or key that they cannot do. Only a Foch could copy
the key of this safe, supposing Pointer could lay his hands on it for
a moment. The Catalans worked only on their own terms. Measurements,
weight, and impressions had to be taken, according to their strict
rules, or they would refuse the job.

He replaced everything as he had found it, took off the silencers from
the various alarums, and proceeded with his room to room inspection.
In Major Vaughan's flat he found some things which interested him
greatly. He even went so far as to take a tracing of some boots and
shoes he found up there, and very familiar the outline would have
looked to Watts, too, had he seen it.

It was close on six o'clock when he finished, and the only results to
the eye for a very fatiguing day was a little cardboard box of a kind
which had contained stationery, a tiny oval box retrieved from a dusty
corner of the attic, and a little yellow pill-box, marked “Mrs.
Erskine, 14 Ave. de Paris, Biarritz,” that had come from a deep pocket
of an old travelling bag. Yet with these, and his tracings, and his
other discoveries, the Chief Inspector felt more than satisfied.

Next morning he took his leave of Mrs. Erskine, and acknowledged that
she had been right in thinking that the papers which he had looked
over contained no clue.

“I'm quite sure that the criminal is that man you let go, Carter!”

He did not contradict her. “He's where we can put our hands on him at
any moment,” he assured her as he bowed himself out. He had timed his
departure to coincide with the hour at which he had learned from Marie
that the major and his man were expected to arrive from Monte Carlo.
The major would sometimes go regularly to the Casino for a week at a
time, or, as now, just for an occasional flutter; on the other hand,
months might go by without his trying his luck at the tables, where he
generally won. And indeed a week might pass without his leaving his
flat at all. He had been gassed in the war, Marie informed Pointer,
prompted by his easy questions, “and was now _un original_—_un
sauvage_, yet often still of a charm!”

The major returned in a dusty motor while Pointer still lingered over
some flowers behind a bush of heliotrope. The valet whipped open the
door. The major, a shrunken little man, stood blinking irritably into
the sunlight with red-rimmed eyes. He caught sight of the Clarks just
leaving in their tennis clothes.

“You look like solid ghosts,” he grunted in reply to their greetings.

“Won pots of money, you lucky man?” asked the lady.

“Oh, pots and pans!” he nodded. “As you say, I am a lucky devil. Know
the difference between a lucky devil and an unlucky one, Clark. You
_ought_, by Gad, but _do_ you?”

Mr. Clark, a sunburnt, good-natured looking man, apparently gave it
up.

“A lucky devil helps to skin others, an unlucky one can only be
skinned,” and the major, with the cackle Christine so much disliked,
walked into the house.

“Of a charm certainly!” repeated Pointer to himself with a faint grin
as he emerged from behind the flowering shrub and walked down to the
police, where his snapshot of the major was developed and enlarged, in
time for a copy to be despatched to the Yard in the evening, together
with a pressing request for further particulars as to the officer in
question.

Carter was next met in Pointer's quiet room at a Meublé near the
station. The detective officer had no directions to give the Canadian,
but asked a good many questions about Robert's letters, and to the
answers he paid the closest attention. That done, he took his
departure by the afternoon express. He got out at Marseilles, where he
waited for Watts to join him. That detective had been instructed by
telegram to leave Mr. Beale to the sole care of his mate and join the
Chief Inspector at the noisy, dirty port as soon as possible. Watts
was only too glad to descend from the crowded train and make his way
to the hotel, where Pointer gave him an account of the past day's
work.

“I don't want amateur help!” Pointer examined some _bouillabaisse_
with quite undeserved suspicion. “Carter, even supposing he were free
from suspicion—which he isn't—may be a useful chap, or may be an
absolute bungler. I haven't time to train budding talent in this
case.”

“And the young lady?”

“Is staying at Cannes. She's very keen to help, and I don't say that
she may not be useful, too; but give me the real thing, Watts. Had I
been able to get a good woman-detective into the villa in her place, a
good many doubts as to the character of Mrs. Erskine's ‘bodyguard’
might be over. However, I couldn't.”

Two nights later a loud ringing and banging on the door of the villa
disturbed the occupants just after they had separated for the night.
It was quite late, for they had all been to a theatre and supper
party. A postman stood at the door. Could he see Madame Erskine about
a cable which had come, marked “Urgent,” and which he was not sure was
meant for her, as beyond the name there was no address.

Mrs. Erskine, whose bedroom lights had only been twinkling a short
time, put her head over the window-sill and said that she would come
down at once. The man was told to enter, and the front door closed.

A figure crouching behind some bushes sprang lightly erect, waited a
moment or two, listening intently at a shuttered window—the window
into the lower hall—then, lifting a ladder lying buried in the earth,
stood it deftly against Mrs. Erskine's window ledge, and was up with
the swiftness of a cat. He took off his rubber shoes and left them on
the sill. Then he swung himself into the room and looked at the safe.
The door stood wide open, the key was in it. In a second the black
figure slipped to the bedroom door. Mrs. Erskine had left it locked.
He strode back to the safe, took out its key and weighed it carefully,
though swiftly, on a little balance. Followed several quick
measurements taken with a sort of dialled spanner, after which four
impressions had to be made in boxes containing the special Foch
compound. Balance, spanner, and boxes were returned to a little black
bag the man wore strapped to his waist. This done with the utmost but
unflurried haste, the key was replaced in the safe, and the figure
vanished the way it had come. The ladder was laid on the grass for a
moment, till the ground under the window had been smoothed with a
rake-head, also produced from the bag. In another minute ladder and
man seemed to melt, rather than to pass, through the gate.

The telegram was not for Mrs. Erskine after all, as a glance at its
obviously business contents told her. It took some time to make this
clear to the postman, who was an “extra,” and spoke with an atrocious
Basque accent—acquired during the retreat from Mons, when Watts'
company had got inextricably entangled with some of the blue Bérets.
Finally the postman grasped the truth, apologised, and “returned to
the post office to make further inquiries.” These seemed to lead him
to a small hotel in a back street, after a change of toilet in the
nearest dark doorway, which included turning his coat inside out,
ripping off some narrow red braid from each trouser leg, and
substituting one cap for another. That done, Watts went to bed, to
speculate with some curiosity on exactly what had taken place in the
villa during the colloquy in the central hall. He knew better than to
ask his superior, and finally consoled himself with the thought that
he would doubtless hear of it some day under “From information which
has just come to hand.”



Chapter X

Eight o'clock next morning found the Chief Inspector wrapped in
slumber. The Boots interrupted them to tell him that there was an
insistent telephone call for Mr. Deane—a lady speaking from Cannes.
Grateful for the fact that science did not yet enable Miss West to see
him as well as hear him, Mr. Deane descended the stairs sleepily after
the briefest of toilets.

“Gladys speaking. I was at Monte Carlo last night with some Americans,
and in the Rooms I saw a lady I had last seen in London at the hotel
which we so often talk about. She had room number twelve there. You
remember her, too, don't you?”

“Perfectly. What was she doing when you caught sight of her?”

A little gurgle came through. “Talking to Jack.”

“Indeed!” Pointer's voice sounded as amused as hers, but his eyes were
hard and keen. “Oh, indeed! Had she got rid of her cold?”

“You'll have to ask him. I was miles away from them, stuck in a block
of people around one of the tables. But it seems that Jack was only
telling her the way out.”

“You saw him later on?”

“No. He too had vanished by the time I got clear. You see, he didn't
expect me there. I had tried to 'phone him, but he was out all day.
But I got through to him the first thing this morning.”

Pointer's free hand gave an impatient tap to the table.

“Bless all amateurs!” he would have liked to reply, but he changed it
instead to “I see. But first about yourself. You didn't notice where
Miss—umph——”

“Twelve went to?”

“No, I only saw her for the one second, but I thought you'd be
interested.”

“Quite right. How was she dressed?”

“Beautifully, I guess. I can't get used to people leaving all their
clothes behind them, but she had as much on as the wife of one of your
ambassadors who was there, too, and Miss Les—Twelve had the finer
jewels.”

“Did Mr. Crane have anything interesting to tell you about her?”

“Oh, no, he was merely watching a table when she asked him the way
out. She was standing beside him you see, and as she really was a
lady, and alone, and had got separated from her husband, why, of
course, he showed her the way out himself. In the vestibule sure
enough was the husband, and they went off together. John had had
enough of the rooms—and isn't the air hot inside—so he roamed along
the _terasse_—you know what a wonderful night it was, and then after
supper at the Paris motored back to Nice. But say now, Mr. Deane,
don't you want to come and have a nice long talk with me, or have me
come and see you? I'm so dull here.”

There was nothing she could do yet, Pointer assured her, by which he
meant that there was nothing he wanted her to do, and remained adamant
in spite of all her appeals. His next 'phone was to Watts to come
immediately to the hotel. Then he rang up Carter, who having a 'phone
beside his bed answered at once, but apparently he could add nothing
to Miss West's account. Until Christine had 'phoned him half an hour
before he had had no idea as to who the lady was who had spoken to him
last night at the Monte Carlo Rooms. Her husband was a smart,
youngish-looking man with something military about his get-up. Where
the couple went to Carter did not try to see.

Toule, the French detective “attached” to Carter, when questioned next
on the 'phone, only knew that “Mr. Crane” had taken a car from the
hotel and driven along the Corniche road to Monte Carlo, returning
late at night—about twelve the hotel-porter said.

“Humph!” was the only comment of Mr. Deane as he returned to his room,
where Watts was already waiting.

“Watts, get off to Monte Carlo at once. Miss West saw Miss Leslie and
Carter talking together in the Rooms there last night. His explanation
is”—the Chief Inspector repeated the conversations. “You have a
snapshot of her—” The ladies occupying both No. 12 and No. 11 of the
Enterprise had been snapshotted going down the hotel steps on the
Monday following the discovery of “Eames' suicide.” “Rake the coast
from Ventimiglia to Marseilles if you have to, but get on her track.
What will you go as?”

“Colonel Hunter,” Watts said gloomily. He disliked that gentleman
exceedingly, from his walrus moustache to his political opinions, and
his miserable golf handicap, but it was his best impersonation, and
the only one for which he had a passport.

“Right.”

The future Colonel bustled off after making a note or two. He did not
report for a couple of days, and then he called up Pointer to say that
Captain and Mrs. Anstruther were also stopping at the Negresco, where,
oddly enough, they had gone from the Hermitage, the afternoon after
the lady was seen talking to Carter. In the hotel a slight,
casual-looking acquaintance seemed to have been struck up between them
and Carter, ostensibly connected with his civility to Mrs. Anstruther
at Monte Carlo. The closest watching had as yet shown nothing
suspicious beyond the facts themselves.

Within the hour a tall, dark-haired, black-moustached man sent in his
name to Mrs. Anstruther as one of the _Daily Post's_ reporters.

It was Captain Anstruther who came down into the lounge instead.

“My wife does not care to be interviewed,” he said shortly, handing
back his card to “Mr. Wiley.” “We are at a loss to understand why she
should be singled out for the favour.”

“It's about her contract at the Columbine,” the journalist said
chattily, “but you might do as well. The _D.P._ wants to know what has
become of Miss Leslie and——”

“Come upstairs.” Captain Anstruther spoke with more haste than
hospitality. “I don't know how you got on to the fact that my wife was
Miss Leslie. . . .”

“Recognised her.”

“Well, you tell your paper that she's retired into private life. Look
here, it's worth our while to make it worth _your_ while to mention no
names. See?”

“I do. But our paper thinks she married a Mr. Black, of Richmond,—or
no, another place on the river——”

Captain Anstruther looked still more vexed.

“Of all the damned spying!—I'm a nephew of those Blacks as a matter of
fact. Look here, keep all names out of the papers”—he squeezed a note
into the journalist's hand, who returned it promptly.

“I should get the sack if I tried that game. I can keep all names
out—possibly—without palm-oil. It's her broken contract anyway that
our paper's keen on. Why wasn't she sued? And why no announcement of
the wedding?”

Captain Anstruther bit his lip.

“Look here, Wiley, you seem a decent chap. I'll, well—I'll take you
into our confidence. I'm divorced from my first wife, and Miss
Leslie's people are Romans and fearfully pie. They'd have a fit. So,
as they're buried alive in Cumberland, they'll never know—at least
till the honeymoon is over—unless some paper spreads it broadcast. As
to the contract—I squared the management under a pledge of the
strictest secrecy. Now then, have a drink, and see how little you can
tell about us, there's a good chap. You might let me see your article
if you would?”

The journalist sipped his tumbler of lemonade.

“Look here,” he said impulsively, “I'll scratch the whole item. I've
always admired Miss Leslie immensely. I wouldn't for the world do
anything to annoy her. But I wonder if she wouldn't do us instead an
article on ‘How it feels to be on the Stage,’ or some ‘Reminiscences.’
She could sign her old name to them all right.”

“I'll bring her in and you can ask her yourself.”

Miss Leslie was quite taken with the idea of a fortnightly article.

The first one on “Hardships of the dressing-room” would let her fire
off quite a few burning truths she had often wished to singe the
manager with in the days of her comparative poverty. And it would keep
her people quiet.

Mr. Wiley only stipulated that the articles should be sent through
him, and that he must, of course, be kept in touch with the authoress
until the series of six articles for which he contracted in the name
of his paper was finished. The Anstruthers, who knew nothing of the
newspaper world, were quite impressed by Mr. Wiley's ability and
helpful suggestions, and he left the apartment with their permanent
address in his pocket.

He walked back to the Chief Inspector's hotel, whence a 'phone to
Watts relieved that detective of some of his anxiety, for to watch a
person with a known address is a very different job than keeping an
eye on a homeless wanderer who may vanish utterly within a quarter of
an hour. A telegram to the Yard brought the confirmation of the
marriage, the bride's Roman Catholic parents in Cumberland, and of the
husband's large estates in Devon. Of the lady herself Pointer had a
mixed impression. On the whole he pigeon-holed her as belonging to
those women who, outwardly well bred, can be swung completely off
their balance by but one force—the power of money. She struck him as a
woman determined to have her share—and as much more perhaps as she
could compass—of the good things of life. He took her husband to be of
different calibre, and in his case the incentive of a possible need of
money would be absent. So she had married a relation of the young
fellow she had braved the rain storm on that August Saturday to see.
He had not turned up, and whatever the reason the Chief Inspector
wondered idly whether Black ever knew that it was his absence which
had cost him the lady's affections.

On the evening of the next day arrived the key from Barcelona—the key
which he hoped would successfully unlock the Aglae safe in the villa.

At Nice there is some society function every night during the season.
This night it was a big ball in honour of a Spanish prince at Baron
Boron's castle on its beautiful hill. All the Riviera world would be
there. He and Watts, taken off duty temporarily, watched the departure
of the motor containing Mrs. Erskine, the Clarks, and Major Vaughan.
Leaving the other man near the gate to give an alarm, if need should
arise, Pointer, after allowing the servants time to be gathered
comfortably around the supper table, mounted a ladder as once before;
but this time it was a silk one, which he lifted over the sill once he
had entered by Mrs. Erskine's window, which stood open, for the night
was warm. The door safely bolted, the Chief Inspector approached the
safe and disconnected the alarums. Even his heart beat faster as he
inserted the Foch key. It turned easily, the door swung open, and with
a deep breath the police-officer took off his hat mentally to Foch as
he looked inside.

Three hours later he touched Watts on the shoulder, and leaving him to
taxi back to the Negresco, where Mr. Crane was among the
“not-invited,” Pointer sent off a pile of telegrams to all the
air-stations near London.

The replies drifted in next day. Among them was an answer to an
earlier request for information concerning Major Vaughan. That officer
had distinguished himself on several occasions during the Great War,
and it was a matter of comment that he had not received either the
Military or the Victoria Cross which had been as good as promised him.
His means were believed to be small. He had not returned to London for
many years now, and was reported to suffer from weak lungs, which
needed Riviera sunshine.

M. Guillaume of the Préfecture knew nothing against the major, any
more than he did against the Clarks. All three seemed to the French
police to be model Riviera guests, wealthy, well-born, and
entertaining a good deal. Only the major's health was not up to the
rest of his report. It sometimes necessitated seclusions for a week at
a time in his charming bachelor flat, but Pointer agreed that this
could hardly be considered a moral blemish. He walked along the
Promenade des Anglais to think it all out. But in vain did the azure
arms of land bend around one of the loveliest bays in the world, a sea
of cobalt and violet and silver. In vain did sunshine, African in its
splendour, beat on him. The Chief Inspector's thoughts were brooding
on too black a crime to take their hue from Nature. Though he strolled
under the palm trees beside beds of nodding cyclamen, in reality he
walked only along a twisted, tortuous murder trail, which still
baffled him. Now and again he faced the casino, rising from the sea
with gilded cupolas and airy pinnacles like a fairy palace, but he saw
ever instead a young man's dead face—and a wardrobe—and a poison
draught—and motives obscure and dark.

He decided to start that night for Biarritz. Since he could not pick
up the ends of the threads here, he might chance on them further back
in the surroundings of the widow years before she moved to this side
of France. Colonel Hunter he left to hover around Carter, in spite of
Watts' hints that the villa might yield a better harvest to an
unobtrusive investigator.

“I've arranged that with Guillaume at the Préfecture. A hint that Mrs.
Erskine may possibly be in some danger, which I hope to locate
shortly, will keep her safe. Not that I anticipate any trouble. As for
you, shadow Carter closely, and trail him if he leaves Nice.” A few
directions followed as to where, and when, to communicate with
himself; and Watts, willy-nilly, had to readjust Colonel Hunter's
buttonhole and, stroking that warrior's moustache firmer into place,
descend the stairs, meditating on the charms of a farm in Canada, or a
free life in Australia, careers for which he had as much talent or
real liking as a mole might have for catching birds.

Pointer found Mrs. Erskine's circle in Biarritz almost impossible to
reconstruct after fifteen years. However, he at last unrolled the main
outlines to where she had left to spend the summer on a farm further
in the Pyrenees. Here the path seemed to end, till an idea came to
him. A library! Especially a circulating library with English books!
He found the only one in Biarritz. The manager told him he had kept it
over thirty years. Did he have all books entered? Naturally, the owner
in Paris was most particular. Could he trace any library books which
might have been sent out to No. 42, Avenue de Paris, fifteen years
ago? He could, but he did not look enchanted at the prospect, until
Pointer begged him to use the trifle he pressed into his hand to buy
himself some cigars. Next morning the police-officer got his money's
worth. The manager had found three entries fifteen years ago to a Mrs.
Erskine, but the books had not been sent to the address the Chief
Inspector had given, but to a farm near St. Jean de Luz. Pointer
taxied at once to the place. It was still in the same hands, and
Monsieur Jaureguibarry recognised the portrait of Mrs. Erskine, but
knew none of her friends, except her companion, though he could not
remember that lady's name. His visitor's book gave Paris as the
objective of the two ladies on leaving the Basque farm.

“Paris,” mused Pointer. He hoped that she had made some stop on the
way, and, allowing for the length of the journey from the farm, he
decided to try Bayonne as the first likely place. He had guessed
rightly, and found Mrs. Erskine's name on an old register of the Grand
Hotel. She seemed to have made a stay of over three weeks there, and
he sallied out on his round of questions once more. First of all was a
telegram to Russell asking for all details in full of any “companions”
Mrs. Erskine had ever had, and what had become of them. The reply
arrived after a little delay.

“We know only of two women who acted as companions to Mrs. Erskine.
First a Scotswoman, Janet Fraser by name, whom she mentions once in a
letter about a year after her husband's death. She is dead. Then in a
mortgage executed by Mrs. Erskine some four years later as a witness
to her signature we have an entry of ‘Mabel Baker. Companion to Mrs.
Erskine.’ Am posting document to you.”

Mabel Baker! Mabel—— Pointer's eyes snapped. The passport of Mrs.
Clark found in the safe at the villa did not give her maiden name, but
he had written to the passport office for the particulars furnished by
her when applying for it. On her application form she had entered her
name as Mabel Baker, daughter of Arthur Baker, of Norwich. He had
tried unsuccessfully to find out anything about Arthur Baker, the
father, and all that he knew of herself and her husband was that their
forms had been signed by their London bank-manager, who was unable
after so many years to furnish any particulars Their address was a
house in Kensington which had long ago been converted into flats, so
that all efforts to trace the couple further back or further forward
had failed, but here at last was a new fact that fitted a theory of
Robert Erskine's murder, which since the night when Foch's key had
opened the safe had been steadily accumulating weight in his mind.

Christine felt more and more disappointed as the weeks passed and no
sign came from Pointer. Nothing seemed to be being done. He had spoken
of spade work, but she feared that the police had dug themselves in,
and that valuable time was being lost. She even began to doubt their
keenness. After all it was they who had actually blundered so far as
to imprison her John. Might they not be off on some other equally
wild-goose chase? Carter preached patience at their weekly meetings,
but he could not hide his surprise at the slowness of the official
tempo. Pointer would have been grimly amused could he have heard them.
The two young people talked in odd _confiseries_ or took excursions
together, meeting “by chance” in the tram, and having lunch “by
chance” in the same inns, with a tea also by the same coincidence in
the same cake-shop, or on the same hotel verandah. Luck, however,
never favoured them to such an extent that they were quite alone. Some
man, now old, now young, now middle-aged, was sure to be already
there, or come in with them, or enter before they were more than
seated. It never occurred to Christine that the faithful Watts was on
duty, and that a great deal more than she would have cared for was
absorbed by his attentive ears.

One day, when the Chief Inspector had been close on a fortnight away,
Carter watched Christine get down from the tram and pass in through
the doors of the Galeries Lafayette. They had already said good-bye
for another week before boarding the tram at the top of the hill, but
he watched her, thinking that there was no gait in the world to touch
hers. Christine had decided that new gloves were a necessity even
though the question of clothes did not interest her at all in these
dark days. While she was trying on a pair, a voice, low and faintly
monotonous, spoke to her. It was Mrs. Erskine. She asked Christine to
come back to the villa for tea. The girl accepted at once, for she
hoped to hear that Pointer after all had been making some fresh
discovery, of which the mother had been kept informed. But Mrs.
Erskine had nothing to tell her, as she complained during the drive
back, and both women lamented the proverbial stupidity of Scotland
Yard. The Scotswoman asked Christine to pass on at once into the
_loggia_ used for tea on warm days, while she took off her things. The
_loggia_ was a pretty spot, with well-placed mirrors duplicating the
scenery, and gay with tubs of flowering plants. There were a couple of
rows of books running around its three sides, and Christine idly
picked up a Paris guide. It belonged, as she saw by the name in it, to
Mrs. Clark. A loose sheet of letterpaper fell out as she turned it
over. It was the first half-sheet of a letter. Christine's eyes grew
larger. It was in Robert's handwriting,—a letter to his mother—a
Christmas letter dated four years back. She stiffened. Over and over
again she read the words, they were the ones which had disagreeably
struck the Chief Inspector in Paris. Christine folded the half-sheet
carefully away. Mrs. Erskine had tea alone with her. There was
evidently a bridge party going on below. She tried to continue their
conversation of the car about the impasse in her son's “case,” but
Christine let each question drop until her hostess had had some tea.
She was anxious that the shock of what she had to say should not be
too much for one whose health was so delicate. When the tea-things had
been cleared away, she spoke slowly.

“I _have_ got something I should like to say about Rob's case, but
could I talk it over with you in your boudoir? This is such an open
place.”

Mrs. Erskine looked at her very keenly. In silence she led the way,
and closed the door behind her visitor.

Christine held out the half-sheet of note-paper. “This dropped out of
a book of Mrs. Clark's I happened to pick up while waiting for you
just now.”

Mrs. Erskine put on her glasses. Her hand went out in a sudden nervous
little jerk. “One of my Robert's letters! Oh, let me have it! I
thought I had lost them all!”

Christine gauged the mother's affection by the eagerness of the voice
and eyes. She had never seen Mrs. Erskine show her heart so clearly,
and her own went out warmly to the widowed, childless woman before
her. “Mrs. Erskine,” Christine moistened her lips, “there's been a
strange mistake somewhere. That looks like a letter from Robert, but
it isn't! He never wrote those lines. Never!”

“What?” Mrs. Erskine turned very pale—“what do you mean?” The
half-sheet which she held in her hand shook till Christine wondered
that it did not rattle.

“You see, _I_ wrote Rob's Christmas letter for him four years ago. He
had burnt his hand badly at the mills, and couldn't go anywhere, so
that we had a quiet time together, like old times. He dictated a
letter to you and I wrote it. Jack can tell you the same thing.
Besides, you might have known that Rob couldn't—wouldn't have written
like that.”

Mrs. Erskine seemed dazed. “But—but—they were all alike. All his
letters were the same. . . . And who's Jack?”

“A friend of mine who used to know Rob well—in Canada. I'm so sorry
to've sprung this on you, but you ought to know it, and at least you
can comfort yourself with the thought that your son never wrote such
horrible letters as you have been thinking all these years. Surely
someone with you must have had a motive to intercept your son's
letters, and forge others in their stead.”

“It's his paper—the paper he always used.” Mrs. Erskine seemed quite
dazed. She gave Christine the impression of a woman speaking in a
nightmare.

“It may be, but it's not his letter. You see, I happen to be in a
position to swear to that one, and to prove it in time. Lots of other
people knew of his accident. Now, Mrs. Erskine, who is there who could
have done so wicked, so cruel a thing?”

Mrs. Erskine suddenly got up, as though she found the room stifling.
She looked ghastly, and to Christine she looked frightened as well.

“I must be alone—this shock—this blow—I want time”—she held out a
cold, shaking hand—“will you come back—it's now five. Will you come
back at seven without fail? Without fail? I—promise me you won't speak
of this to anyone in the meanwhile. I know a French detective, not so
far from here, before whom I want to lay the case. He is the only man
who can solve this riddle. But I'll go into that later when you come
back. Promise that you won't speak of it to anyone in the meanwhile. I
have a feeling that absolute secrecy is essential if this mystery is
to be unravelled,—and unravelled it must be—and quickly!”

Christine would have taken the widow's hand, but Mrs. Erskine did not
see her gesture. There was something fierce in her eyes. Action, not
sentiment, was evidently rising rapidly in her heart to the exclusion
of any softer feeling. Christine mentally apologised to her for ever
having thought her dull and cold.

“But what about the Inspector?” she asked gently.

“You mean yon English policeman? That dolt has done nothing but muddle
and muddle along. And where is he now? Away on his holidays, I
shouldna be surprised.”

Christine made a little deprecatory _moue_.

“Still, the case is in his hands,” she ventured, and remembering how
he had come to the help of them all at Lille, she repeated more
firmly. “I do think you owe it to him to let him know about this at
once.”

“And where is he to be found?” Mrs. Erskine asked fiercely; “tell me
that?”

Christine had not the faintest idea, and said so. She could not add
that the Chief Inspector had told her to consult Mr. Watts should any
emergency arise while he was away.

Mrs. Erskine sank back into her chair. “He bade me 'phone to the
Préfecture if anything unexpected should happen, and it's aye the
unexpected to that man that happens in all his cases, I'm thinking.
Well, instead of the Préfecture, I am going, as I told you, to employ
a most clever French detective of whose skill I've had some verra good
proofs indeed in other days. Now, Christine, my dear”—she had never
called the girl that before—“just send a wire, or a letter, to your
_pension_ in Cannes and bide the night here with me. I have much to
do. I need you. Leave me to myself now, but come you back at seven
without fail and we will see what my Frenchman can do to clear up this
dreadful discovery of yours.” Mrs. Erskine was deeply moved. She
folded one trembling hand over the other, as though to keep them quiet
by force.

“I canna believe it”—she turned her glowing eyes on the girl—“I canna
yet believe what you've told me. To-night you must let me hear
anything that you remember from my Rob's letters. The letters that I
never received.”

Mrs. Erskine covered her face with her hands, and only made a gesture
of farewell as Christine passed her.

“Don't fail me!” she breathed, and the girl laid a tender hand for a
second on the bowed shoulder.

She herself spent the interval as in a dream. What did it mean? What
could it mean? Was there really someone in the house with Mrs. Erskine
who had substituted those brutal begging letters; but how had they
been able to profit by the money? Surely there could not have been an
accomplice at the other end as well? Someone who could take Mrs.
Erskine's letters with their money contents and change them again for
the cold, formal epistles which alone had reached Rob? Yet he had been
allowed to receive the thousand pounds! Christine felt her head in a
whirl, and she tried to think of something else as she walked by the
sea. There was something, too, in Mrs. Erskine's manner which
suggested that she knew more than she would admit. She was afraid of
something, or someone. What or who? Christine was thankful that the
mother could turn to an expert who could throw daylight on what seemed
so dark, and to whom the other would at last speak out.

It was not quite seven when she returned to the villa.


It was on the afternoon of the same day that Pointer set out for Nice.
He 'phoned to Christine from Marseilles, where the train had a wait.
The puzzle had yielded to the key. He knew now the truth about Robert
Erskine's murder, but he wanted her help with regard to his letters to
his mother.

The Chief Inspector was told that mademoiselle was out, but would be
back in the afternoon. A 'phone to the Negresco informed him that
Crane was away too. He wondered if he had struck the weekly meeting
day of the young couple, and left a message for Christine to expect a
'phone from Nice at the hour when his train arrived. A few words over
the instrument would tell him all that he wanted to know. To “Colonel
Hunter” he wired instructions to meet Mr. Deane at the station.

Watts met him, but it seemed that Miss West had not yet returned to
her _pension_. Not only that, but she had 'phoned about an hour ago to
say that she was spending the night in Nice with friends, and would
possibly be away a day or two. “Yes, mademoiselle had sent the 'phone
herself.”

“The devil!” murmured Pointer thoughtfully; “that can only mean she's
at the villa! The very devil! Where's Carter?” he asked aloud of
Watts, who as yet had heard nothing concerning the other's journey.

“He is to dine with the Anstruthers to-night. When I left he was
playing tennis with one of the Chapman boys.”

“Humph!” grunted Pointer, “we'll try to get him.”

Carter's voice answered him at once.

“Hello! That you, Deane? At last! Anything turned up? What? Where's
Miss West? In Cannes. She was going back by the three-fifteen. Am I
sure? No, I can't be sure, as she never lets me see her off. Orders,
you know. But when I left her at half-past two that was her intention.
Is anything the matter?”

“Not that I know of, but keep near the 'phone for a few minutes, will
you?”

“You bet!” Pointer heard before he disconnected. He promptly rang up
Mrs. Erskine. That lady, too, was out, Marie's voice informed him. Had
Miss West been there during the afternoon? Yes, she had had tea with
madame, and had left a little before six o'clock. No, she had not
returned.

Again the Chief Inspector looked thoughtfully at his boot-tips. Watts,
who knew his little ways, wondered what was worrying him. In another
second Pointer was speaking to Carter again and asking him to come
around to his hotel at once in the big car he hired regularly.

“For God's sake, tell me is there anything wrong with Christine,”
urged the Canadian; but the Chief Inspector hung up the receiver. He
next tried to get into touch with the Préfecture, but the line was
occupied, and before he got through Carter's car was at the door and
that young man was in the room.

“Look here, you can't keep silence like this. What's wrong? Why did
you ask about Christine?”

“I'd like to know where she is,” was all Pointer would reply. “She's
not at her _pension_; I want to find out just where she is. Drive to
the villa.”

It was close on eight o'clock when the car rushed up the drive. Pierre
came out at once.

“M. and Mme. Clark were out. They had left after six o'clock, he
thought.” He himself looked slightly dishevelled. Marie came running
down from the floor above.

“Ah, I thought it _was_ your voice, Monsieur Pointer! What a pity
madame is out. But pray come in and rest yourselves, gentlemen.” They
followed her upstairs into the drawing-room.

“Major Vaughan in?” asked Pointer.

For answer she went to the little house 'phone on the wall. There was
no reply to her ringing.

“He is out, and his man, too, monsieur.”

“Do you know when madame will return? We must see mademoiselle as soon
as possible. It is most important. She has not gone back to Cannes. We
made sure that she would be spending the night here. Are you certain
that she did not come back later and go out with Madame or the
Clarks?”

“Ah-h, that was, of course, quite possible. As a matter of fact there
had been a dreadful upset here. Madame Clark had lost the wonderful
emerald pendant she values so highly.”

She had discovered her loss a little before six, and after that Marie
hardly knew what had happened. Pierre had been sent post haste in a
taxi way out to the _Palais des Marguerites_, where Madame Clark had
been last night, in case . . . It was absurd to send him, but Madame
Clark and her husband, usually so gay, were quite beside themselves;
even the _chef de cuisine_ and the kitchen man had been made to help
in the hunt,—been sent all the distance to some lunch place at Monte
Carlo. Madame Clark had got Madame Erskine to send her, Marie, in a
taxi to Antibes, where the Clarks had been during the late afternoon.
As for Madame Clark's own maid, it was her afternoon off. Marie did
not know whether the pendant had been found or not during their
absence. She herself had only just got back when M. Pointer
telephoned, and as for Pierre, he also was but just returned—the
others were still away. But as the car was out, the Clarks were out,
and madame as well as the major were out, Marie thought that the
emerald must have found itself, and the household be taking its
evening amusements as usual. But what a day! Oh, la, la!

Pointer walked swiftly through the rooms of the flat, followed by
Carter, silent and anxious. Watts, at a whisper, was looking over the
rest of the house, beginning—thanks to his pass-key, with the major's
rooms. Pointer stopped in a small dining-room Mrs. Erskine used for
herself, or a very small dinner party of intimate friends.

“When was the last meal served here?”

“Not for over a week, monsieur.”

Pointer asked Marie to be kind enough to 'phone to a Mr. Deane at the
Moderne to join him as soon as convenient at the villa. “He is a sort
of guardian of mademoiselle. If he is not in, ask them in the hotel to
look for him, and kindly wait by the 'phone. He will be in shortly in
any case.”

Having thus got rid of her for some little time, Pointer stopped and
picked up a couple of fair-sized crumbs.

“They're quite fresh. Someone's had a meal here recently.” He motioned
Carter to stand with his back against the door, and opened a couple of
cupboards. He glanced keenly at the bottom plates of a little pile.

“Still greasy. Been wiped with a newspaper.” He felt inside all the
cups. “Two are quite wet.” He paused over some teaspoons before he
hunted on, as though for something more definite still. Finally he
pounced on a crumpled little newspaper thrust into an empty cardboard
box on the back of the lowest shelf. He opened this out on the table.
A few scraps of bread and ham were inside. “Two people have had a meal
of sorts within the hour.” He shut the cupboards, whisked off the lace
centre and emptied the waste-paper basket on the polished surface.
More crumbs, bits of litter, and a faded flower tumbled out. Pointer
pounced on this last.

“A clove carnation. Was Miss West wearing any? There are none about.”

“Not when I saw her.”

“Marie!” called Pointer, and the maid came running up. “Was
mademoiselle wearing carnations when she came to tea?”

Marie shook her head with a smile.

“Ah, monsieur met her, then, later? I did give her a bunch when she
was leaving. Mademoiselle loves them so.”

Marie was quite certain that Christine had only been in the _loggia_
and the boudoir during her afternoon call.

Watts, who had joined the little group, shook his head. No one was in
the house. Pointer walked swiftly downstairs and out on to the drive.

“How much petrol has been taken, Pierre?” asked the Chief Inspector.
“As I said, we must catch up with mademoiselle, in her own interests,
to-night. It is a question of a paper she must sign. These gentlemen
have come as witnesses.”

Pierre rushed off to the garage. “No tin has been touched, and there
was very little in the car.”

Pointer stood motionless. Carter started to speak, but a glance from
the police-officer's eyes stopped him. Every mental nerve of Pointer's
was strung taut to the call he was making on it. Where had Christine
gone or been taken? He wasted no time on speculating on the why. He
looked at the tyre-tracks from the garage to the house, which showed
fairly clearly in the dust.

“Those wheels wouldn't do for any hill climbing. Who generally drove
the car?” he asked in French.

“Generally M. Clark. Sometimes, though rarely, M. le Majeur. Neither
would try to climb with those tyres.”

“And very little petrol . . . humph!” Pointer picked up the 'phone
mouthpiece and called a number, adding a code word swiftly.

“'Ello! Monsieur Guillaume there, by any chance, still? Ah, Monsieur
Garnier! You will do perfectly. No, it is nothing to do with my 'phone
from Tarascon this morning. That matter is all arranged, thanks to
your colleague, but I would like to know whether Madame Erskine owns a
launch or a yacht? No? Then, will you kindly have inquiries made at
once as to whether one has been hired to-day, late in the afternoon,
by anyone at the villa. It is most urgent.”

Pointer walked up and down, saying nothing. Carter, very pale, stared
hard at him, but did not offer to speak. Watts was lost in
speculation. The Chief Inspector leapt to the instrument at the bell's
first premonitory tinkle.

“Yes? Ah, good! Madame Clark hired it, you say. One of the swiftest
steam launches here. By 'phone about six, to await her at the harbour
steps by seven? Five people in all? Three ladies—one young—and two
men. That is the party. Oh, thank you, we should indeed be most
grateful. There are three of us. We will be with you in a little
minute, and if your surgeon could accompany us he might come in
useful. I do not know what we shall find.”

Carter blanched as he heard him.

Pointer turned to the other two.

“Your car, Carter! Miss West is on a launch which we shall be able to
overhaul on a still faster police boat which the Préfecture puts at
our disposal. We're in plenty of time.” But Pointer ran down the steps
and leapt up beside the driver's seat as though the margin of safety
were not so wide as he had said.

A direction or two, a turn of Carter's wheel, and they whirled up to a
quiet part of the old town's harbour where lay a wicked looking little
craft. A gendarme took charge of the car, they stepped aboard, and off
the launch flew like an arrow through the quiet blue evening.

“So Mrs. Clark arranged this party, did she?” Pointer said with a hard
stare through the lovely lilac shades of the early evening. “I fancy
it will be her last pleasure jaunt for some time.”

“What is it you're afraid of, in Heaven's name?” Carter asked, as so
often before; but Pointer only shook his head.

“Too complicated to explain just now. I think we shall be in plenty of
time.”



Chapter XI

“Is Mrs. Erskine in any danger, too?” Watts ventured in an aside as
the boat cut through the smooth water.

“In very grave danger, indeed, I fancy.”

“And shall I still keep an eye on him?” “Him” was Carter, staring
ahead of the two police-officers.

“You won't need to, after to-night,” was the oracular reply.

“There she is!” Carter called suddenly. “There's the large steam
launch you described.”

He was right. It was the _Hirondelle_, the boat that Mrs. Clark had
hired. Pointer, once he knew that she was the one they wanted, hardly
glanced at her: his eyes were fixed on a black stretch of water,
beyond a projecting arm of land, which lay sombre and unlit.

“Catch her up before she reaches that.”

“The ‘Devil's Sock,’ as our smugglers call it? _Bien._ We shall do
it.”

And they did. The launch when hailed stopped instantly.

“Who is it?” called Clark's breezy voice, in his bad French. “Anything
wrong? Can we help?”

The police cutter closed up. In the light of its electric lamps the
face talking to them changed suddenly, the jaw slackened, the eyes
darted furtively from the police-boat to the pleasure craft about, who
were watching the meeting with curiosity.

“It's all right, Mr. Clark,” the Chief Inspector answered civilly as
he mounted the ladder swiftly, followed by Carter and Watts. “Only
Miss West is most urgently wanted, and we heard that she had gone out
with you in the swiftest launch in Nice, so I borrowed a
police-cutter.” He had opened the door of the little cabin as he
spoke. Carter would have pushed in first if the other's sheer bulk had
not prevented it. As for Watts, a glance from Pointer made him wait
outside.

In the unusually large and airy cabin sat the three other occupants of
the villa and Christine. The women lay back in their chairs with
closed eyes as though asleep; only Major Vaughan blinked evilly at
them.

“Christine!” Carter fell on his knees beside her. “Christine!” He
shook her gently. “She's unconscious. Give me some brandy—some
coffee.” His gaze swept the table doubtfully.

Pointer said something over the rail, and a man stepped up on to the
deck.

“Here is the surgeon. He'll soon tell us if anything serious is the
matter.”

The doctor rolled up Christine's eyelid, felt her pulse, and poured
her out some brandy from his flask. He looked at a coffee-tray on the
table, smelt the coffee, tasted it, and added his brandy to a cup of
the steaming beverage. “She'll be all right with as much of that as
you can get her to drink.”

He bent over the other two women. “Same here. Opium den, eh?” He
whispered to Pointer, who nodded.

A French sergeant of police stepped in, curled his moustache fiercely,
and made a few notes in a book.

“You will all accompany me to the police-station for inquiries on
arrival in the harbour.”

The major cackled softly.

“Why? The ladies would try a little dose of my Eastern friend. I told
them beginners should go slow.”

“_Il n'y' a pas d'explications!_” snapped the Frenchman, seating
himself between the two men, while Watts lounged against the door.
Christine opened her eyes drowsily, and closed them after a look of
infinite relief as she saw Carter's face bending over her. Another sip
or two, and she was able to stagger outside, and supported by Carter
and the doctor walk up and down in the fresh air.

“Where's Mrs. Erskine—Mrs. Erskine's in danger,” she suddenly babbled
after her second cup. “And I thought I saw Mr. Pointer——”

“Here I am, Miss Christine,” came the cheery answer as the Chief
Inspector relieved the doctor, who returned to the cabin to look after
the other two ladies.

“Oh, Mr. Pointer!” Christine clutched the cup he held out to her
dizzily.

“I—there's a letter Mrs. Erskine has which Rob never wrote—someone's
deceived her all these years. He never wrote any of them.” She tried
to speak coherently. Pointer pressed her arm soothingly.

“I know. Don't you worry, Miss West. You let Carter take you home and
sleep this off till he calls for you in the morning.”

“But Mrs. Erskine—those horrible men—Mrs. Erskine——”

“She's quite safe now. Watts is in the cabin. I shall stay with her,
and when Carter has seen you safely into Madame Secret's hands at my
hotel—she's plenty of empty rooms—he'll join me, and between us Mrs.
Erskine will be well taken care of, don't you think so yourself?”

Christine could not think yet. Her mind could only give out the
impressions made on it while it was still working normally before she
had taken the drug. She drank some more coffee at Carter's urgence.

“Are we making for _Californie_? Surely we ought to be there by now.”

“Californie, eh? Why Californie?” asked Pointer.

“Mrs. Erskine's friend—no, not a friend,—a man she knows—a
detective—lives there. We're taking Rob's letter to him—he's very
clever, or something. . . .”

“You found Robert Erskine's letter when you went to tea at the villa,
didn't you?”

In vain Carter gave the Chief Inspector a look not to worry Christine
just now. Pointer thought it did her as much good to exercise her
brains as her lungs, once he saw that she was physically up to the
exertion.

“Yes. Has she told you? Oh, thank Heaven you both came.”

Carter could keep silence no longer.

“Christine, darling, who gave you that stuff to drink?”

“I didn't drink it. She moved her arm as though it pained her. I——”

“What happened when you got back at seven?” asked Pointer.

Christine struggled bravely to answer, and what with the coffee and
brandy, and her own desire to speak, the effort grew easier after the
first broken gasps.

“At seven? Oh, yes, something had upset the household. There didn't
seem to be any servants—we had to wait on ourselves—and when we got to
the garage Pierre wasn't there—Mrs. Erskine had counted on getting
away unnoticed—by ourselves. But Mr. Clark heard us talking and
dragged it out of her that we were off for Californie. So he insisted
on our letting him drive us there down to a launch his wife and the
major were waiting in and going to Californie by water. I felt horrid
when I stepped on board. If only I could have drawn back I would, but
I couldn't leave Mrs. Erskine. Besides, I wanted to see the affair
cleared up as much as she did, only I sure hated coming on this yacht.
I leant over the rails here and refused to go into the cabin where the
others went to play bridge. I seemed to suddenly see us two or perhaps
three—I don't know about Mrs. Clark—I wondered what sort of people
they all really were, for I felt that Mrs. Erskine distrusted them,
too, since she knew about those letters. I began to think about Rob.
Next Mr. Clark came away from the engine over there and the major came
out of the cabin. They stood on both sides of me, and Mr. Clark made
some remark about the view. And all of a sudden I felt frightened.
Jack, what I would have given to have had you there!”—Jack pressed her
arm—“I stepped back from between them, but Mr. Clark—to think that I
used to rather like him—caught me and held me tight while the major
ran something hard into my arm. It hurt frightfully, but Mr. Clark
held me with my face pressed right into his shoulder so that I
couldn't make a sound, and when he left me go and went to the engine
again, the major stood in front of me and laughed.”

“He won't laugh next time he sees you, and as for Clark—” Carter spoke
slowly between his teeth.

“I thought of Mrs. Erskine alone in the cabin—and of her revolver. I
got into the cabin somehow, though my feet seemed to be made of lead,
I remember her helping me to a chair, and asking what was the matter,
and the next thing I heard was your voice, Jack, from miles and miles
away calling to me.”

Pointer thoughtfully stepped away for a moment to glance into the
cabin. Mrs. Erskine, whose eyes were half open, made him a feeble
sign, but he only shook his head with a gesture that implied there was
no hurry, and made Christine go over the details of the afternoon
again.

At the landing stage Watts helped Mrs. Erskine into a taxi, and drove
her off to the villa. Pointer himself, Mrs. Clark, and the men of the
party walking to the police station close at hand, while Carter took
Christine to the Chief Inspector's hotel, where a sympathetic maid and
landlady diagnosed her case as an attack of sea-sickness and helped
her to bed. Carter left her door reluctantly, he would have liked to
stand on guard all night after what had so nearly happened, but a
confidence in Pointer was beginning to reassure him where it was a
question of that police-officer's orders. At the villa he found the
servants flitting uneasily about, like bats. They connected all these
strange goings on with the loss of the emerald pendant and were in
secret mutiny. Carter was asked to join Monsieur Pointer in the
drawing-room, where he found only Mrs. Erskine lying on the
chaise-lounge looking very ill, and Watts.

Pointer was just laying down a packet of legal-looking papers on the
table beside her.

“Here they are. Will-forms taken from the major's pocket. If you don't
understand their significance, Madame; but I see you do”—for Mrs.
Erskine was staring with dilated eyes at them. “It would have taken
some persuasion doubtless to make you sign away your fortune to any
one of your three friends, but—as I think you know—they would have
ways of persuading you, and whether the will would have been valid
wouldn't have interested you, once you had followed Miss West to the
bottom of the Mediterranean. It would have been so easy to connect the
two ‘accidents.’ Miss West overbalanced, and you falling over in an
effort to save her. True, your friends might have had a few awkward
questions to answer; but, after all, the French courts will decide on
the question of the attempted murder of Miss West, that's none of my
business for the moment.” Pointer took a step forward—“This is my real
reason for being here to-night. Janet Fraser, you are detained,
pending an extradition order, for the murder of Robert Erskine, and
for the embezzlement of the Erskine funds under false pretences for
over seventeen years. It's my . . .”

There was a shriek from the woman to whom he was speaking. She sprang
to her feet and looked around her as if demented, as indeed she was by
the shock—for the moment.

“The devils! They've sold me! After all the money they've squeezed
from me they've sold me in the end. Sold me!”

She screeched, arching her back and advancing in a horribly feline
sidle.

“What else did you expect?” Pointer asked imperturbably. “But it's my
duty to warn you that anything you say may be used against you.”

“My God, Mrs. Erskine!” Watts murmured, while Carter felt as though
the solid floor had opened under his feet.

The woman sank back on the sofa, and struggled for self-possession.
“I'm drugged—I don't know what I'm saying—I drank some morphia—we all
did—just to taste it for once, you know . . .” she was mouthing and
grinning horribly—“and it's quite taken my senses away.”

“Neither you nor Mrs. Clark got much of the stuff into your systems,”
Pointer said in his hard official voice; “when you two heard me on
deck you each jabbed a needleful into your arms, but half of it came
out again. Your wrists were all wet to the touch.”

Yet as a matter of fact it was just this small amount of morphia,
irritating instead of calming as a larger dose would have been, which
had thrown and was throwing off its balance the cold, calculating
brain of the woman whom Pointer knew was not Mrs. Erskine.

“I don't know what you're talking about.” She tried again to steady
her flighty wits. “Ask Mr. Russell who I am.”

Carter, who was listening still as a man in a dream, saw now why the
Chief Inspector had begun as he did. He had thrown the woman off her
guard by fear and rage. Unstrung by the growing strain of the
investigation into Robert Erskine's murder, by the morphia taken, by
the revelation of how near she herself had been to the end of all
things at the hands of her accomplices, she could not recover her
poise, try for it as she might. Like some tight-rope walker over an
abyss, she made a desperate effort to save herself even when she was
already all but falling headlong. “Mr. Russell met me scores of times
before my husband's death as well as since.”

“He was easy to hoodwink. It was his father who had known the real
Mrs. Erskine well, the younger Russell had only seen her a couple of
times as a lad. But your aunt by marriage, Mrs. Fraser, of Glasgow,
would only too gladly swear to you any time, as will other relations.
She seemed to think that your death stopped the pressing home of some
claim against you about the illegal sale of a cottage of hers. She
sent me your photo. . . .”

The woman in the white wig, and artificially shaped eyebrow, bit her
grey lips.

“You are Janet Fraser, of Murry Street, Glasgow. You were engaged as a
companion by the late Mrs. Erskine some fifteen years ago, after
having been an unsuccessful actress for over six years. You joined her
near St. Jean de Luz, and went on with her to Bayonne, where she was
taken with a paralytic stroke the same night and was removed to the
hospital. She died a few days later without recovering consciousness.
The doctor in charge of the hospital mistook you for the mistress, and
you kept up the deception. He has identified the photo of Janet
Fraser—your photo without that wig on, and without that shaved peak to
one eyebrow. The hotel people at Bayonne and the sisters at the
hospital have also identified it. Mrs. Erskine lies buried in the
churchyard there under your name. We are getting an order for her
exhumation under the pretext of having her body taken to Scotland. Her
identity can easily be proved by a couple of operations she had had.
You assumed her name, forged her handwriting—which was a very easy one
to copy. You continued to enjoy her income, until chance gave your
secret away to Mrs. Clark, at that time Mabel Baker, your companion.”

The woman seemed to collapse more and more as he spoke. Now she tried
to pull herself up once more.

“I don't know what you're talking about,” she whispered, with a voice
which was but a ghost of itself.

He stopped. “Now, look here. You can deny everything, of course, but
it won't help you any; and meanwhile these others, the Clarks and the
major, who, I don't doubt, are as deep in it as yourself, who've
battened on you for all these years, may get off scot-free, and in any
case won't get much more than a few months. Do you want that?”

Her haggard eyes opened and shut themselves convulsively, her throat
worked, but she forced back the words by an effort which was visible.

“Wait—I'll go on. Robert Erskine came to England. You poisoned him to
prevent his discovering the fraud. For he would have known his mother.
You could not hope to always receive him in twilight as you did Mr.
Russell or anyone who had ever met the real Mrs. Erskine. You wrote
your letters to him as forbidding as possible in order to prevent his
wanting to come to Europe and see you. But you made your big mistake
when by your miserliness you only sent him one thousand pounds of the
money he asked for. The whole of the five thousand would have kept him
in Canada. Carter here is ready to swear that the one thousand which
you finally sent him was the only money Robert Erskine ever received
from you. Those letters you showed me in Paris were all forgeries.
That was why you ‘lost’ them. You got him to supply you with a box of
his stationery when you heard that he was sailing for England. The
discarded box is in our possession. Unfortunately for himself, he told
you that he was coming over, though he did not tell you on what
business, as he had never referred to business matters with you. He
gave you the name he intended to use, and you sent a letter to meet
him on the boat's arrival in which you wrote of your joy at the
thought of seeing him, and that he was to telegraph you as soon as he
had found a hotel. He kept that letter among his papers in a safe.
Otherwise you would have destroyed it as you did all the other papers
in his room. But to go back, for I want you to see that there are no
gaps. As soon as you knew his hotel, you flew over to England and took
a room in the same house, by good luck—as you thought—getting a room
very near his. You passed under the name of Mrs. Willett. You painted,
padded, darkened your eyes with belladonna, and had a wig arranged to
look as like a portrait of Mrs. Clark which you had with you as
possible. The firm who supplied you with it, and the eyebrows meeting
over the nose, kept a copy of that photo, as they always do, to
safeguard themselves in case of dissatisfaction. I found an eyebrow
box in the attic which bore the name of the shop.”

“The others planned it. They egged me on. They were all in it!” burst
out, as though in spite of herself, from the woman. “They said it was
the only way.”

“Very likely they did, but, you see, I have no proofs of that. All I
can prove is that when you found Robert Erskine's acquaintance
impossible to make, that medicine bottle of his gave you your chance.
You changed the last but one dose for a deadly solution of morphia,
obtained how I can't think. . . .” Pointer knew perfectly, but he
wanted her to speak, and she did.

“No, no, no! I never did such a thing!” The sane part of her brain was
fighting the drugged part which wanted to babble.

“Oh, yes, you did.”

“If I did, I got it from that sneering, drug-sodden fiend Vaughan.”

“Robert Erskine drank the poison. When it was acting,—I take it you
listened at the door—you entered his room, locked the door, unscrewed
the back of the wardrobe, fastened the bolt on inside, and dragged the
armchair up to it. You're a tall woman and a strong one, but you must
have had some difficulty with his body before you got it safely
bundled in . . .”

The woman turned livid.

“. . . with your letter to the manager in the pocket. Next you laid in
some things of his which you thought would bear out your 'phone about
his having gone into the country, screwed the back on again, pushed
the wardrobe into position, emptied the medicine bottle on to the
balcony, filled in the cough mixture again, and went through all his
belongings. His bag you fastened inside a larger bag. . . .”—This last
was guess-work, but he saw by her terrified eyes that he had been
right.—“Wearing Major Vaughan's shoes, you crept down the back stairs
into the street. You had already oiled the lock and opened it at noon.
When you had disposed of your bag, and exchanged the shoes for your
own, you waited in the theatre and took a taxi back to the hotel. When
you heard the arrival of the police—your door was ajar, we noticed—you
put on his shoes again, and crept out on to the balcony to peer in
through the blind, as you had done once before when Mr. Beale was in
the room. You had intended to reach France Saturday night, but the
storm which raged made flight out of the question. Even the channel
boats did not go. Besides, once you knew the body had been found, you
waited on to see what would happen. The telegrams which I sent Mrs.
Erskine here were received and answered by Mrs. Clark. You flew to
Paris, using her passport, and back again the same day after the
interview with Russell and me, an interview which you were expecting
and had prepared for after catching sight of Mr. Russell at the
hotel.”

Watts shot his chief a crestfallen glance, but the woman broke out
excitedly: “She lent me that passport. She helped . . . They all
helped . . . They're all in it. Yes, you're right, Inspector, they
knew all about it. And ever since then I've been in hell! In hell! I
knew it was only a question of time before I should be killed in my
turn . . . oh, my head . . . I don't mean that! I don't know what I'm
saying.”

“I'll just make a note of what you say about their being implicated
too.” Pointer drew out a block of writing paper.

She veered around again, the hatred of years sweeping away every
barrier, as the wily police-officer had hoped it would. He had a full
confession of the crime, written in the first person, in his pocket,
only waiting for her to sign, and for that signature he was working,
leaving her no time to recover that cold nerve of hers which had been
temporarily broken down, but which was sure to come again later as he
well knew. There was too much tension between France and England just
then for extradition to be a quick matter when the crime had been
committed on French soil, but with the criminal's confession safely at
the Yard the police could wait in patience the law's delays.

“Stop! Write all this down.” She sprang to her feet and leant heavily
against the table, rocking as she stood. “Write it all out, and I'll
sign it, and then we'll see if those blood-suckers get off with only a
couple of months. _Months!_ While I . . .”

“You'd better see a solicitor,” suggested the Chief Inspector
half-heartedly, but remembering the jury's passion for every advantage
to be given to the criminal, as he pulled out the sheets, which were
burning his fingers.

“No, no! Is that it? Let me read it over.”

“If you want to sign it, just add a line at the foot to say that you
have read it through and that it is correct.”

“I'll put more than that in. I want to say that these three
blackmailers instigated Robert Erskine's death. They told me what to
do. Ever since yon Baker found me one day asleep with my wig awry
she's lived on me, she and Vaughan, who was her lover at the time, and
the man she calls her husband now.”

“And Miss West, what were you going to do to her?” Carter spoke for
the first time—he had been literally spellbound till then. “What of
her?”

For a second the woman blinked at him as though hardly remembering to
whom he referred.

“I'm writing that down, too. When I told them that she had discovered
something wrong with the letters—letters _they_ drafted for me, mind
you they insisted on drugging her, and—and—they told me that she was
to be put ashore somewhere. I thought she was to be kept till we could
get away safely.” Her eyes flickered uneasily, and fell to the paper.

In a fury of vengeance which burned away all thought of personal
safety for the moment if only she could engulf the others deep enough,
Janet Fraser wrote nearly two pages before she signed her name, with
Carter and Watts as witnesses.

The Chief Inspector drew a deep breath of relief, and motioned Carter
to precede him out of the room.

Janet Fraser's hand went to a little picture standing on the
mantelpiece, a sketch of her father's manse. The frame was a
Florentine one, and in a corner her finger pared off a tiny gilt
pellet as she apparently automatically adjusted the water-colour. When
Pointer turned to speak to Watts she slipped it into her mouth. It was
a way of escape she had prepared long ago.

“I shall be quite ready to come with you to England without waiting
for an extradition order,” she said quietly as she lay down on the
couch again and pulled the rug up over her, “but I'm exhausted for the
moment. I want a little rest.”

“Very good. I'll arrange about our tickets so that we can get off by
the early train if possible. I'll be back within an hour and let you
know what has been settled. There will be Watts on duty outside, but I
think you'll be sensible.”

“Quite sensible,” murmured Janet Fraser, looking him full in the face
for a second, and then dropping those pale grey eyes of hers.

Carter and the Chief Inspector walked away in silence. At last the
Canadian spoke.

“So it wasn't Beale after all, and Rob was murdered by that she-devil
who passed as his mother because he would have given the show away!
I'm glad you got her! God! I never thought I should like to see a
woman arrested for murder, but I'm glad you got her! And, see here,
Inspector, I do see why you weren't keen on my helping, nor Christine
either: it did take a mighty keen eye—a trained one—to pick out the
king-log from that jumble.”

“Largely a matter of routine,” muttered Pointer, lighting his pipe.

“Routine!” Carter echoed. “I suppose it was routine that lets
Christine sleep safely in her bed to-night. Poor old Rob. To be done
in like that. . . . I wish to Heaven . . .” He was silent for a few
minutes. “But how in tarnation did you get hold of—of—the truth?”

“Well, it's a longish story. First of all, as I said, was that letter
this woman wrote to Erskine which we found among the papers Beale had
got hold of—she had destroyed the others, you know—asking him to let
her know his address in London at once. That only bewildered me. You
don't suspect a mother easily of having a hand in her son's murder,
but I began to wonder whether Robert Erskine might turn out not to be
her son at all. I found that that was impossible, and I began
speculating a bit along the lines of the truth. A Toronto stationery
box I found in her attic here made me doubt whether the letters I had
taken a bit for granted, I confess, were as genuine as they looked. I
had noted the water-mark, but had let them go at that, under the
circumstances—my mistake that! Then—well, what with one thing and
another, I got hold of a key to her safe and that unlocked her story
as well, or at least the clue to it. It was this way. In the safe were
a couple of the real Mrs. Erskine's old diaries, a large photo of
herself, a small razor, and a couple of white wigs. Strange things for
a lady to keep with her jewels, eh? The photo set me thinking. It had
been constantly handled, and had a clip fastened to the top to allow
of its being hung on any convenient nail. But why? Taken in
conjunction with the wigs, why else than to make up like it? Then the
little razor—Mrs. Erskine's queer eyebrow would fit that idea. In
Janet Fraser's photo—I only got it later on, of course; didn't know of
her existence then—you'll see what beetling eyebrows she has by
nature. The two women were otherwise about the same size and general
build. With the wig, and the eyebrow shaved to a peak in the middle,
and after years of semi-invalidism, the one could easily pass herself
off for the other, when there were no suspicions alert. I found in my
hunt at the villa an old pill-box which gave me a Biarritz address,
and went there. The rest of the story . . . ? Well, after that it
was——”

“Merely a matter of routine,” suggested Carter; “but say, Chief
Inspector, I'll never forget what I owe you. You saved me once when
you drew Beale's fangs, and you've saved Christine to-night.”

“I don't mind telling you that I never in all my life spent a worse
five minutes than when I had to decide what had become of her, and
knew that if I made a mistake there would be no time to put it right.”
Pointer spoke with feeling.

“What made you guess the river?” Carter asked in a hushed voice.

“Couldn't see what else they could do with her. It was obvious that
the house had been cleared so that no one should know of her second
arrival. When she had been at the villa before, she had practically no
friends on this side of the Atlantic. I think they counted on that a
bit. I know this coast pretty well. As Mr. Deane, I've walked it over
for hours, and I couldn't call to mind any ravine or place where a
body could be dropped as though from a motor accident except some
spots a good way off, and where a very stiff gradient had to be
climbed. The tyres and the small amount of petrol were against them.
There only remained the sea, for the villa itself was out of the
question. What they wanted was an accident, not a body that could be
found some time or other, and prove it to've been a murder.”

“You jumped to the conclusion at once that her life was in danger,
then?”

Pointer put his head on one side. “Well . . . in a murder case there
generally comes a moment when a second murder seems the only way to
keep the first one quiet.”

The two men stopped at the Negresco, and Pointer glanced up at the
purple roofs high above them.

“Don't let yourself feel too grateful, Mr. Carter. You and Miss
Leslie, as was, quite tangled me up for a while. There were weeks when
I felt none too sure of either of you.”

“See here,” Carter stopped him as he would have turned away, “I saw
that man of yours—Watts—pull out a knife to-night to sharpen a pencil.
My knife! I had lent it to a funny old gheezer here, a Colonel Winter,
who's pestered me the last fortnight, buzzing around me, and I've been
kind of figuring——”

But the Chief Inspector was gone. Carter gazed after him. “Well, I
guess our British police take some beating after all.” And he went
upstairs to write out a wire offering a reward of five thousand pounds
to anyone who should first find the murderer of Robert Erskine. The
wire was sent off to the Yard, after a futile effort on his part to
get it dated earlier in the day. He thought it would look more natural
to Pointer, but he consoled himself afterwards with the knowledge that
it would have made no difference in the Chief Inspector's acceptance
of the sum solely on behalf of the Police Widows' and Orphans' Fund.

When Pointer returned to the villa it was close on dawn. He and Watts
looked at each other in silence a moment and then glanced away.

“A letter must have come for Mrs. Erskine late last night. I found it
in the letter-box.” Watts handed it to his superior.

“Any sound from in there?” asked Pointer rather tensely.

Watts shook his head, and, receiving no answer to their knock, they
entered.

She was quite dead. Gone by the same way that she had sent Robert
Erskine out of life. They 'phoned for a doctor, though there was no
slightest chance of rousing her to life. Then Pointer glanced at the
letter he held. It was from Russell and Son. He broke the seal and
read:

  “Dear Mrs. Erskine,

  I will reply to your last at full length to-morrow. This is simply
  to ask you to let me have all possible details as to the death of
  your one-time companion, Janet Fraser. Place of burial, doctor who
  attended her, etc. A relative of hers has died in Australia, and as
  next-of-kin she—had she lived—would have inherited his enormous
  fortune, which will now go to his more distant kin.

  I note in your letter that your press for the sale of your Bell
  shares, against which we most strongly counsel you——”

Pointer put the letter down for a moment, and looked thoughtfully at
the dead woman before him.



Transcriber’s Note

This transcription follows the text of the edition published by A. L.
Burt Company in March, 1925, by arrangement with Alfred A. Knopf.
However, the following errors have been corrected from the original
text:

 * “concide” was changed to “coincide” (Chapter IX).
 * “apolgised” was changed to “apologised” (Chapter IX).
 * “Negreso” was changed to “Negresco” (Chapter X).
 * Twelve occurrences of unpaired quotation marks have been fixed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EAMES-ERSKINE CASE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


