The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hearts in exile
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hearts in exile

Author: John Oxenham

Release date: May 30, 2025 [eBook #76194]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1904

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEARTS IN EXILE ***







HEARTS IN EXILE


BY

JOHN OXENHAM



TORONTO: HENRY FROWDE

LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON



[Illustration: Title page]




  TO
  EVERY HEART IN EXILE
  THIS BOOK OF HOPE
  IS INSCRIBED
  IN THE SURE AND CERTAIN FAITH
  THAT LOVE STILL KNOWS THE WAY.




Contents


CHAPTER I

HOW HOPE SACRIFICED HERSELF FOR LOVE OF THE PEOPLE


CHAPTER II

HOW ONE WENT FORTH ALONE


CHAPTER III

HOW ONE WENT TO THE COUNTRY AND ONE WENT OUT OF IT


CHAPTER IV

HOW ONE FOUND HIMSELF IN HADES


CHAPTER V

HOW TWO MET IN HADES


CHAPTER VI

HOW THE WHITE SEEDS GREW


CHAPTER VII

HOW THE SEEDS BORE FRUIT AND FLOWER


CHAPTER VIII

HOW HOPE WRESTLED WITH SATAN AND GOT HER OWN WAY


CHAPTER IX

HOW HOPE SHORTENED THE LONG ROAD


CHAPTER X

HOW THREE PASSED WITHOUT MEETING


CHAPTER XI

HOW HOPE FOUND LESS THAN SHE EXPECTED AND MORE


CHAPTER XII

HOW HOPE CAME SLOWLY BACK


CHAPTER XIII

HOW HOPE GOT GLIMPSE OF HELL


CHAPTER XIV

HOW THEY LIVED TOGETHER AND YET APART


CHAPTER XV

HOW PAVLOF LEARNED HARD LESSONS


CHAPTER XVI

HOW THEY SAT SIDE BY SIDE WITH A GULF BETWEEN


CHAPTER XVII

HOW PAUL FOUGHT THE TERROR AND MADE A FRIEND


CHAPTER XVIII

HOW THE NEWS CAME THAT DREW THEM TOGETHER


CHAPTER XIX

HOW HOPE IMPOSED HER WILL UPON HIM


CHAPTER XX

HOW THE TIME CAME TO AN END


CHAPTER XXI

HOW THEIR CUP BRIMMED FULL


CHAPTER XXII

HOW THE CUP SPILLED


CHAPTER XXIII

HOW ONE CAME BACK FROM THE DEAD


CHAPTER XXIV

HOW THEY PREPARED TO GO WITH HIM


CHAPTER XXV

HOW THEY STRUCK A FRIEND


CHAPTER XXVI

HOW THEY FOUGHT IN THE CLEFT


CHAPTER XXVII

HOW THREE CAME HOME AND ONE WENT FURTHER


CHAPTER XXVIII

HOW SOKOLOF PAID HIS DEBT




CHAPTER I

  HOW HOPE SACRIFICED HERSELF FOR LOVE OF
  THE PEOPLE

"You think she will be in in a few minutes, Marya?"

"Assuredly.  She is past her time now," said the old woman.

"She may have called somewhere," said the young man, and glanced
doubtfully at her.

"Sit down, Paul Ivanuitch," she said, in a more than simply
hospitable tone, "and I will get you some tea.  She cannot be many
minutes now."

The old woman nodded knowingly to herself as she went down the
passage.  The young man sat down for a moment, and then jumped up and
began to wander restlessly about the room.  How could any man sit
still when all his future happiness was in the balance, and when he
had good reason to know that the hand that held the scales was no
ordinary hand, and might let itself be swayed by no ordinary feelings?

Straight and tall, and spare of figure; deep-set, trustworthy eyes,
dark like his hair; frank, thoughtful face, high in the cheek-bones
and lean in the cheeks, so that at times one could follow or even
anticipate his feelings by the curves and lines that came and went
there, Paul Pavlof was distinctly attractive to look upon.

For his was, above all, an invitingly honest face, and one does not
come across too many such.  Perhaps also there was, in the eager face
and strenuous figure, more than a suggestion that such of the good
things of life as had come his way had been rather mental than
material, had contributed more to his inner well-being than to his
outer, that the lower things held but small interest for him, and
that he had not greatly missed them.

It was a very plainly furnished room, and Paul Pavlof knew intimately
every single thing that was in it.  Table, couch, chairs, white-tiled
stove, green-shaded student's lamp, all were severely simple and
without individuality, but each separate article was glorified in his
eyes by the high service to which it was dedicated.  He felt like
kneeling and kissing the chairs because Hope Arskaïa used them, the
floor because she walked on it, the lamp because she read and thought
by it, for all these things pertained to the higher life.

He wondered if she had ever thought of him as she sat in the chair or
walked the floor.

He knew she had, and moreover that her thoughts of him had been
pleasant thoughts.  But all the same----

There were neither books nor papers lying about.  The lack of them
contributed largely to the austerity of the apartment.  But books and
papers are dangerous things when one never knows at what moment the
steps of the gendarmes may be heard on the stair.

On the walls were three portraits.  Paul eyed them with reverence,
and stopped his wanderings now and again to look at them, as though
they might afford him some clue to the answer Hope Ivanovna would
give to the question he had come to put to her.

The bearded man with the calm, intent face and thoughtful eyes was
her father.  He died in the Schlusselburg casemates, martyred for an
idea.  High thought and fixity of purpose were the dominant features
here, and Pavlof's mouth tightened somewhat as he looked at it.  Hope
Ivanovna took after her father.

The sweet-faced woman was her mother--the Scotchwoman.  She died a
few months before him, broken-hearted at the racking injustice of it
all.  Hope Ivanovna had her beauty and more, but her spirit was her
father's.

The bright, curly-headed boy was her brother.  He died before she
came into Paul's life for its brightening and embittering.

He was standing before the portraits, finding likenesses in them all
to Hope herself, when the door opened again, and Marya, with an
apologetic look and shrug, ushered in another visitor--Serge Palma, a
strapping, jovial fellow, with blue eyes and light hair, and full
beard and moustache; very well dressed, and carrying an air of
opulence and hearty good feeling towards himself and the rest of the
world; in all respects the very antithesis of the first-comer.  He
stopped with a short laugh at sight of Pavlof, and Pavlof's forehead
crumpled with annoyance at sight of him.

"Hola, Paul!  It was not you I came to see," said Palma jovially, in
spite of the infelicity of the meeting.

"Nor I you."

"No, I suppose not," said Palma, with another short laugh.
"Moreover, unless I'm mistaken, it is no good our both stopping here
at the same time.  Is it not so?"

Paul regarded him with gloomy annoyance.  He was strung to concert
pitch himself, and the careless gaiety of the other jarred upon him
exceedingly.  At the moment he hated Serge Palma most cordially,
though as a rule they were on friendly terms enough.

"I really don't think you need wait," said Pavlof quietly.

"Of course you don't.  But then I do, you see, and that makes all the
difference in the world."

"It will make no difference."

"Da!  As to that we shall see.  But it's no good our waiting
together, if you've come, as I imagine you have, to put your fortune
to the test."

"I suggest then the propriety of your retiring."

"Of course you do.  But, again, I don't see it, my friend.  Why
should I leave you a clear field?  First come may be first served."

"That's as it may be, and since I was first here----"

"Tell you what--let the fates decide it," said the other, with that
cheerful laugh of his which made Pavlof grind his teeth.  And Palma
drew a coin from his pocket and spun and caught it.  "Heads you stop,
tails you go."

But Pavlof shook his head with an expression of disgust at such
unseemly frivolity in so momentous a matter.

Palma laughed and uncovered the coin on the table.  "You win," he
said, "so I go.  If it had been tails I would have stopped in spite
of you, my boy.  I shall wait till I see you leave, then I take my
turn.  I'd wish you luck if I had no conscience.  As it is----"

He nodded and went out, just as old Marya brought in the samovar and
teacups.

"Nu!" said she, with a wag of the head "That's right.  I'm glad he's
gone--if he does not meet her on the road."

"You don't like Serge Palma, Masha?" said the young man hopefully.

"Not in that way, no," with another thoughtful shake of the head.

"He is rich, good-looking, good-tempered----"

"No doubt, no doubt.  But there are better things even than those."

Then the door opened and Hope Arskaïa came in, and, to both Masha and
Pavlof, the homely casket glowed suddenly radiant with the brightness
of its treasure.

"Ah, Paul, mon ami!  You have come to share a cup of tea with two
lonely old maids.  That is good of you.  Is it all ready, Matushka?
I am later than usual."

From the sweet, full tones of her voice to the light, firm tread that
bore her so rapidly and so gracefully, she was the embodiment of
health and energy, and her beauty was very remarkable.  But, after
the first glow of satisfaction which fineness and regularity and
proportion of feature never fail to produce, it was the purposeful
soul shining through the eagerness of the beautiful face, and
especially through the great dark-blue eyes, which gave her the
mastery.

It was the knowledge--the partial knowledge--of what was in her that
made Paul Pavlof's hand tremble as he took the cup of tea she handed
him.  For a woman animated by feelings so mighty as those which moved
and restrained Hope Arskaïa was capable of anything.

The one thing that troubled him was the doubt whether she was capable
of condescending to so small a thing as the love of Paul Pavlof--to
him the mightiest thing on earth.

Her greeting was full of hearty fellowship, nevertheless the first
quick glance she had given him had in it something of apprehension.
She knew what he had come for, and she feared the result of the
interview--for him--and--well, yes, for herself as well.  For they
had been good comrades for many years, and friendship which aspires
to more does not readily content itself with less.

"Any callers, Masha?" she asked, as she drank her tea.

"Is not this one enough, Hope Ivanovna?" said the old woman
diplomatically, with a friendly nod at Pavlof, and hastened out of
the way of further questioning.

"Masha bullies me," said Hope, with a smile.

"She is a good old soul.  You would have been very lonely without
her....  Sometime she will die, and then, Hope Ivanovna, you will be
more lonely still, unless--unless you have some one to take care of
you.  I have come to-day to ask you to let me be that one.  My heart
has been yours to trample on since the first time I looked into your
eyes.  You have known it."

Yes, she had known it, she had known it only too well.  And she had
looked with foreboding to this moment, for many a day, as the
possible end to their friendship.

Under other skies, under other circumstances, it might have been.
But as things were--the ordinary joys of wifehood, home, motherhood,
were not for Hope Arskaïa.  Rightly or wrongly, her heart was set on
other things, and for those other things she was prepared to
sacrifice all that womankind holds most dear.  Compared with those
other things she held herself of very small account.

That was the view he had feared she would take.  Nay, he knew
instantly, even as he spoke, that he had known it all along, and he
knew her too well to hope to move her by any passionate pleading.

Her response would have been instant, if response had been possible.
One glance from the great dark eyes would have carried his soul up
into heaven.

But the eloquent eyes, which would have told him so much, remained
downcast, and he saw only the shadow of the long lashes on the white
cheek.  He rose instantly.

"Forgive me, Hope," he said, as quietly as though his life's hopes
had not in the space of a moment crumbled into a heap of burnt-out
ashes.

"Paul!" she said, and raised a detaining hand, and there was that in
her tone--something of pleading and of pity both for herself and for
him--which made him glance quickly at her from under his pinched
brows.

He stood silently in front of her and waited--so near to heaven,
nearer than he knew, yet separated from it by the deep gulf of a
woman's invincible determination, and that woman to other women as a
volcano to a candle.

"My friend," she said at last, and her voice was full and strong
again, "you know to what my life is dedicated."  She did not look at
him, but at the portraits on the wall.  "To that end I am prepared to
sacrifice myself, body and soul, and these other things are not for
me.  You are poor, I am poor.  Poverty ties our hands.  With all your
help I could do little of all that cries aloud to be done.  Yet I
want your help.  Will you work with me still for the people, Paul
Ivanuitch--in spite of this--in spite of--of all?"

"I would lay down my life for you, Hope Ivanovna.  You know it."

"I know it.  I know it.  Even though I----"

"Even though you marry Serge Palma's millions, Hope Ivanovna."

He could not keep the bitterness out of his voice.

"Ah!"

"He was here.  He will be back presently.  God help us all.  Why does
He permit these things to be?"

"If the sacrifice of one can help the many, it is right to make it,
Paul.  Palma's millions may help to break the fetters of a nation.
What am I that I should withhold myself?"

"You are the sacrifice," he said sadly, and bent and kissed her hand,
and went quietly out.

Hope sat silently gazing at the portraits on the wall--past them, at
what she had put from her--past that, at what lay before her.  And
her eyes were sad in spite of the spirit that was in her--nay,
because of it.  For she knew, as well as any, where that path would
probably lead her.

Old Masha came in presently, and eyed her anxiously as she announced
Serge Palma.

Hope's face was grave and composed as his keen glance swept it.
There was an afterglow in the great dark eyes which he took to
himself, and courage therewith.

"You are welcome, Serge Petrovitch," said Hope.

"Ah!" said Palma, with a humorous twinkle.  "Condolences, then, to
friend Paul," to which her only answer was a slight lift of the level
brows.

"You know what brings me, Hope Ivanovna," he said in reply.  "I am no
student and have no gift of words.  Will you be my wife?"

She looked at him quietly, and then asked, "Are you sure you know
what that means, Serge Petrovitch?"

"What it means?  To be my wife?  I know what it means to me, Hope
Ivanovna."

"I must be sure of that.  Listen to me.  You know that I work among
the people."

"Every one knows it," he nodded.

"Since ever I can remember, the thought of the people under the yoke
has weighed upon me, and my heart has groaned with them.  My father
died in Schlusselburg, as all the world knows.  His only crime was
the desire to raise the people out of the slough.  My mother went
before he did.  The same blow killed her.  There they are on the
wall, and night and day they cry to me to help the work on."

"It is a good work."

"And a dangerous, and heart-breaking in its slowness, for lack of
workers and for lack of funds.  If you are ready to join me in the
work I will be your wife."

"I will join you, Hope Ivanovna, so long as you don't go to extremes.
I am no believer in force as a remedy."

"Nor I; brains and money properly applied will bring the remedy in
time.  It may be slow, but it will come.  It must come.  It shall
come," she said vehemently; and added, with quiet conviction, "we
want to build up, not to overthrow; to plant, not to uproot."

"I am with you there with all my heart.  We will work side by side in
the matter."

And doubtless in the glow of his passion he meant it.

He had been prepared for some such demand.  He had considered it.  He
was ready to accede to it sooner than lose her.  Doubtless, also,
somewhere in his mind there was the feeling that altruistic notions
such as these were common to most women gifted with intelligence
above the ordinary.  And if one's heart were set upon such an one,
why, you had to take the rough with the smooth, the thorn with the
rose.  It was a phase which time would overlay.  The inducements of a
safe, luxurious life would wean her from it by degrees, and there
would be no harm done.

But that only showed how very little he actually knew of the woman he
had asked to be his wife.

Her father was that Dr. Ivan Arskoi whose only crime was his
far-sighted love for his fellows, and for the best interests of his
country.  To Autocracy and Bureaucracy, however, such a man
represented social revolution.  And so he did--but revolution by
natural growth, not by fire and steel; evolution, therefore, though
the results to the bureaucrats would be the same in the end.  And,
since those results must necessarily be extremely unpleasant, the
bureaucrats promptly nipped Ivan Arskoi in the bud.  He was labelled
"untrustworthy."  Administrative process carried him off one night to
the Schlusselburg.  For two years he lay there without trial, and
there he died.  His wife's heart broke against the bars, and Hope, a
girl student of sixteen, was left alone in the world, except for an
aunt who took charge of her, and old Marya Ostronaya, her nurse.

Hope continued her studies and nourished the faith and hopes of her
father.  When the guardian aunt died, leaving her a tiny patrimony,
she eked out her living by teaching, and devoted every spare minute
of her life, and every rouble that could be saved from the slender
housekeeping, to that quiet propaganda among the down-trodden for
which her father had already given his life.

Paul Pavlof she had long known in the schools.  She had also been on
terms of closest friendship with his mother, Elizabeth Pavlovna, one
of those sweet, saintly souls which every land and every creed
produces, and Paul, in his highmindedness and abstraction from the
lower things, was very like her, as he was like her in the face and
eyes.  His aim in life and Hope's were identical, but he was poorer
even than she.  His father was a proprietor possessed of no business
aptitude.  When he died, what remained after the Jews were satisfied
was just about sufficient to keep Paul's soul and body together
during his University career, and no more.

He was a quiet, thoughtful fellow, student still, and teacher in his
spare moments of those same wakening ideas which animated Hope
Arskaïa.

Their common interests and common dangers--for it is dangerous in
Russia to think of things as they ought to be, and still more
dangerous to speak of them--these things had drawn them very close
together.  So close that Pavlof had even dared to dream of a closer
union still.

He had told himself a hundred times that it was only a dream, and yet
he would not banish it, for it was the radiance and glory of his
life, the dash of colour in the grey, without which a man's life
flies low on sombre wings.

Then Serge Palma came upon the scene.  He was the only son of Peter
Palma, of Odessa--Prince Peter, by descent from a former petty ruling
family, just as Paul Pavlof, if he had chosen, could have claimed a
similar title, but wisely forbore.  Prince Peter, however, finding,
like Pavlof's father, that his rentals were decreasing year by year,
had gone into the grain business and had amassed a fortune in it.  He
died, and his son Serge was enjoying the fruits of his labours,
scattering what he had not gathered, dispensing with free hand that
which had cost him nothing to procure.

He met Hope Arskaïa first at the house of Kataya Barenina, whose
brother Mikhail was one of his many friends.  The girl's remarkable
combination of beauty and high intelligence and intense earnestness
had made a great impression on him.  With wide-open eyes to possible
consequences--for Peter Palma's son was no fool--he pursued the
acquaintance to its ultimate issue, and now he had asked her to share
his life, and she, for sake of what she held more highly than any
earthly happiness, had consented--on condition that he also shared
hers.




CHAPTER II

HOW ONE WENT FORTH ALONE

So, in due course, Hope Arskaïa became Hope Palma, and no littleness
of mind imputes to Paul Pavlof from the fact that, when he got the
offer of a small medical appointment in Moscow, he accepted it
instantly, and Odessa knew him no more.  He was very human, and he
loved Hope Arskaïa to the very depths of his aching heart.
Consideration for his own peace of mind might not have carried him to
this final extremity of exile.  He might, indeed, have found a gloomy
satisfaction, something not very far removed from a flagellant
pleasure, in watching her from afar, meeting her occasionally, and
nursing in secret the thought that her heart had surely been his
before she consummated her great self-sacrifice to duty by becoming
Palma's wife.

But he was too big a man for that.  If Hope could sacrifice herself
for her life's work, so he could sacrifice himself for love of her.

It would indeed have been a sore trial to any man to watch from the
outer darkness the happiness which, under equal circumstances, might
have been his.

If he had seen any possibility of service to Hope he would have
suffered and rejoiced.  But there was no visible call for sympathy on
Hope's account after her marriage with Palma.  She seemed quite
contented, nay, even happy, and Pavlof, pondering this strange matter
in the light of a deeper understanding of her than most, imputed to
her neither lightness nor forgetfulness.

He had known her better than any, and he knew that, compared with the
work which she looked upon as an inheritance of sacred obligation
from her father, her own well-being, prosperity, happiness, were as
nothing and less than nothing.

To some it may seem that altruism so complete as this is visionary
and overdrawn.  The history of the evolutionary movement in Russia
has given us many examples.  Not that I would, for one moment, be
supposed to hint that Russia monopolises, or even possesses in higher
degree than other countries, this mighty force of self-sacrifice.
But, in happier lands, the self-sacrificing dree their weirds below
the level surface of life, obscure and unknown; whereas, in Russia,
their lives and sufferings and deaths are, by force of circumstances,
flashed luridly on the screen and set the startled world aghast at
times.

He saw that she was contented in her new life.  His presence in
Odessa could afford her no pleasure, might even cause her a twinge of
regret at times, for, with all the will in the world, a quiet face
was all he could compass, and cheerfulness was hardly to be expected
of him.

So he called upon her once after her marriage, to say farewell, and
then he went away to Moscow.

He might have denied himself even this visit, and he debated the
matter within himself for some time before deciding on it.  Then it
seemed to him that Hope might reasonably feel hurt by such avoidance,
and by such a lapse from the ordinary rules of courtesy, and he went.

Old Masha had followed her mistress into the new life.  She received
him with all the old friendly favour which would have put him in
Palma's place if the turning of the wheel had rested with her.

"I will tell her you are here, Paul Ivanuitch," said Masha, scanning
his face, woman-like, for sign of his feeling, but lingering still.

"I am going away to Moscow, Marya.  I have come to say goodbye."

"Ach!" said old Masha knowingly, and stood looking at him.

"Tell me, Marya.  Is she happy?"

"Yes, she is happy, Paul Ivanuitch," and added quickly, "but you know
she is not like others.  It is not of herself she thinks.  It is a
terrible great change," she said, waving her simple old hands at the
sumptuous appointments of the room.  "I am almost afraid to speak
aloud at times, it is all so fine.  But it doesn't trouble her one
bit, and it is not that she cares for.  It seems to me sometimes that
we have half the poor people of the city on our hands, and there are
fresh ones every day."

"And Palma is good to--to you, Marya?" he asked, with an almost
imperceptible quiver of the lip, which old Marya did not fail to
catch, though her eyes were not as strong as they were once.  She
knew so well all that lay behind it.

"He is very good, Paul Ivanuitch.  He is a bigger man than I thought.
He is very generous.  My God! how the money goes!  I am afraid in the
night sometimes that it will come to an end, but there is always
plenty next day.  I did not know any one had so much money."

"I will send you my address in Moscow, Marya.  If ever I can do
anything for--for you--or for her, will you promise to let me know?"

"Surely.  It is good to know one has a friend to turn to.  Now sit
down and I will tell her you are here."

He did not sit down, but stood looking at the big oil paintings on
the wall--Prince Peter, and Serge's mother, and Serge himself when he
was a small boy.  And the rich hangings to the windows and doors, and
the carved table and buffet and chairs, stole in upon his senses
without his knowingly looking at them, though he remembered them all
afterwards, because they were the things she lived among.  And then
the door opened, and he was face to face with Hope herself.

She was looking very well, very bright and cheerful, more richly
dressed than he had ever seen her, more beautiful than ever.

His face was thinner even than it used to be, and his deep eyes
deeper, and keener, and more ardent, she thought, but just the same
straight, honest eyes that always met your own frankly and squarely,
and held no equivocations.  Perhaps there was something of a shadow
in them now, but it might be only that they looked deeper in their
settings than before.  In truth there was in them the shadow of a
slight reserve to which she had not been accustomed.  For in spite of
himself he felt a touch of resentment at her cheerfulness, and a
touch of anger with himself for so feeling.

"You are going away, Paul Ivanuitch?" said Hope, when she had greeted
him.

"I am going to Moscow, Hope Ivanovna.  I have got an appointment
there.  It is not much, but it may lead to more."

"You will be missed here.  Will you still be able to carry on the
work there?"

"Oh, surely.  I hope to have still larger opportunities.  My work
will lie among the very poor, and there is never any lack of them."

"It would grieve me to think of you dropping it."

"I will carry it on as you would have it, Hope Ivanovna, as long as I
am able.  When you have set it in one's heart it would be as hard to
drop it as it would be to forget yourself."

"There is so much to be done and so few to do it," she said earnestly.

"You are always busy?"

"Always busy."

"And quite happy?"

"Quite happy.  I have no time for anything else."

"I am glad," he said quietly.  "If ever I can serve you in any
smallest thing, I beg of you to let me know."

"There is no one I would sooner turn to for help, Paul, if that time
should ever come.  I wish----"

She looked wistfully at him, and he knew that she was wishing it was
in her power to do something to brighten his own path in life.  But
the only thing she could have done she had not seen well to do, and
nothing else was possible.

"God be with you, Hope Ivanovna, and give you every good."  He
stooped and kissed her hand, and she bent and kissed his forehead.

"Would you not stop and see Serge----"

"No, I thank you, Hope Ivanovna.  I leave to-night, and I still have
some calls to make," and he was gone.

She told Palma of his visit, when he came in, and he, in his hearty
way, regretted that she had not kept him to dinner.

"It's ages since we met, and we used to be good friends at one time.
Let me see--" and his eyes rested thoughtfully on Hope's face, as he
cast back in his mind--"yes--I don't think Pavlof and I have met
since our marriage.  I suppose that was it.  I don't believe Paul
Ivanuitch has ever quite forgiven me for carrying off the prize.  But
really, you know, I was not to blame.  Was I now?"

"No, you were not to blame, Serge, and I'm quite sure Paul Ivanuitch
bears no malice.  He will be very lonely in Moscow.  I cannot help
feeling sorry for him."

"Oh, he'll soon make heaps of friends."

But Hope knew better, and her own great happiness set his lonely way
in deeper shadow in her thoughts.

For she was happy.  In marrying Serge Palma she had given but small
consideration to her own feelings.  And Palma, perfectly aware of
that, had set himself diligently to win her to himself.

He had tried at first, in the quietest and most unobtrusive manner
possible, to introduce into her life new elements of interest, which
might, he hoped, in time wean her from those labours among the poor
and downtrodden which she looked upon as her great work in life.

His manner of life had been, in almost every respect, the very
opposite of hers.  He had always had more money than he could use.
He had always flung it about generously.  He had never had to scrimp
and save in his life, and self-denial was as absolutely unknown to
him as the absence of the necessity for it was unknown to his wife.
Whereby no doubt he had missed much, and had been to that extent
docked of his full stature.

He treated Hope with the greatest generosity, gave her everything he
thought she could possibly want, which included very much which she
did not want at all, and in every possible way showed her that the
one desire of his heart was to win her completely, and so round their
union into a perfect circle of happiness.

In order to win her to his own ways, he found it advisable at times
to go hand in hand with her along her chosen paths.  And, bit by bit,
for very love of her, he found himself going further than ever he had
dreamed of going.  For very love of her he found himself first
tolerating, then enjoying, this new way of life because it was her
way.  Hers was the finer spirit, and by degrees he came to look
through her eyes at matters which had lain under his nose all his
life, but which he had never seen until his love for her quickened
his understanding.

She was a whole new world to him, a sweet apocalypse, and, by
degrees, those things which had sufficed him before came to be as
nothing and less than nothing to him.

The change was very gradual, but it could not fail in time to attract
the attention of those who sorely missed the jovial dispenser of
largesse in Palma's former circles.  His old friends chaffed him and
laughed at him.  He invited them to dinner and they fell under the
spell of Madame Palma's beauty, to the extent, at all events, of
swearing in marvellous language that Serge Palma was a mighty
fortunate man.  And if they still chaffed him at times, for his
dereliction from their primrosy paths, his quiet smile turned all
their shafts aside and even lodged them in their own bosoms.  Not a
man of them but would have done any mortal thing Madame Palma might
have asked of him, however contrary to his natural inclination.  But
Hope had very soon taken their shallow measures, and not one of them
did she find worth using in her great work.

For that work, while patently and undeniably of the most harmless
description, and with no end or aim beyond the uplifting of the
helpless and downtrodden, was still work at which the authorities
looked doubtfully, if not actually askance, and it needed for its
furtherance large souls who could be at once energetic and cautious
and discriminating.

Even in such simple work as this there ran a vein of danger, in the
fact that the downtrodden, when they awake to a sense of their
condition, and of the causes of it, are liable to fits of fierce
resentment; and at times fiery spirits will out and kindle
conflagrations the stifling of which entails far-reaching
consequences and suffering.  And at such times the innocent are as
like to suffer as the guilty--more like, perhaps, since the latter,
with their foreknowledge of coming events, can also provide ways of
escape.

Palma was redeeming to the full the promise he had made to Hope when
he asked her to marry him.  In her simple schemes of amelioration he
was with her to the extent of her will.  Against anything beyond he
set his face like a flint, as indeed she did herself.

The people were nominally free, but they were not educated up to
freedom.  It was her aim, as it had been her father's, to lift them
out of the sloughs, so that in due time they should be able to put
their unknown powers to noblest uses.  But as to any violent and
precipitant exhibition of these as yet immatured powers, they never
ceased to warn their poor folk with all the strength that was in
them; and their poor folk met their warnings with vehement denial of
any remotest thought of any such intentions, and talked among
themselves afterwards in ways that would have given Serge Palma
nightmares in powder magazines if he had dreamt of them.

He regarded some of her agents with considerable doubt, though she
had chosen them with the utmost care and discrimination, and had
tried them well before she leaned to any extent upon them.

"Now that fellow Petrof, Hope?  Do you feel quite safe with him?" he
asked her one day, when Dmitri of that name had come creeping up to
beg Hope Ivanovna's assistance for Katerina, wife of Nicholas Korba.
Katerina was expecting to be laid up, and her husband had managed to
get into the hands of the police.

"I've known him a very long time now, Serge, and I have never found
him take a kopeck for himself of what I have given him for other
people."

"I wish he'd make more noise when he walks," said Palma, smiling
himself at the meagreness of his grounds for disliking Dmitri.  "He
goes along like a snake, and it's all I can do to keep from putting
my foot on him."

"He is very quiet.  But, you see, they learnt to be that in the old
times, and some of them can't get out of it."

"Well, we can only trust in Providence that they put the money you
give them to the uses you intend."

"Where I give money they are mostly in such want that they would
grudge it being used for anything else.  But you are quite right,
Serge.  There is a risk, and I don't see how we can eliminate it more
than we are doing by exercising every possible care and watchfulness.
You assumed a great responsibility when you took over me and my work."

"I have never regretted it, my dear, and never shall, whatever comes
or goes.  You have opened the eyes of my understanding.  In time I do
believe you will make a fairly good man of me."

"You are very good to me, and to give up so much for me, Serge.  You
are a bigger man than I thought."

"With such a teacher who could fail to grow?  I have only one regret
in life, and that is that I cannot make you Tzarina and give you a
free hand to work your fullest will."

"I wish you could.  But the one without the other would be very
little use.  It is not the Tzar or Tzarina who obstruct, but those
below them.  And how they will ever be brought round I do not know."

"Well, all I want is that we should so carry on the work that it may
not bring us into collision with the powers that be, for in that case
the work would suffer check.  We also, perhaps."

"Our intentions are good, at all events," she said thoughtfully, "and
for the rest, as you say, we can only trust in Providence."

"Ah, my dear, good intentions they say, pave the road to--Siberia,"
he said, with a smile.  "But we'll do our best to keep on the right
side of that line, at all events."




CHAPTER III

  HOW ONE WENT TO THE COUNTRY AND ONE
  WENT OUT OF IT

Time came when, in spite of all her zeal for others, Hope Palma found
it necessary, or at all events was prevailed upon, to think first of
herself.  And yet, again, perhaps it was rather a possible other than
herself that she considered, when she allowed herself to be persuaded
to renounce her work for a time and go away into the country with old
Marya to look after her.

She had contracted a touch of the low fever that prevailed in the
poorer parts of the town, and found a difficulty in throwing it off.
For, so long as she was in town there was neither rest nor respite
for her.  There was always so much to be done, and no appeal ever
reached her without meeting full and prompt response.

So Palma, who had an equal, nay, surely, a double, stake in the
matter, put down his foot gently but firmly, and carried them both
away from the strenuous life of the town to the restful quiet of a
small estate he had close to Akerman, where the Dniester flows wide
and free into the Black Sea.  He saw them comfortably settled in the
house of his steward, stayed a few days with them, and thenceforward
divided his time between Akerman and Odessa.

One day, when he came, he brought with him news which it was useless
attempting to withhold from Hope, since the matter was being talked
of everywhere and had made itself felt throughout the empire.

Scherbatzky, chief of police at Odessa, had been shot one night as he
was driving home from his office, and was dead before they could get
him into his house.

The usual sweeping arrests followed, but, wide as the net was cast,
the actual perpetrator of the crime remained undiscovered.
Whence--rigorous enactments and much undeserved suffering.

When Serge came down with the news, Hope's anxiety on account of her
poor folk was painfully excited, and he could do but little to allay
it.  Some of them were undoubtedly in the net.  Whether they would
creep through the meshes remained to be seen.

Vehement in her belief in the integrity of her people, Hope was for
starting at once for the city, and it was all he could do to stop
her.  Old Marya sided with him energetically, however, and between
them they prevailed upon her to remain quietly where she was, though
greatly exercised in her mind, and vicariously suffering much.

Serge brought and sent her all the news that was going.  Most of
their poor folks were, one by one, in due course, and with extreme
reluctance, released, as the police found it impossible, in spite of
all their efforts, to bring the matter home to them.  A new man
reigned in Scherbatzky's place and took his own measures to avoid
following in his steps, and matters seemed to quieten down again.

So things went on for a time.  Serge came regularly to Akerman,
Hope's health was decidedly improving, and her work in the city was
not neglected, though Serge had deemed it wise, in the shadow of
recent occurrences and present enactments, to confine it strictly to
the relief of the needy, of whom, in consequence of the general
upsetting, there was no lack.

Then the end came swift and sudden; the end of Hope's quiet
resting-time; the end of her peace of mind for many a day; well nigh,
and but for the mercy of God, an end of Hope herself.

For one day, when they were expecting him, Serge never came, nor any
word from him.

All Hope's dormant fears crept out of their hiding-places and flapped
about her, a tormenting crew, obscuring all her heaven.  As the hours
passed and still brought no word from Serge, they finally settled
down upon her hopes like a crowd of carrion crows.

It was all old Marya could do from hour to hour to keep her from
setting out for the city.

She was still in a somewhat tremulous state of health, and looking
forward with no little foreboding to that which lay before her.  It
was inevitable that her fears should carry her thoughts to the
extremest possibilities of ill.

"He is dead, Masha," she said, with tragic finality.

"Nay, dearie, we should surely have heard if that was so," said old
Marya.  "Maybe some business has kept him just as he was starting."

"He would have sent us word.  He is dead, or he would certainly have
sent us some word."

"Maybe he's had an accident.  Things do happen to folks in the city.
One's never safe there.  Maybe they've taken him to the hospital,"
said Job's comforter, who hailed from the provinces.

"I must go and see.  We will go at once."

"Nay, not to-day, dearie, or we might pass him on the road.  He's
maybe coming yet."

"No, he is dead," said Hope gloomily, but old Marya's argument had
weight with her, in spite of her own convictions, and she drearily
allowed herself to be prevailed upon to wait till morning.

Morning brought no relief to their anxieties and they started at once
for Odessa--and beyond: started at one black day's notice on a quest
that led beyond their wildest imaginings.

When Hope and old Marya, pale and heavy-eyed from their night of
sleepless anxiety, reached their home on the cliff overlooking
Quarantine Harbour, they found it in possession of the police.  As to
the why and wherefore of so summary a proceeding, or the whereabouts
of the master, no information whatever was vouchsafed them, nor could
their utmost endeavours procure any.

Palma had been arrested.  That was all they learnt, but it was more
than enough.

Hope, forlorn and desolate, but driven to desperate daring by her
fears, sought the new chief of police in his office.  He flatly
refused her any information whatever, and set his face like a flint
against the pitiful appeal of hers.  She sought light in her sudden
overwhelming darkness among her husband's friends and acquaintances.
But arrest under administrative process falls on the ordinary ties of
friendship as sharp frost on flowers.

Where even the suspicion of untrustworthiness is sufficient to land a
man in Siberia, mere friendship affords but small salvage for the
unfortunate who falls beneath the ban.  It needs closer ties to stand
the strain, and at times even these also fail him, and to all intents
and purposes he is dead, yet lacking the rest and relief that death
confers.

While strength lasted her, Hope strove blindly with the powers of
darkness.  She wrote in desperate urgency to Paul Pavlof at Moscow,
and got no reply.  Then she failed suddenly, and old Marya carried
her away, broken in spirit and feeble in body, to her own native
village in Old Khersonese, and none too soon.

There the old woman and her kin wrestled nobly with death for her,
and by God's grace won the fight, she not caring one whit, and as
fain to die as to live.

But when the soft head of her baby boy lay at last against her
feebly-beating heart, new strength and the desire for life ran
through her, and she woke again to all the sadness of living.




CHAPTER IV

HOW ONE FOUND HIMSELF IN HADES

This brief record deals with human emotions rather than with a too
realistic detail of all the facts which excited them.  Yet, since
every deliberate act in life is fruit or flower of seedling thought,
the planting and growth of these is worthy of observance.  It is the
sum of the small that makes the large, and a single word may plant
the seed which, in its time, blossoms into fragrant action, and
alters the courses of lives, and rounds life itself at last into its
fullest beauty.

We exercise our privilege, then--more fortunately than those chiefly
concerned--and skip twelve dreary months, and pick up the threads
once more inside one of the Imperial sheepfolds--the great stockade
of the Tomsk convict-forwarding prison, three thousand miles from St.
Petersburg, on the banks of muddy Tom.

And if you had happened to be sitting on the ground with your back
against one of the wooden houses inside the great stockade that day,
this is what you would have seen, just as Paul Pavlof saw it.

Up above, a blue, rain-washed sky, with a clear sun struggling
blessedly to warmth; all round, whichever way you looked, the sharp
teeth of the high wooden stockade, set in a savage snarl at the world
in general, and biting viciously into the soft blue of the sky; many
long, rough log houses with grated windows and heavily padlocked
doors; a wooden church with pointed spire; black and white sentry
boxes every here and there, each with its Imperial watch-dog in the
person of a green-coated Cossack, who leaned stolidly on his
bayoneted rifle, and in his dull, uninterested regard of his charges,
showed plainly that he considered them of a lower breed even than
himself.

The ground was churned into mud with the restless tramping to and fro
of droves of shaggy, unkempt prisoners in long grey overcoats and
flat grey caps.  They walked for the most part in silence--a silence
that was fretted with the discordant jingling of leg fetters.  The
sound of chains in connection with one's fellows produces a natural
repulsion in most minds, but Pavlof had grown used to it.

He sat on the dryest spot he had been able to find, with his back
against the rough logs of the house, and watched his companions with
interest, almost with enjoyment.  To a starving dog even a sour crust
is treasure-trove.  When one has been hermetically sealed in a stone
cell for many months, the generous freedom of the prison enclosure,
its wonderful height from mud to sky, the great stretch that lay
between its rows of grinning teeth--why, it was resurrection.  And
contact with humanity and freedom of intercourse are things to be
grateful for.  For humanity, even in the dregs, debased, dirty,
disgusting in its details at times, is still preferable to the
automatic machinery in human form which attends to one's more
pressing outward needs, but is deaf and blind and dumb to all else,
in the sepulchral silence of the stone bags of Schlusselburg.

A year of close confinement had wrought some changes in Pavlof,
though not so great as might have been apparent in a softer-bred man.
He was always lean and eager of face, and spare and tall.  He looked
taller and thinner, and perhaps a trifle leaner of face and more
cavernous about the deep-set eyes, and the careless sprawl of his
limbs as he sat betokened a certain listlessness even in his novel
enjoyment of observation.

He lay watching all that went on around him with the quiet alertness
of one deeply interested in his fellows and rejoicing once more in
the exercise of faculties long barred.  There was a thoughtful
keenness in his scrutiny, as though he were endeavouring to weigh
each man in his mind and to classify him according to his past.  His
aspect was that of the student come suddenly into possession of a
library bearing specially on his own chosen study.

Not far from him a group of his fellow prisoners was intently wasting
its meagre substance by means of a couple of dice, which, for want of
a box, they shook in their balled hands.  One of them had chains on
his wrists as well as on his feet.  When his turn came the rhythmic
jingle of his fetters was like a ghostly chorus to his play.  Their
stakes were scraps of food and morsels of brick tea.

A cheerful-looking little man pushing a barrow came along and stood
near Pavlof to watch the gaming.  He was past middle age and very
uncouth and shaggy, but his face was the most cheerful Pavlof had yet
seen.  When he took off his flat cap Pavlof saw that his head was
shaved bare on one side, by which he knew that he was a penal
colonist, and the odd little fellow took off his cap and ran his hand
over his head every few minutes as though he had not yet got used to
that style of hair-cutting.  Whenever he moved the barrow, to which
he was attached with an iron chain, the wheel squeaked monotonously.

"Ey, ey!" he said, with a knowing shake of the head at Pavlof.  "It
passes the time, but it's foolishness all the same, for if you lose
you starve."

"Yes," nodded Pavlof.  "The stakes are bigger than they look.  Can't
you stop that wheel of yours from squeaking so?"

"No, barin, I can't," said the odd little fellow, with an evident
desire to be obliging if he could.  "I've given it all the fat I can
spare, but it squeaks all the same.  The dust and the mud have got
into its throat, I expect.  So now I eat the fat and let it squeak.
You get used to it in time.  It's rather a pleasant squeak, don't you
think?"

"I've not got used to it yet.  How far have you brought it?"

"Over fifteen hundred miles, barin.  From down Orenburg way," and the
little old man sat down on his barrow quite ready for a chat.

"You must be pretty tired of it by this time."

"Yes, and no, barin.  You can get used to any thing in time, and I do
believe I'd miss it now if they took it away.  It's a bit in the way
at nights sometimes, when I forget it's there, but I talk to it as we
go along and it always says 'Yes!  Yes!  Yes!' to everything I say,
and that's a change for the better anyway."

"How's that?" asked Pavlof, amused at the old fellow's simple chatter
and manner.

"Well, you see, barin, my wife, she used to say 'No!  No!  No!' to
everything I said, and she didn't always stop at that either.  No,
bless my soul, that she didn't!  Now the little barrow never says
'No!  No!  No!' to me, and it never ups and knocks me down and sits
on me."

Here a small girl hugging a little slate-blue cat came up, and leaned
on the barrow, and looked up at the little old man and lisped, "Won't
you give us a ride, little father?"

"Ey ey! a ride, little Dushenka?  Well, well, get in and I'll give
you a ride.  How's pussy to-day?"

"She doesn't like the mud, little father," and she climbed in, and
the old fellow trudged away to an accompaniment of cheery squeaks
from the barrow, jingling fetters, and jerky prattle from the little
maid.

Presently he was back, panting and more cheerful than ever, and the
small girl climbed down, still hugging her cat, and said, "Thank you,
little father!" and ran off to a gloomy-faced man who stood waiting
for her.

"Ey, ey!" said the little old man, as he and Pavlof watched her grip
the gloomy one's hand and go off with him.  "His wife died two days
ago, and that's all he's got left.  Best off here those who have no
wives."

"But you are married yourself, from what you were saying," said
Pavlof.

"I was, barin.  The little barrow is my wife now," and he patted the
barrow with genuine affection.

"And why did you marry the barrow?"

"Well, it was this way.  My wife--my other wife, you understand--she
carried on with another man, and one day I hit him--and so I wear the
barrow."

"That seems pretty hard lines--just for hitting a man."

"Oh, well, I don't know--you see, he died, barin."

"And your wife?--your other wife, I mean?"

"She is at rest, barin, God be thanked!--and so am I," and he crossed
himself devoutly.  "We did not get on very well together, you see,
because she always would have her own way, and she was bigger than
me.  Still, she was my wife, and I could not let another man have
her.  And so--well, she died too.  And on the whole I get on better
with the barrow than I did with her.  It does what I please and says
'Yes!  Yes!  Yes!' to all I say, and my wife she used to say 'No!
No!  No!' and do as she pleased.  And besides, I can sit on the
barrow.  It used to be the other way with my wife."

"And how much farther have you got to take her?"

"Another two thousand miles, barin--all the way to Kara."

"And then?  Why, you'll be quite sorry to part with her."

"Oh, we don't part, barin.  I keep her as long as I live, they say.
I hope she won't get laid up or crippled in any way.  I'd never get
to like another one as I do this one.  Bless my soul!  I never
thought of that before.  Whatever should I do?" and his cheerful
little face grew overcast at the bare thought of it.

"You're a very plucky fellow to bear your troubles so lightly," said
Pavlof, distinctly cheered by contact with so brave a little soul in
so odd a little body and circumstances.

"Oh, I don't know, barin.  It's no good grumbling when you can't
alter things.  Besides, she's useful at times--like this, to sit on.
And she carries my pack, and sometimes one of the children, and now
and again my neighbour's little dog.  Now my other wife would never
have done that, you know.  She didn't like dogs or children either."

"What's that about my little dog, Gregory Stepanovitch?" asked a
tall, lean man, who had strolled up and stood leaning against the
house, watching the players and listening to the old fellow's chatter.

"I'm telling the barin he likes to ride in my barrow at times, Mr.
Zubof."

"That he does, and to sleep in it too.  I only wish it was big enough
to hold us all.  I slept on the floor last night because we were so
crowded, and it was all wet mud and it got into my bones."

"Ah!" said old Gregory with a chuckle, "I sat on my wife all night,
alongside your little dog, Mr. Zubof, and my bones are all right.
But all the same you don't rest your legs properly when you can't
stretch them out."

"And where are you bound for?" asked Pavlof of the newcomer.

"Only to the provinces, barin."

"And why do you take the dog with you?  Is he exiled too?"

"He belonged to my little girl," said the lean man gloomily, as he
fondled the dog.  "She and her mother would come with me, and they
took the fever and died.  It was just as well, perhaps, for the road
is very terrible for women and children.  And I couldn't leave him
behind, you see.  Besides----" and he nodded his long melancholy face
knowingly.

"Besides what?"

Zubof glanced round to see if the green-coated watch-dog was within
hearing, and then said cautiously, "I shall walk away from wherever
they send me, one fine day, and Fifi will be company for me in the
woods.  He's as sharp as a needle, and it's good to have some one
sensible to talk to when you're lonely."

"You hope to escape, then?" said Pavlof with interest, since he too
was bound for the provinces.

"Of course.  Any one can escape from the provinces.  It's just as
easy as walking.  But that doesn't say it's easy to get back home,
you understand.  That's quite another thing altogether.  But I've no
one left at home to go back to.  When I get away into the woods I
shall just stop there."

"And supposing they catch you?" said Pavlof.

"Why, then, of course, we go to Kara with chains on our legs."

"All the same," said old Gregory, who had been listening open-mouthed
to all that passed, "you'll starve in the woods when the snow comes
on."

"Oh no, I won't.  I've thought of all that."

"Ah well, one doesn't get out of Kara as easily as that, especially
with a squeaky little wife tied to your legs," and he patted the
barrow consolingly, as though to intimate that no slight was intended
and no umbrage must be taken at what was so evidently a fact.

"Out of Kara?  I believe you!  That's no easy job, though I've done
it more than once," said another, who had stopped alongside to see
what was going on.

He was a great burly fellow with leg-irons on.  His skin, where it
was visible, was brown as parchment.  His face was covered with a
matted growth.  He looked as strong as a carthorse.

"And let me tell you," he added, "There are some worse places than
Kara.  Yakutsk, for instance.  Gr-r--r-r!"

"And what is Yakutsk like?  Been there?" asked Pavlof.

"Yes, barin.  I've been there and nearly stopped there.  They call
Kara hell, but Yakutsk is a hundred times worse."

"That must be pretty bad," said Pavlof, to draw him on.

"Bad!  Well, you see, they're human at Kara, if they are a bit
difficult and hard on you.  But at Yakutsk they're just simple
barbarians--eat raw and sleep cold.  Beasts--just beasts, and not fit
to live among.  I'm rough and strong, and I can stand a good deal,
but I can't stand the Yakuts."

"And why did they send you to Yakutsk?"

"Well, it was this way, barin.  It was my first time and I was going
to the provinces, and there was a barin in our company, just as it
might be yourself, and he was bound for Kara.  And--well, he was very
keen to get back home again, and he got me to change names with him,
so that he went to the provinces and I went to Kara.  It turned out
that he was a red-hot bad lot.  He got back home all right enough,
but then he was fool enough to get caught again, and then it all came
out, and they found they had two of his name on their hands, so they
sent us both to Yakutsk to make sure.  We got away all right, though
it's not easy, for the devils watch you like cats, and--well, it was
bad on the road and he died.  No, if ever I'm sent back to Yakutsk,
I'll die there sooner than try getting out."

"And why did they send you here, Mr. Zubof?" asked Pavlof, of the
lean man with the dog.

"I was a schoolmaster," he said bitterly, "and I taught people how to
live and grow, and so they plucked me up by the roots and cast me on
to the dunghill, and here I am.  I never wronged any man, as far as I
know.  But they have killed my wife and child, and now I have nothing
left but Fifi here.  And we're going to live in the woods and care
for nobody....  I used to believe in God, but I can't fit Him in with
these doings."

"These are man's doings," said Pavlof quietly.

"Devil's, barin," said the man who was like a carthorse, very
emphatically.  "The men are underneath and the devils are all on top.
As soon as a man gets an office he becomes a devil."

"We're all just rats in a trap," said the schoolmaster, looking
slowly round the great stockade, "and sometimes I wish the trap would
snap and chew us all up with its big, black teeth."

"It's swallowed many a thousand," said the man who was like a
carthorse, "but it always spits them out again--to Kara, and
Nerchinsk, and Yakutsk.  And it'll go on swallowing as long as there
are any left to swallow.  Think not, barin?" at a sign of dissent
from Pavlof.

"No, I think not.  Sometime the end will come."

"Ah God!  That is too good to hope for," said the man who was like a
carthorse.




CHAPTER V

HOW TWO MET IN HADES

The great gates of the stockade swung slowly open, and a motley crowd
came in from the barges which had brought them from Tiumen, and the
older inhabitants gathered in long lines to see them pass, all except
the dicers, who remained intent on their game.

But Pavlof lay where he was.  The sight of the weary women and
children, smelling like wild beasts from the close confinement of the
barges, was always a saddening one.

The newcomers were drafted off to the already crowded kameras, and
the grey-clad droves settled again to their aimless wanderings.

While Pavlof still lay musing over his late studies--the man with the
barrow, the man with the dog, and the man who was like a
carthorse--one of the newly arrived came out of the log house where
he had been to deposit his grey sack containing his belongings, and
strolled along past the spot where Pavlof lay.  A big man with fair
hair and beard.  It was only when he had passed that Pavlof got an
impression of him.  But the impression was so startling that he
jerked out an involuntary "Good God!" and sat up suddenly and
remained staring intently after the man.  He argued himself out of
the impression and leaned back against the wooden house again.

But presently the newcomer came strolling back.  Pavlof sat up again
in rigid scrutiny.  Then their eyes met and Pavlof sprang up and ran
to him.

"Palma!  Is it possible?" he gasped, with a mighty fear dragging
rough hands across his heart-strings.

"What--Pavlof?" and their hands gripped tightly.

"It's good to see the face of a friend even in hell," said Palma,
with something of his old heartiness.  "All the same, I'm sorry to
see you here, Paul Ivanuitch."

"And I you, Serge Petrovitch.  And your wife--Hope Ivanovna?" he
asked anxiously.  "She is not here?"

"No, thank God!  She is not here."

"Thank God for that!" said Pavlof earnestly.  "But where she is I do
not know, nor whether I have anything to thank God for in her not
being here.  It is twelve months since they took me and I have had no
word of her since," and his face broke for a moment, and then pinched
the tighter.

"Sit down here in the sun and tell me your news," said Pavlof.
"Where are you for?"

"Kara--ten years."

"And why?"

"God knows!" said Palma, as he threw himself down on the dry spot
where Pavlof had been sitting, and Pavlof dropped alongside.  "I
don't know, and they don't know, or at all events they haven't told
me.  I have thought and thought till my brain cracks with thinking,
and the nearest I can get to it is that some of the folks we used to
help have got mixed up with some of these other matters and so they
drag us in.  It is what I always feared, but if the work was to be
done we had to take the risk.  I tell you what, Pavlof," he said,
thumping the ground with an angry fist, "I know now what it is that
turns men's souls to gall and bitterness and makes devils of them.
It is damnable work such as this.  I never counselled force.  I never
did a thing but what I believed for the good of my fellows.  But--my
God!--if--ever--I--get--free, some one shall pay for all this."

"And all for what?" said Pavlof quietly.  "For teaching men and women
to look up instead of down, and that they are no longer slaves."

"Slaves they are and slaves they will remain until they break their
bonds for themselves," said Palma hotly.  "It will come, Pavlof.  It
must come.  A nation cannot be ground down for ever by the handful on
top."

"It will come in time, but the time is long, and the grinding is very
bitter," and the silence that fell on them for a space was filled
with gloomy thoughts.

"Where have they had you?" asked Pavlof presently.

"Petropavlovsk.  And you?"

"Schlusselburg."

There was no need for details.  Those two words supplied them to the
very last letter.  They have meant torture, madness, death, to many a
man--and many a woman too--whose only crime was too advanced thought
for their fellows.

"And Hope Ivanovna?  How will she fare in your absence, Serge
Petrovitch?  Even if they have not taken her too?"  It was the one
thought and fear that had been churning through his brain ever since
he had learned that she was not there.

"Ach God!  Paul Ivanuitch, that is where they hit a man when he is
down," said Palma, boiling over again at thought of it all, and
emphasising his points with his fist on the ground.  "The thought of
her, alone and friendless, comes near to driving me crazy at times.
She may be alive.  She may be dead.  She may be in the gutter.  You
know how things would go.  They would seize everything I had and put
in an administrator, and nothing gets through their fingers.
And--and----" he stumbled, and looked piteously at Pavlof, his face
working with deep emotion, and the bold blue eyes, which had always
looked so merrily on the world, swimming now in a mist of bitterness.
"Ach!--you cannot understand!" he jerked.  "In a few months I was to
have been a father, Paul Ivanuitch, and I had persuaded her to go to
the country to give herself a chance.  And here I am"--and the heavy
fist smashed into the ground again--"and I do not know whether she is
alive, or whether the child is alive.  I do not know whether I am
still a husband, or whether or not I am a father.  God!  I know only
that I am no longer a man, but am becoming a devil at thought of it
all.  May his blackest curse blight them all for ever and for ever
and for ever!"

And again a bitter silence fell upon them.

"Truly, the grinding is bitter," said Pavlof at last.

"And we are between the stones.  But--sometimes--that which is
between the stones will catch fire, Paul Ivanuitch, and then the
grinders will see hell--as they did in France.  God grant I be there
to see it too!--and to help!  I was becoming a man, and they have
turned me back to the beasts.  Hope Ivanovna is an angel, and she was
making a man of me, and they will grind her to powder, like the rest
of us.  She would wait and wait, and hope and hope, and strive after
news of me and find nothing, and then maybe she would die."

"I do not think she would die, Serge Petrovitch.  She is very brave.
She is too bold-hearted to be crushed by them.  It is wonderful what
a woman can stand."

"Ay--but--there are times"--said Palma gloomily.

"Ah--that.  For that you must trust in God, Serge Petrovitch--as she
would."

"It is true," nodded Palma.  "I did not know so great good existed
till I came to know her.  They are nearer God than we are....  My
God!  My God!" he groaned, thinking only of his lost happiness, and
forgetful for the moment of Pavlof.  "And we were so happy and
growing happier every day.  And now----" and his fist rose and fell
in a miserable abandonment of hope.

It was the first time in twelve dreary months that he had been able
to speak to any one of all that had been in his heart.  There was a
gloomy satisfaction in unloading himself to one who knew and could
understand.

"We grew nearer to one another with every day that passed," he went
on reminiscently, losing sight, in the opened flow of his own
thoughts, of the fact that one man's joy may be, and often is, his
neighbour's pain.  "She had won me, heart and soul, to her work in
spite of myself, Paul Ivanuitch.  It was for her work's sake that she
married me.  She told me so, and I, like a fool, believed that in
time I could wean her from it and have her all to myself.  But it was
all the other way.  Since ever we were married I have had no other
thought than what would please her most.  I had come to see through
her eyes.  I had come to love the things she loved because she loved
them.  And now----" and he came to earth again with angry fist.

"And she, Serge Petrovitch?" asked Pavlof quietly, and if Palma had
glanced at his face he would have found it white and cold.  "She had
come to love you also?"

"Surely," said Palma, with conviction.  "A man may be mistaken about
any other woman's feelings but never about his wife's, Paul
Ivanuitch.  Yes, she had come to love me, and our love was growing
day by day."

And the silence that fell on them now was gloomy only on Pavlof's
part, for Hope's love evoked a glow in Palma's heart even in the bare
recollection.

And presently it came to him that their talk had been wholly of
himself and his affairs.

"And you, Paul Ivanuitch, why did they take you?" he asked.

"I was working quietly among the poor, as Hope Ivanovna would have
had me"--he could not forbear himself that trifling share in
her--"and I had no thought of ill to any man.  But they carried me
off one night and my place knew me no more."

Palma nodded.  "And never said what for or why."

"Yes.  They gave me credit for an intention to place myself in a
position of illegality.  But no such intention was in me--that is, as
I interpret the laws."

"And where are you for?"

"The provinces--five years.  Minusinsk I'm assigned to."

Palma nodded.  "That is not so bad.  Escape from the provinces is not
difficult, they say, though it's none too easy to get back home.  I
was talking to a man who had been through it, as we came along on the
barge.  He got home all right, but he could not keep out of it, and
now he's going to Kara with chains on his legs."

"Yes, it generally ends that way, I believe.  Which is your kazarm?"

"Number eight.  It was crammed to suffocation, they say, before we
came in, and now there are twenty more of us.  The days are bearable,
but the nights are simply hell."

"Simply hell.  If Dante had slept for a week in a Siberian kamera
he'd have had something more to write about."

"And when do we go on?  Do you know?"

"I think we were only waiting for you.  I saw them selecting a convoy
guard this morning."

"The sooner the better."

That night, in his fetid corner under the over-loaded sleeping-bench,
Paul Pavlof found it more impossible to sleep even than usual.

It was not an easy matter at any time, with over a hundred foul
fellow-sleepers above and all around one.  The sighs, the coughs, the
groans, the stertorous snortings and snorings, the restless movements
which travelled spasmodically along the packed sleeping-benches from
whatever spot they started till they stopped on the pachyderm carcase
of some heavier sleeper than usual, the quarrels, the cursings, the
jingle and clink of fetters, the poisonous, ammoniacal smells of all
those foul bodies, the sickening heat, the insects and vermin--truly,
to any man accustomed to the simple virtues of cleanliness of body
and mind, sleep in such a place was not a matter of easy
accomplishment, and Palma's short, descriptive word was amply earned.
Yet at times Pavlof had found sleep not impossible.

But that night it was very far beyond him.  He lay awake and with his
eyes wide open, too, in spite of the pungency of the atmosphere which
weighed on his eyelids like coins on the eyes of the dead, and set
his eyeballs smarting.  And, though the mirk and reek, and the heavy
darkness, and the thick log walls of the kazarm cut short his bodily
vision, the white soul of him looked past these and caught glimpses
of visions of another kind, and in the sight of them he smiled.  Now,
when a convict on the great Siberian road smiles to himself in his
kamera of a night, he is half-brother to the saints or joint tenant
with a madman, and the madman, I am inclined to think, has the
pleasanter time of it.




CHAPTER VI

HOW THE WHITE SEEDS GREW

As Pavlof had expected, the following day saw them on the road.

Palma and he, as political prisoners, had the right to travel in a
bumping teléga.  They both gave up their places in favour of less
capable travellers--Palma yielding his to an ailing wife who was
following her husband into exile, and Pavlof dividing his among some
of the bigger children, whose mothers had failed to convince the
convoy officer that they were under twelve.  Whatever their ages,
their small feet soon tired of the road, and they showed their thanks
to the tall man with the pleasant lean face--whose eyes still smiled
at them even when the day's march was drawing to a close--by shy
offerings of the wild flowers they had gathered during their
perambulatory spells.

Their road lay up hill and down dale, through fine rolling
country--mighty stretches of prairie land gemmed with flowers, dense
forests of birch and poplar with evergreens clustering thick below,
and now and again wide fields of corn still green in the ear, and, at
long intervals, straggling villages of weather-beaten log houses
where the women gave the children food.

The children, indeed, had much the best of it, even when they had to
walk all the way and grew very tired before the resting-place was
reached.  For they carried no burdens, visible or invisible, and, of
all that the grown folks carried, the burdens that were not seen were
the heaviest.

Even when they were tired the children would break out of the
straggling line, and flit to and fro among the flowers, and come back
laden with wild roses and bluebells and buttercups and daisies, and
prattling with delight in their short-lived treasures in a way that
braced weary mothers afresh for the rest of the journey.

For the first day or two both Pavlof and Palma felt even the sixteen
or twenty-mile course a long one.  The stone bags and casemates of
Schlusselburg and Petropavlovsk do not make for muscularity.

But the fresh air was a tonic.  The season had been a rainy one so
far, and they were spared the torment of the dust.  The full day's
rest each third day gave them time to recover, and before the first
week was out they found the day's march within their powers, though
the monotony of it soon began to pall.

They walked side by side and spoke much together, and, bit by bit,
Pavlof came to know much of Hope's life in Odessa, and satisfied
himself that her marriage had made for her happiness.

It was new life to Palma to talk of Hope Ivanovna to one who knew and
understood her, and who was never tired of listening.  He could talk
of her all day long, her sayings and her doings, her goodness and her
beauty; and the fragrance of her memory shortened the stages, and
softened the asperities of the road and the discomforts of the
crowded rest-houses.

And if Paul Pavlof spoke little it was because he thought the more,
and because he had no text so good to speak upon.  And in the reeking
darkness of the kameras where they were herded at night like cattle,
he looked past the cramping horrors and discomforts, and smiled--and
showed as yet no signs of madness.

The Great Siberian Road is kin to Death of the Equal Foot as a
leveller of distinctions.  Here men are equals in most respects, even
though the politicals receive an extra few farthings a day to live
upon, and have a right to bump their bones to pieces in the
springless telégas instead of tramping on their own two feet.  Those
are matters of small importance, however, in the darkness of the
overhanging cloud.  To all, the past is equally dead--a closed book;
to all, the future is a hopeless blank--a book sealed with many
seals, and every seal a sorrow.

In the comparative privacy of the dilapidated rest-house where they
lay the second night and all the third day, the burly ex-convict,
Ignatz, the man who looked like a carthorse, came to them and asked
if they would join a trade union the prisoners had been forming among
themselves, and of which he had been chosen president on account of
his unique knowledge of the ropes.

This idea of the "artel" was new to them, and Pavlof especially was
interested.

"What is it for?" he asked.

"We club funds, barin, and stand by one another."

"What to do?"

"Everything, barin.  We help you to buy food on the road, and if you
want tobacco or vodka we can get it for you.  Later on we can perhaps
get chains loosed for those who wear them, but that's not till we're
well into Yeniseisk.  And when you get footsore we hire a teléga and
ride in turns.  Oh, the artel is very useful, I assure you."

"Well, those things are none of them much good to us.  What else?"

"If you care to risk a bolt we can arrange that for you, barin.  But
I do not advise it.  It's dangerous, and only one out of a dozen gets
clear as a rule.  The rest pay--with their skins."

"And how would you escape from the provinces if you wanted to?"

"That's easy.  Settle down and be good and quiet and mild as milk
till you're ready.  Start in the spring when the cuckoo sings, and
walk away through the woods."

"And to get back into Russia?"

"Ah!  That's another thing, barin.  I struck north myself the first
time, till I got among the Ostiaks, but it is rough work.  How much
shall we say now?  If the artel can't help you, you can help the
artel, and the weaker folk will fare the better."

"Very well!--for sake of the weaker folk, and if we want your help we
will let you know," which was quite satisfactory to the burly
president-treasurer, who pocketed their donations and went away
smiling like a carthorse who has just filched a carrot from a
neighbour's cart.

"You hope to get away, Paul Ivanuitch?" said Palma, after he was gone.

"I may.  It's as well to learn what one can, anyway.  The
surveillance is very nominal in the provinces from all that I can
learn.  In fact, they do say that some of the officials wink at
evasions, and almost urge you to go."

"How then?"

"They draw the prisoner's allowances all the same, you see, while the
prisoner lives as he can in the woods and costs them nothing.  They
count on the final difficulty of getting across the last fence into
the home pasture.  I should think his idea of steering far north is
probably the best."

"If you get away will you promise me something, Paul Ivanuitch?" said
Palma earnestly.

"Surely!  I will do anything I can."

"Will you seek out my wife, and tell her--tell her not to grieve for
me?  I know just how she will take it.  She will be blaming herself
for having drawn me into it all.  And there is no need.  Tell her I
rejoice in what we were able to do together, and I regret nothing
except that we were parted for a time.  Tell her to leave Russia and
get to London.  There is money waiting for her there--at
Rothschilds'.  I foresaw what might come and provided for it.  Tell
her to have a letter always at the Poste Restante for me, saying
where I shall find her.  I will come to her as soon as I can--ay,
though I have to come red-handed.  You don't need to tell her that;
simply say that I will come.  You will tell her all that, Paul
Ivanuitch?"

"I will tell her all that--if I get away, and if I find her, Serge
Petrovitch."

"You can escape if you will, Paul Ivanuitch," he said, laying his
hand eagerly on Pavlof's arm.  "Promise me that you will escape and
tell her all this."

"I would do much to be of service to Hope Ivanovna, Serge Petrovitch.
I will do what I can."

"Ay!--I remember," said Palma, looking at him thoughtfully.  "Well, I
can trust you, Paul Ivanuitch.  I would trust you with my life."

"You may trust me, Serge Petrovitch.  A man has but one life and he
can put it to no higher use than the service of his friends."

And thereafter Palma suffered more cheerfully, in the thought that
sooner or later Hope Ivanovna would hear news of him and the
assurances of his endless love and devotion.

Perhaps the most visibly cheerful member of all their company was old
Gregory of the barrow.  In his former estate he was lowest of the
low, and of no account.  Here, through the fewness of his wants and
the consequent equanimity and cheerfulness of his bearing, he walked
head above his fellows, and became a dispenser of largesse.

He persisted in keeping as near to Pavlof and Palma as he could
manage it, and wherever he might start in the line, before long the
squeak of his barrow and the clink of his chains were heard just
behind them.

"Hi!  You're in a mighty hurry to get there, Old Squeaky Barrow,"
some would growl, as he pushed past them.

"All right!  All right!" he would chirp, with a face like a winter
apple.  "I like to be in good company, and these two barins are for
me."

His barrow was rarely empty, and its most frequent occupant was the
small girl with the slate-blue cat to whom he had given rides in the
prison yard at Tomsk.  She flatly refused to ride in a teléga among
strange people.  She toddled along holding by her grim-faced father's
hand, and clasping her cat with the other arm until she was tired,
and then climbed up into Old Gregory's barrow or her father's arms,
and prattled away to one or other as merrily as though life were one
long picnic, and convicts and prisons were not.

And when "Little Darling," as old Gregory called her, was walking on
her own account, or being carried by her father, the squeaky barrow
was still never empty.  Now it held some other tired child clasping a
bunch of flowers; now the impedimenta of some weary mother.  And as
to largesse, he was for ever giving away bits of brick tea to the
women who had children, and scraps of food to the children themselves.

"It doesn't take much to keep me alive," he chirped, when they
wondered at him.  "You see, when one hasn't been used to much one
doesn't need it.  Yes!  Yes!  Yes!  Take it, take it!  I don't want
it."

Palma, too new a convert to altruism to lose himself entirely in
thought of others, and unbuoyed by that which had by this time taken
full possession of Pavlof, found the going tedious, and more than
once broke out into furious commination of the bureaucrats who sat
like a curse on the land.  Small annoyances fretted him even among
the greater ones.  More than once he turned and vented his feelings
on old Gregory's squeaky wheel, while the old man gaped on him, with
open mouth and wondering eyes.

"To the devil with you and your wheel!" growled Palma.

"Ey, ey!" gasped old Gregory.

"Stop that infernal squeaking or keep away, man.  It's enough to
drive one crazy."

"Ey, ey!" said old Gregory.  "I know when I'm in good company, barin!"

"Find it elsewhere, then."

"He's a good old soul and you'll soon get used to it," said Pavlof.
"Let us be thankful we're not pushing barrows ourselves, nor even
wearing chains."

One afternoon, the long wavering line, articulated here and there
with the dancing gleam of a Cossack bayonet, was straggling through a
forest of larches, beneath which thick undergrowths of laurel and
rhododendron rose on each side in solid green walls.  The ground was
very broken, great rocks draped with lichens and moss pushed through
here and there and shouldered the road where they would.  At no one
moment could more than a section of the crawling procession be seen.
The day had been hot, the stage a long one, every one was longing
wearily for the rest-house.

Pavlof and Palma stumbled along in dogged silence.  The only sound
beyond the shuffling tread of tired feet and the dull clink of
fetters, was the shrill cheep-cheep of old Gregory's barrow, and the
grind of its wheel on bare patches of rock.  Little Dushenka was
riding in the barrow, but even she was silent and sat nodding her
curly head to the jolt of her carriage in unison with the slate-blue
cat's, both just sufficiently awake to keep their places and no more.

And whenever old Gregory looked at them he smiled through his
weariness and murmured, "Ey, ey!  The little wife is enjoying
herself."  And the little wife said "Yes!  Yes!  Yes!" and little
Dushenka and the slate-blue cat nodded, "Thank you, little father!
Thank you!"

And suddenly there was a stir behind, a gasp of amazement from the
prisoners, and in a moment pandemonium--hurtling curses from the
guards and the quick reports of their Berdans.  One foaming Cossack
sprang in front of the gaping line and threatened its broken ranks
with rifle and bayonet.  The rest dashed into the undergrowth, and
their rifles rang through the forest aisles as through the vaulted
heights of a cathedral.

A dozen of the prisoners had made a bolt for freedom, by
prearrangement evidently and undoubtedly by signal, for they had gone
as one man.  The rest, innocent even of intention, after gazing for a
time with open mouths, sat down in the road, glad of the halt, though
possibly in cases regretful at its cost.

And presently the Cossacks returned dragging their spoils with
them--three dead men and four more bleeding from bullet wounds, three
bashed almost into pulp with rifle stocks.  Whether any had escaped
they could not be sure till the roll was called.

The captain of the convoy stormed at his men, and they flung back his
curses from the corners of their eyes.  The prisoners looked
downcastly on the bruised, the broken, and the dead, spread before
them as an object lesson for future would-be absconders.

Little Dushenka stared with the rest, her blue eyes wide with wonder.
And suddenly she scrambled down from the barrow, and ran to one of
the bodies, and knelt by it with her cat still in her arms.

"Little father!" she cried, in her fluty treble.  "Have the bad men
hurt you?  Oh, what have they done?  Won't you speak to me, little
father?" and the little round face bent anxiously over the grim dead
one, which yet had been dear to her.

Pavlof went to her where she knelt peering into the dead man's face.

"Stand back there!" stormed the captain, in the middle of his furious
harangue to his men.

But there was a stricken little heart in question, and Pavlof paid no
heed to him.  He drew the child up into his arms and soothed her with
gentle words.

"Dushenka, little Dushenka!  Your father has gone to be with your
mother."

"Has he, then?--truly?"

"Truly, dear.  He has gone home."

"Back to Russia?"

"To a much better place than even Russia."

"Is it possible?  Then why did he not take us with him?"

"You will go too in God's good time if you are a good girl."

"And Katinka too?" hugging her little cat close to make it quite
clear that it must be both or none.

"We must see how Katinka behaves."

"What are they doing with my papasha?"

"They are putting him into one of the carts.  But that is only the
outside of him.  He himself has gone to your mother."

"Ah--truly?" and the little maid, lost in wonder, settled herself in
the arms of the tall man with the deep, kind eyes.

"Give her to me, barin," said old Gregory, as the captain came
striding up with menace in his face.  "She won't feel so heavy in the
barrow.  I will be her papasha and take care of her now."

"You are not my papasha, but you shall take care of us, Gregory
Gregorievitch, because you are good and we like your barrow."

"Now then, which of you were mixed up in this matter?" demanded the
captain, of the quivering line.

"You"--to Pavlof.  "Whose child is that?"

"Her father lies there," said Pavlof, pointing after the dead man.

"And you knew him?"

"Only through seeing him with the child."

"You had an artel?  Of course you had an artel.  Who was president?"

Pavlof shook his head.  "You know artel rules, Excellency.  He who
speaks dies."

"I'll artel you all.  He who doesn't speak shall----  Stay!" and his
keen eyes ran rapidly over the crowding faces.  "Yes!  I remember.
You!" pointing a finger like a bayonet at Ignatz, the burly
ex-convict.  "Step out here!  I have seen you busy among them.  Are
you president?"

"I was, Excellency.  But this was quite against my notions.  I urged
them against it.  It was foolishness."

"I'll president you!  Knock off all those chains," he cried to his
men, "and bring them here.  It is right the president should wear the
chains of office."

They prized open the fetters of the dead and wounded, and hammered
them on to the burly one's arms and legs, forty-five pounds weight in
addition to the five he carried of right--or wrong.  Then, chuckling
at his Solomon-wisdom, the captain set the convoy in motion, with the
decuple-burdened Ignatz as leader, and watched his heavy progression
with a connoisseur tilt of the head and a smile of malevolent
gratification.

And the abjects, quickened and saddened by this clap of sudden death,
plodded gloomily behind the creaking carts.  For the carts had become
elevated to the dignity of biers, and the motley crowd had become
even more of a funeral procession than it was before.




CHAPTER VII

HOW THE SEEDS BORE FRUIT AND FLOWER

The sleeping kameras of the half-way house were quieter than usual
that night.  So far as absence of noise was concerned it was almost
possible to sleep.  The gloom of the day's happenings hung heavy on
them all.  Perhaps the future also cast its shadow.

Ignatz, the chain-bearer, lay on the ground near Pavlof and Palma,
and whenever he moved he rattled like an armoury.

The short remainder of the afternoon's march had told on him, strong
as he was.  They had seen the veins swell out in his neck and
forehead till they looked like bursting.  And his eyes, when he
stumbled into the stockade, were dim and shot with blood; partly no
doubt with the weight of his burden, for where five-pound fetters are
a burden fifty-pound are torture; and more, perhaps, from the
injustice of it, for he had spoken truly when he said the rest had
gone against his advice.

"Can you stand it, my friend?" asked Pavlof.

"No, barin."

"They will see that and take them off."

"Yes, barin."

"If you can get through to-morrow, the next day is rest day, and then
we change convoys, and the new man may not be a devil."

"Yes, barin."

They did what they could to ease his burdened state, fed him, gave
him drink, packed his fetters with rags torn from their clothing; but
not much was possible to them, and Ignatz lay brooding all night like
a spirit in chains.

Next day his torment waxed with the sun.  He plodded doggedly on, and
Pavlof, from behind, watched the martyrdom keenly, and his trained
eye told him that the man could not stand it much longer.  It was
painful to watch, even at a distance, the sufferer's vain attempts at
easement; the chained hands knitted behind the swollen neck; clasped
on the crown of his half-shaven head with the dangling chains about
his ears; the heavy head thrown back to balance the weight in front;
the gradual bowing of the broad shoulders; the blind, stumbling step.

"He can't stand much more of that," said Pavlof.  "He'll either break
down or break out."

But Ignatz staggered through the heat of the morning journey, and
fell flat only when they reached the eating-place.

Pavlof tried to get him to eat, but the blood-shot eyes looked dumbly
at him out of the black-flushed face and he only shook his head.

The captain strolled round smoking a cigarette.  He came to have a
look at his work.

"Well, Mr. President?  How goes it now?  Stand up when I speak to
you!" he ordered, and Ignatz staggered to his feet and stood swaying.

"You won't be quite so forward in forming an artel another time, my
man, or if you do you'll keep it in order, eh?"

But Ignatz had nothing to say.

"When you reach the étape to-night you shall shed one chain, and I
shall advise the captain of the next convoy to take off one each
night till you get back to normal.  By that time you will have
learned your lesson maybe."

He flicked the ash from his cigarette and turned to go.

Then, instantly, with the spring of a tiger, without a sound save the
indrawing of a great breath, and a clank and a dull thud, Ignatz was
on him.  With his bunched fetters he felled him like an ox, sat on
him, and, before the others had found their wits, was demolishing the
captain's last semblance to humanity with smashing blows from
twenty-five pounds of rusty iron chain.

It was done in a moment.  The captain was probably dead before he
reached the ground, for the great knots of chain came down on the
back of his head with the force of a sledge-hammer But Ignatz sat on
his body pounding away still as if his own life depended on it.

All who saw had leaped up with cries of horror.  It was the sergeant
of the convoy who took the only way to end the matter.  He snatched a
rifle from a gaping Cossack, took careful aim, and fired.  Ignatz, in
the act of pounding, rolled over on his victim and the episode was
closed.  The sergeant took charge of the convoy, the bodies were
placed in one of the telégas, and the procession moved on.

The future is ever the outcome of the past, as every deed is the
fruition of thought, conscious or otherwise.  These dire happenings
brought the travellers face to face, in the most abrupt and
uncompromising fashion, with the great elemental facts of life and
death; and close behind them, and interwoven with them, were the more
complex perceptions of life in death and death in life.  Their hearts
were bruised and tender, their understandings were quickened to the
mighty meanings of things.

They spoke less now, as they tramped side by side, but thought the
more, and the thoughts of both were continually of the woman they
both loved, and of her desolation in her loneliness.

Pavlof heard his friend murmur her name in his uneasy sleep.  Once,
as they tramped in silence, Palma broke out in unconscious utterance
of his thoughts, "God! if I only knew that all was well with her!"
and never knew that he had spoken.  And Paul Pavlof, as he heard it,
smiled to himself as he smiled of a night in the darkness of the
kamera.

There come a day at last when they passed between two great brick
pillars, set up one on each side of the road.

"What are these?" asked Palma.

"We were in Tomsk.  Now we are in Yeniseisk."

"So!" and they went in silence and knew that the time drew near when
they must part--one for the comparative freedom of the provinces, the
other for the terrible tramp of two thousand rough miles to Kara, a
dreary journey with a drearier ending.

"You will do that which I asked of you, Paul Ivanuitch?" said Palma
presently.  "You will escape, and seek out my wife, and tell her all
that is in my heart for her? ... My God!  My God! what a pitiful
wreck I have made of her life, and I had hoped so much for her!"

"I will do what I can, Serge Petrovitch."

And that night, as they lay side by side in the kamera, Pavlof said
to him, "Are you sleeping, Serge Petrovitch?"

"I cannot sleep."

"Then draw your coat above your head and put it close to mine.  So!
Now, listen!  To-morrow we reach Achinsk, and there we part company.
You made me promise to do something for you, for the sake of Hope
Ivanovna.  Will you promise now to do something for me?"

"Surely, Paul Ivanuitch!  I will do anything you want."

"Swear it!"

"I swear it--if it is anything within my power."

"It is within your power and you are pledged.  Listen!  When they
call the roll in Achinsk you will answer to my name and I to yours.
You will become Paul Pavlof.  I shall become Serge Palma."

"Good God, Paul Ivanuitch!--What----?"

"You will go to the provinces in place of me."

"But----"

"You will wait till the cuckoo sings in the spring----"

"But--Paul----"

"And then you will walk away and strike north for the land of the
Ostiaks"--he felt Palma's body shaking as with an ague.  "You will be
very cautious, for Hope Ivanovna's sake.  And when you find her you
will tell her that Paul Pavlof did his best to live up to her
teaching."

"It is your life you are giving for me, Paul Ivanuitch," said Palma
hoarsely.

"For you and for Hope Ivanovna.  But perhaps not.  I shall try east
from Kara if the chance offers."

Palma was silent for a time, the magnitude of the sacrifice
struggling within him against the sudden mighty hope that Pavlof's
offer had kindled.

"It is too much, Pavlof," he said brokenly at last.

"You promised."

"Ay, but--this----"

"You must think of your wife--and the child."

"Ah God--the child!" and he strove against it no more.

Nine months later, "Serge Palma," lean and wiry, and worn with the
road, but cheerful of face, and with that in his deep-set eyes which
drew men's liking, trudged through the deep spring snows into Kara
and found his place among the forlorn and downtrodden.

And in Yeniseisk, "Paul Pavlof," big and bluff, fair-haired and
blue-eyed, listened eagerly for the song of the cuckoo which should
tell him it was time to be up and going.

And this great sacrifice and its acceptance were tribute to the love
two men bore to one most gracious woman.




CHAPTER VIII

HOW HOPE WRESTLED WITH SATAN AND GOT HER OWN WAY

"It is well with the child, Marya," said Hope Palma, as she rose from
her knees by the bedside and kissed the dead face of her three-months
old baby.

But Marya Ostronaya wept inconsolably.

"Dear heart!--Matushka!  It is no good to weep--he is safely home.
He will never know prison cell and chains.  He was dearer to me than
my life, but I thank God He has taken Him to Himself.  And I do not
think he suffered, Masha."

"No, he did not suffer.  See the smiling face of him," wailed old
Marya.  "It is the face of an angel from heaven."

"In heaven, Masha, dear, and that is still better.  He will have
found my father and mother.  Ah, how they will welcome him!  He is
safe.  And I am glad."

Her face was thinner than it used to be, chastened to a rarer
delicacy by the troubles of the past six months, and the great
dark-blue eyes seemed larger by reason of the soft touch of sorrow
below them.  But the brave true spirit shone through undimmed, seemed
even to shine the brighter for the fining and chiselling of its
tenement.

Since the day she had, at Serge's earnest persuasion, gone away into
the country for the sake of the expected one, troubles had pursued
her like a pack of winter wolves.  That hasty and, in her condition,
recklessly dangerous visit to the city flung her on the rack
concerning him.  All their efforts after news of Palma beat
themselves to pieces against the adamantine silence of the
authorities, like spray against a rock.

He had been arrested and carried off by the police--simply that, and
nothing more.  He had disappeared from human ken, as many another had
done before him.

His estate was placed in the hands of an official administrator,
pending developments, and his wife was left to get along as best she
could.  And all this at the time when, of all times in her life, a
woman needs every help and consideration that outward circumstance
may procure for her.

That the little one, when it came, was weakly, was not to be wondered
at.  The wonder was that either it or its mother survived so dreadful
a time.  For three months the tiny life flickered gently in their
tender hands and then went quietly out.

It was with a new and deeper reverence that Hope recalled the memory
of her own mother, who had suffered in her time as she was suffering
now.

She had her father's intrepid spirit, however.  Bend she must before
the repeated blows, but break she would not, and as soon as her baby
was buried she turned everything she possessed into money, and went
up to St. Petersburg to prosecute inquiries after her husband.

Wherever he might be she was determined to follow him, if it were
humanly possible to do so.  It was for love of her that he had been
drawn into the net, and her place was by his side.  And, moreover,
the motives which had in the first place induced her to join her life
to his had grown into a close and true affection.  He had loved her
very warmly, and his nature had deepened and developed by contact
with hers.  Her marriage had turned out a success, in spite of the
fact that she entered into it more from love of duty than for love of
the man she married.

The search after news of him was heart-breaking work, however.  Post
sent her to Pillar, Pillar to Post; an endless round of supercilious
insolences and cold evasions.  Her patient endurance of the
harassments of her quest might have worked upon a flint, but the
hearts of the bureaucrats were unmoved.

Her beauty, however, wrought for her where her anxious pleading and
visible distress failed.  The results of all her inquiries focussed
at last upon one, Colonel Zazarin, of the Ministry of the Interior,
as the man who could help her in her search if he would.  Her patient
pertinacity in time procured her an interview with him.

Colonel Zazarin was a man of commanding bodily presence, but his face
was predatory, his eyes and mouth lairs of low gods.  Hope recoiled
from him with the instinct of a dove from a hawk, of a lamb from a
wolf, of a pure woman from a foul man.

After a second prolonged stare at her face, the Colonel's haughty
rigour abated somewhat.  He questioned her at length, promised to
look the matter up, and told her to return in three days.  When she
went back he had more questions to put and told her to call again,
and again, and yet again.

She knew he was amusing himself with her, and that he could probably
have put his hand on the necessary papers in five minutes at any
time, had he chosen to do so.  Questions always, endless questions,
she might have been a criminal and he the examining magistrate by the
number and irrelevancy of his questions, and she found it more and
more difficult to retain her equanimity under it all.

Then, to her great annoyance, he took to calling upon her at her
apartments, to ask still further questions, and to convey trifling
scraps of information which only kept her hungry for more.  With all
her might she strove to keep her anger down, and to close the eyes
and ears of her understanding to the meaning of the Colonel's
distasteful attentions.

But it was desperately hard work.  It grew beyond her bearing, and at
last one day she broke out stormily, "Colonel Zazarin, if you have
anything to tell me, tell it me, and let me be gone.  If not, pray
say so, and I will try elsewhere," and the Colonel gazed at her
admiringly.

"Quite so, quite so," he said.  "But you are so impetuous"--she had
been in St. Petersburg a month, and knew just as much of what she
wanted to know most, as on the day she arrived, and of some things
much that she would have been glad not to know.  "A matter such as
this needs time, my dear young lady, time and much careful inquiry.
It would not do to make any mistake.  Is it your intention to follow
your husband--that is, in case we should find that he has been sent
away?"

"Certainly I shall follow him.  Where should a wife be but with her
husband?  Where has he been sent?"

"In certain cases condemnation cancels all obligations of the kind,"
said the Colonel smoothly.

"What do you mean?"

"Supposing, for example, your husband should have been sent to
Siberia, the law sets you free.  Your husband has no further claim
upon you."

"The law, the law!" she fired.  "Your law!  I hold myself under
something higher.  If you will not help me----"

"Well, well!  I have not said I would not help you----"

"Where have they sent him?"

"----To the Kara mines," said the Colonel at last.

She had feared it and had been prepared for it.  Yet Kara was better
than the grave.  But then she had never been to Kara.

"I shall follow him."

"Have you money?"

"The law--your law has seized my money," she said bitterly.  "I must
go as I can."

"Will you permit me to----"

"No, no," and she started up in haste.  No woman could mistake what
that meant.

"Well, well!  But you are so impetuous.  If you will go you will have
to get a permit to travel with a convoy."

"That I have a right to--even by your law."

"Certainly."

"Then I will avail myself of it.  To whom shall I apply?"

"I will see to it for you, if you will not permit me to----"

"Where can I get it?  How soon can I start?"

"I will find out.  Perhaps you can make it convenient to call at my
office to-morrow.  It is a terrible journey.  You have no idea what
it means.  Months of travel, and at the very worst time of year.
Wait, at all events, till the spring."

"I would start this moment if I could.  I shall know no rest till I
get there."

"Undoubtedly," said the Colonel, who knew a great deal more about it
than she did.

By one pretext and another he managed to retard the granting of the
permits for nearly two months.  Then there were delays upon the road,
and a weary wait at Tiumen till the Irtish opened.  So that May was
well advanced before she found herself at last sitting inside the
wire cage of the great convict barge which carried herself and five
hundred more into exile, and watched the yellow banks drift by into
the past like the lives and hopes they were leaving behind them.




CHAPTER IX

HOW HOPE SHORTENED THE LONG ROAD

In spite of her high courage and fervent spirit, Hope Palma never
recalled without a shudder the horrors of that long journey down the
Volga, over the Urals, down the Irtish and up the Ob, to Tomsk, and
thence along the great Siberian road to Irkutsk.  The physical trials
of the road, the defective supply of coarse food, the bone-bruising
bumping of the springless telégas, the promiscuous herding at night
in the filthy, unventilated étapes--the convict stage-houses--where
the tortured children cried incessantly till they slept and sometimes
never woke, and the equally tortured mothers tended them in stony
despair--these things burnt themselves into her very soul, and would
have broken a less courageous spirit.

Old Marya had had to be left behind.  The paternal Government
provided transport, such as it was, for convicts' wives and children,
but Marya had no such claim, and with unflinching kindliness Hope had
sent her home to her own people.  And the loss of her faithful and
whole-hearted sympathy was to her almost as the loss of a part of
herself.

What money she had she hoarded with miserly care, for there was no
knowing for what high service it might avail at the end of her
journey.  Every rouble might be a step towards Serge's enlargement,
and she treasured her pieces as the woman of the Gospel.

And yet, at times, the miseries of those about her prevailed.  The
little ones crept into her heart and her purse, and precious coins
were dispensed for slabs of brick tea and cakes, for any possible
sweetening of the bitterness which came home to her so closely.  With
her sweet, firm face and glowing eyes, and the tender pity of a
guardian spirit, she lived and moved among them like an angel of
mercy, and smoothed their little passages--to exile or the stars, as
the case might be--as well as she was able, and in such gentle
ministries found relief from her own griefs and fears.

She talked with the women as they walked, learned their pitiful
stories, and gave them much wise counsel which they accepted for the
sake of her brick tea, and remembered long after she and her tea had
passed out of their lives.  She argued with them day by day, and
scolded them by night, for their many and obtrusively undeniable sins
of omission and commission.  She saved many a tiny life by her care
and insistence.  That, indeed, was a doubtful benefit to the little
ones themselves, but she could not stand by and see them die.  And,
by her own words and her own high courage, she strengthened into
hopefulness many a heart that was weary to death of its load and
embittered with the bearing of it.

But each day now brought brighter weather, and to that extent
softened the asperities of the road.  The birches and poplars
fluttered trembling welcomes as they passed, as though they feared
the law might take official cognizance of more; the children began to
stray outside the slow-moving line to gather bunches of
forget-me-nots and wild roses, and Hope's sore heart was gladdened
and her eyes filled as the shy little tokens of their remembrance
were tendered her.

The aspect of the country surprised her greatly.  She had thought of
Siberia as a mighty desert of snow and ice and desolate wastes.  But
here were great sweeps of growing corn, and pastures and
farmsteadings.  There were rolling rivers and rustling forests.  They
walked in clouds of dust and the children picked flowers by the
wayside.

But this was midsummer, and Siberia in summer and Siberia in winter
are as different as heaven and hell.




CHAPTER X

HOW THREE PASSED WITHOUT MEETING

"On the Volga there is a Cliff," but the bureaucrats, for reasons of
their own, object to all mention of it.  For it recalls a glorious
time, long since, when the bureaucrats went under, and for a space a
free man ruled a free race--even in Russia.  And the would-be-frees
still sing of that time long since--but they sing of it below their
breath, for the ears of the bureaucrats are long and their hands are
heavy.

There are cliffs also on the Yenisei, blue and fair, across the
mile-wide stretch of swift-flowing water; and these cliffs, too, are
known to free men, and known still better to those who are not free.

In a cleft of the hills on the eastern bank, three free men lay in
the sun and watched the slow, methodic passage of the pendulum ferry
as it swung to and fro from bank to bank.  It was loaded to the brim
each time it left the further bank and it went back empty.  But the
crowd on this side grew but slowly, and the packed mass on the other
side seemed undiminished by the stolid bites of the big black boat.

"Da!" said one of the men in the cleft.  "There is no end to them."

"It is the first party of the season.  They have been piling up,"
said one of the others.

"Women, too, and children," said the third, and thought of one woman
and a possible child.

"Always women and children," said the first, "and it is a hard road
they travel."

And on the crowded boat, as it swung down stream to the length of its
tether, one woman looked across at the blue hills and thought that
somewhere away behind them lay the man she had come so far to find,
and she hoped that it was well with him.

When that load was landed there came a delay in the passage, and
those who had already crossed stood up and crowded the bank to see
why the boat was coming over empty.  But as it drew in they saw that
this journey was devoted entirely to the convenience of one
passenger.  He lay back in a three-horsed tarantas and seemed to eye
the motley crowd on the bank with a more than usually keen and
searching scrutiny.

At sight of him a hasty word flew round among the Cossack guards, and
they threw up their rifles to the salute.  And Hope Palma, who had
been watching with the rest, sat down suddenly on the bare earth
behind them, and her face was pinched and clouded as she recognised
her old tormentor, Colonel Zazarin.

"Nu!" said a woman to one of the soldiers, as the carriage sped away
in a cloud of dust.  "The great man is in a hurry.  Who is he, little
father?"

"It is the new Governor of Kara.  The last one is dead of the fever."

"Tell us, little father," said one of the three in the cleft, as they
lay on their stomachs, chin in hand, and watched the traffic below,
"why should one man have the power to do all this?  After all, he is
only a man like you or me.  Strip him and set him alongside me and he
is neither more nor less than a man.  And yet----"

"The trouble is that if you kill him there is always another to step
into his place," growled the other.

"And he, again, is only a man like the first."

"You cannot alter facts by killing men," said the third quietly, very
intent upon the scene below--"unless you kill enough," he added
meditatively, "as they did in France.  It is a system, and he is at
the head.  He is probably no worse than any other man----"

"That is not enough.  When all the rest are in his hand he ought to
be more than that.  He ought to be the strongest and the best."

"Originally--far back--I suppose he was.  But it is the system that
is wrong----"

"And we others suffer."

"Yes, we others suffer, and will suffer till the system is altered.
And that will never be done from the top, and can only be done from
the bottom by the shedding of much blood.  In France it ran in
rivers."

"Tell us how they did it in France, little father!"

So, lying with his chin in his hand, in the slant beams of the sun,
Serge Palma told them how France had once shaken off the thrall and
risen red and free.  And below them the ferry swung slowly to and
fro, and the crowd on this side grew greater and greater, till at
last the other bank was bare, and the re-formed convoy crept slowly
away along the road like a crippled snake.  And Hope Palma's spirits
were troubled at the thought that, in seeking the man she wished to
find, she must encounter again a man whom she had every reason to
fear and mistrust.

When the convoy was out of sight, and the eastern hills had relapsed
into their natural solitude, the three men in the cleft stole away
along the river to find some friendly fisherman who would put them
across and keep his mouth shut.  And so Serge Palma, known as Pavlof,
six weeks escaped from Minusinsk, toiled west in quest of his wife,
as she was toiling east in quest of him.

A strange chance, truly, that brought these two within touch of one
another and yet withheld the meeting.  But life is threaded with just
such narrow dividing lines.  And sometimes we cross them, and with a
single step the whole complexion of a life is changed for good or
ill.  But more often we press on all unconscious of that which lies
so close.  We escape disaster by a hair's breadth and miss fortune by
an inch.  And, though man be never so much a free agent, it is
comforting still to believe that there is a higher hand which holds
the twisted threads and guides the shuttle in its flight.

The journey had been a terribly trying one, and in spite of her high
spirit and her ministry of help, Hope had felt her bodily strength
waning daily.

At Irkutsk, with still a thousand miles between her and Kara, and
that the roughest part of the road, she broke down and lay there for
a month with a recurrence of her fever, born, no doubt, of the deadly
atmosphere of the rest-houses.

When at last she was able to take the road again, the summer was
past.  The bracing freshness of the autumn air was very sweet after
the weariness of the sick-room.  She was glad to be among her fellows
in affliction again.  She pressed on with new hope and unabated
courage.




CHAPTER XI

HOW HOPE FOUND LESS THAN SHE EXPECTED AND MORE

It was with a much reduced party that Hope travelled from Irkutsk on
the final journey to Kara--almost the Ultima Thule of exiledom, but
not quite.  There are exiles more dreadful in their hopeless
exclusion even than dreaded Kara.  With such, fortunately, we have
nothing to do.  The mere dry facts of life in the Yakut uluses twist
the very heart-strings with pity and indignation.

Wintry weather set in before they reached the Shilka.  Navigation was
over for the season, and the river ice was not yet solid enough for
travel.  So they took the rough mountain road on foot, men and
women--no children now, for which Hope was most devoutly
thankful--and tramped doggedly on through the pines and firs, with
the keen winds whipping their faces, and the snow wreaths laying
pitfalls for their stumbling feet wherever a mountain stream had
overflowed the path.

It was a terrible experience, but even the Kara Road has an end, and
it was with a heart beating furiously with many emotions that Hope
Palma saw at last the scattered buildings of Ust Kara lying in the
white basin of the hills.

Would she find Serge alive?  And if alive, in what state of misery?
Anything might have happened in the eighteen months since he was
taken from her.

Would Colonel Zazarin recognise her?

Would he dare to continue his attentions, to the annoyance of her
husband and herself?  His presence there would quadruple all her
fears and troubles and all Serge's difficulties and hardships, and
yet any resentment of his insidious friendliness might lead to
disaster.  She judged him utterly unscrupulous, and they were as
absolutely in his hands, for life or death, as rats in a trap.  It
was surely a malign fate that threw him across her path again.

But she was growing hardened to the blows of misfortune.
Hardened?--hardened to the blows maybe, but softened by the sore
heart-bruising, and wishful only to salve her wounds with the balm
and oil of service, and ready to leave the rest in higher hands.  For
all her thinking in all these years had only brought her at last to
this--that life, with all its crying wrongs and unattainable rights,
is past any human understanding, and that he or she who has looked
upon these things, and known the agony of them, must take one of two
courses--either abandon hope altogether, or rest it implicitly beyond
the power of man.

It was the following day before they reached the Lower Diggings and
trooped wearily into the great stockade of the prison, where the
Governor and several officials stood awaiting them.

The roll was called over, the convicts detailed to their various
homes of unrest, and Colonel Zazarin approached the group of forlorn
women who had accompanied their husbands or come to join them.

One by one they were dealt with and told where to go, and Hope's
heart came near to suffocating her as he approached her last of all.

"So you dared this terrible journey after all, Madame," he said
courteously enough.  "He should surely be a good husband for whom a
wife undertakes so much."  She bowed silently, and he continued--

"It was not out of any discourtesy that I left you to the last, but
that I might have the pleasure of conducting you myself.  If you will
follow me I will take you to your husband," and she followed him in
silence.

He led her out of the big prison gate and down the valley.

"You will find him better circumstanced than he might have been,"
said the Colonel.  "And, curiously enough"--with a short laugh--"I
feel under some obligation to him for having paved the way to my
appointment here.  They had a bad outbreak of typhus in the spring.
The prisoners died like flies; the doctor died.  Your husband offered
to take his place"--at which Hope wondered much--"and under the
circumstances he was allowed to do so"--at which she wondered still
more--"though it was directly against the rules.  Under his care the
Governor died"--she did not feel much surprise at that.--"I do not
say he would not have died in any case.  Still your husband failed to
keep him alive, and they pitched on me as his successor.  I
hesitated, I must confess.  Then I decided to accept the appointment
and----  Ah, here we are Madame!"

They stood before a tiny house built of rough logs, with dim little
windows, and long icicles hanging from the eaves.  The Colonel opened
the door, without knocking, and walked in.

"The nest is empty," he said.  "We will wait until the bird returns.
I did not tell him you were coming, because one never knows what may
happen, and to raise false hopes is a cruelty.  It is not a palace,"
he said, with a shrug, "but it is better than a kamera inside the
stockade."

"It will be home," said Hope quietly, lest continued silence should
provoke his resentment.

"There is no accounting for tastes," he said, with another shrug and
a depreciatory glance round, at the crude brick stove with its little
core of heat in a bank of white ashes, the bare floor, the rude
table, the couple of comfortless chairs.  It was all harsh and
cheerless, and might well have excited the distaste of even a more
hardened campaigner than Colonel Zazarin.

"I prefer it to St. Petersburg," said Hope, and Colonel Zazarin
shrugged his absolute incomprehension of such a state of mind.

"You could have been much more comfortable there, if you had chosen,
my dear.  I would have----"

"Oh, don't!  Pray don't!  I beg of you!"  And the Colonel shrugged
again and kicked some snow off his boot against the stove.  Perhaps
the pitiful appeal of her strained white face was not entirely
without its effect, upon even him.

But, as her eyes tuned themselves by degrees to the obscurity, her
heart began to flutter furiously again.  It was in her throat.  It
was choking her.

For, on the rough wooden shelf alongside the stove, stood a woman's
workbasket, with some unmistakable woman's work thrown carelessly on
top of it.  Before the stove lay a pair of woman's slippers; from a
hook hung a woman's gown; and to Hope's quickened eye there started
out from the gloom--like accumulating evidences at a trial--a dozen
other almost infinitesimal signs of female occupancy of the hut.

Her usually placid brows were knitted as she glanced quickly at
Colonel Zazarin, in the belief that there was some mistake.  He was
watching her keenly, and she looked away lest he should see what was
in her.

"You must give me credit for doing my best to dissuade you from
coming, Madame Palma," he said, with a gleam in the dark eyes.  "It
is a lonely life, you know, and a loose one.  Convicts have no
rights, you see.  They are outside the law, though at times they make
laws unto themselves.  And the Free Command here has its own peculiar
notions, and adapts itself to its own peculiar circumstances."

Then the door opened, and a woman came in and stood staring at them.
She threw off her hood and sheepskin coat, and revealed a shapely
figure and a fine frank face, full at the moment of a great curiosity.

"Ah, Madame Roskova, I have brought you a visitor.  This is Madame
Palma come out to join her husband," said Zazarin.

"You are very welcome," said the woman, with courteously veiled
amazement, and stretched a hearty hand to the astonished Hope.  "The
Doctor is up at the prison, but he should be in shortly.  This will
be a very great surprise for him.  Can I offer your Excellency a cup
of brick tea?  Madame is quite ready for one, I can see," and she
began to bustle about the preparation of it, poking up the fire and
reaching down the samovar.

His Excellency made a grimace, and continued to watch Hope Palma.
She had submitted dizzily to Madame Roskova's handshake.  She watched
her movements through a mist--of the brain as well as of the eyes.

What did it mean?  Why was this woman here in Serge's house--in her
place?  Her face looked good.  Her manner betrayed no confusion of
guilt.  What did it mean?

"Da!" said Madame Roskova, after vainly trying to light a small lamp.
"I forgot to fill it," and proceeded to haul out a tin of oil to
remedy her neglect.  "Ach!"--as the tin proved empty--"I will run
across and----"

Before she had got on her hood, however, there was a sound of heavy
boots kicking against the doorpost to get rid of the snow, the door
opened, and Paul Pavlof came in.

In the dim light he could not at first see who his visitors were, but
he expressed no surprise at sight of the official uniform.  Surprise
visits from the vigilant watchdogs at any time of night or day were a
matter of course.

Then, recognising the Governor, he took off his cap, and said, "Ah,
Excellency, we are honoured."

"I have brought you a visitor, Palma," said the Colonel.

"A visitor, Excellency?"

"Your wife."

"My--God!"--and he caught her just in time to anticipate the Colonel.

For, at sight of his entrance, Hope had sprung to her feet.  And at
sound of his voice she gave a little cry, and tottered two steps
towards him, and fell.

"Poor dear!" said Madame Roskova, full of sympathy.  "The journey has
been too much for her," and would have helped him.

"Permit me, Excellency," said Pavlof, through his teeth, and carried
her against his pounding heart into the tiny bedroom, boarded off one
end of the cottage, and Madame hurried in after them.

"Can I be of any assistance?" asked the Governor, when he came back.

"None, I thank your Excellency.  She will come round presently.
Madame is attending her.  No doubt the journey has been a trying one."

"And your patients?"

"The cold is helping us.  Captain Sokolof has taken the turn.  We
shall be rid of it in a month.  But it will be as bad as ever in the
spring unless----"

"All your representations have gone forward, but there is no reply
yet."

"Your Excellency would be amply justified in authorising the work.
It is a case of many lives or deaths."

"You know what they are," said the Colonel, with a shrug.  "We are a
long way off and the nearer things get the first claim.  However, we
will see, if no word comes.  One is not absolutely required to commit
suicide because those others are too busy with their own concerns.  I
trust your wife will not suffer from her journey."

He went out and Pavlof hurried back into the inner room.

Madame Roskova had opened Hope's cloak and dress and was bathing her
forehead with cold water.

"She will be all right in a minute or two," she said.  "Go and make
the tea.  It will do her more good than anything."

"Go you and make the tea, Anna Vassilievna, and I will see to her,"
said Paul, and Madame gave him her place and left them.

Presently Hope's eyes fluttered, opened, and she lay gazing starkly
up in the glimmer of light that came from the fire in the outer room.
Pavlof waited quietly till her eyes turned questioningly on him.

"Where is he?" she asked in a whisper.

"He is on his way back home by this time, I hope," said Paul softly.

"On his way home?  Serge on his way home--and I here?  Oh, my God!"
and she sat up and gazed at him in a very stupor of amazement.  "How?
Why?  What does it all mean?" jerked from her trembling lips.

"We did it for the best, as we thought, Hope Ivanovna.  We met in the
prison at Tomsk and changed names so that he might get back to you
the sooner."

"You changed names?" she echoed vaguely.

"Serge took my place at Minusinsk for simple exile.  I came on to
Kara instead of him.  He was to get away in the spring and get back
to you as soon as he could.  Now listen to me, Hope Ivanovna, for all
our lives are at stake.  Here they know me only as Serge Palma.  You
must suffer that or Serge will suffer."

"They know you only as Serge Palma?" she gasped, repeating his words
as a child repeats a lesson it does not understand.

"Yes.  But you must speak softly, Hope Ivanovna.  Here I am Serge
Palma," he said, slowly and distinctly, "and if by any mischance they
discover the truth it will mean disaster to Serge, and to you, and to
me.  Do you understand?"

"Oh, I do not know!  I do not know.  You must give me time, Paul."

"Serge," he said, in an insistent whisper.  "You must call me Serge.
Try to remember, Hope Ivanovna."

Here Madame Roskova came in with a steaming cup of tea, and the lamp
replenished with neighbourly oil, and words of homely cheer such as
she would have used to a sick child.

"Da!  That is better now!  Drink this, my dear, and then come and
thaw yourself before the stove.  Nothing like a cup of hot tea when
you're feeling down.  And you have got the cold of five thousand
miles in your bones, I expect.  And now I must run across again to
Marya Verskaïa as I promised----"

"Don't go, Madame!  Pray don't go!" cried Hope, almost hysterically.

"Da, then!  Marya will never forgive me if I don't, my dear," laughed
Madame.  "And by the time I get back you two will have found
yourselves and we can talk things over comfortably."

She still had on her cloak and hood from her late quest after oil,
and now with a hearty "God with you!" she was gone.

"Come out to the stove, Hope Ivanovna," said Paul gently.  "You are
frozen as Madame Roskova says."

"My heart is frozen, I think, and my brain too," she said, as she
dropped forlornly into the chair he placed for her, and sat gazing
into the stove.

And presently, as she began to recover from the first numbing shock,
and her wits began to travel, she said, like the child repeating its
half-forgotten lesson----

"Here you are Serge Palma!  And I----!  My God!  My God!  What shall
I do?" as it all came upon her in a heap, and she sprang up wildly as
though to go.

"You must trust me, Hope Ivanovna," said Pavlof gently, and took and
held one of the cold little hands.

"Yes, yes!  But----"

"Listen again, Hope Ivanovna!  If you will trust me all will be well.
Here I am Serge Palma, and you----"

"And I----?" as he hesitated, knowing so well the fine temper of her
spirit.

"For a time," he jerked hurriedly, "till we hear that Serge is clear,
you will have to pass to the world as my wife.  There is nothing else
for it."

"My wife!"--the very words roused tumult in his heart and sent the
hot blood spinning through his veins at a gallop.  Ah, if it could
have been so!  What a heaven the bare little hut would have become!
He would have asked nothing else of God.

But the words had a widely, wildly different effect on Hope.

"Pass--as--your--wife!" and she sprang up, incarnate scorn,
magnificent, blazing, scarifying--she who lay so brokenly in her
chair but a moment before.

"So this is the meaning of it all!"--and, if it had been, he had
surely withered where he stood, scarce daring to raise his eyes to
hers, lest she should see in them that which must be in them for her
alone of all women in the world until he died.

"It is for this you have planned and schemed and tricked?  For this!
Shame on you, Paul Pavlof!--to dupe a woman who would have trusted
you with her life--and more!"

"That is hard to hear, Hope Ivanovna," he said quietly.  "No such
thought has ever entered my head.  Still less the thought that I
should ever have to tell you so.  We thought only of you in the
matter, but--it has miscarried.  You see, we did not calculate on
your coming out here."

"Then you should have done," she said angrily.  "Did you expect me to
sit down and fold my hands and weep?  How little you know of
women!"--with most withering scorn.

"It is true....  We thought to restore your happiness, and I was
ready to give my life for it--and we have only digged a pit for you."

"I must go back," she said, the brief fire burning out already, and
she turned mazily towards the door.  "I will go back to Serge."

"Listen to me, Hope Ivanovna," he said, venturing a firm hand on her
arm, which still shook from the storm.  "I would hold my life as
nothing if it could accomplish your wishes.  But it cannot.  It is
impossible for you to go back at present.  Yours was the last convoy
of the year.  There are no convoys back and the Shilka is closed.
For your own sake, if not for Serge's, you must stop here for the
present."

"As your wife!" spurted the volcano once more.

"Nominally as my wife--for your own sake and Serge's.  For me--as the
most sacred trust God ever imposed upon a man.  You must trust me,
Hope Ivanovna.  You will have to trust me.  There was a time when you
would have trusted me without my having to plead for it--and I at all
events have not changed."

She made an angry gesture with her hand.

"If it should become known that I am not Serge Palma, and that Serge
is at large in the provinces, his chances of escape will be gone."

"And you would suffer!" scorned the final spark.

"Only in this way can I protect you from insult here--and worse.
Kara is no place for a woman to live alone.  Our guards are scum of
the earth and have right of entry to all our houses at any time of
day or night."

The thought of Colonel Zazarin and her utter helplessness overwhelmed
her and she dropped back into her chair.

"What shall I do?  Oh, what shall I do?" she moaned, and turned
instinctively for refuge from the certain evil to the proffered help
whose good faith she had never had reason to doubt before.  "Paul!
Paul! tell me what I must do."

He was on his knees by her side in an instant, and taking her hand he
said gently, "Only trust me, Hope Ivanovna.  Trust me as you used to
do and not a hair of your head shall suffer while life is left me."

"Oh, I trust you!  I trust you!  But it is past thinking of----"

"It will come all right if you will trust me, Hope Ivanovna.  Serge
is to send me word as soon as he is free, and then we can arrange for
you to join him.  Until then you shall be as safe here as if--as
if"--Ah God! as safe as if she were indeed his wife!  And he knew it
and she knew it--"as if Serge himself was here to take care of you,"
was what he managed to say.

She sat for a while gazing into the stove with pinched brow, and then
with bewildering suddenness she flamed out again.

"And this--this Madame Roskova, who lives with you?"

But Paul was past the point of upsetting by any unexpected exhibition
of the vagaries of the feminine mind.  Woman had always been to him
as a dainty sealed book.  The high hopes he had once had of a loving
study of the sacred leaves had been ruthlessly nipped in the bud.  He
was to learn in harder ways.

"Anna Vassilievna is the wife of Dr. Feodor Roskof, whom we all
know," he answered gravely.  "They were working among the poor in
Petersburg, as we were in Odessa.  They sent him to Yakutsk and her
here.  Her one desire in life is to join him, but they will not
permit it, and it is perhaps just as well, for it would kill her if
she went."

"But why is she here--with you?"

"She is here because it is not safe for any woman to live alone in
Kara, nor for only women to live together.  Madame Roskova lived
alone with Marya Verskaïa in a little house up the valley.  But the
Cossacks entered their room night after night, on any pretext or
none, so Dmitri Polokof took Marya into his house and Anna
Vassilievna came here.  She is a good woman and a true wife.  She
occupies that room.  I sleep here before the stove."

"You will tell her how matters stand with us?"

"I think not," he said thoughtfully.  "No!--  If ever it comes out it
will be better for her that she has not known."

"But--Paul!"--in a tone of pained remonstrance at his obtuseness.

"Serge."

And then, with a discreet preliminary knock, and a hitherto unknown
difficulty in finding the latch, the door opened and Madame Roskova
came in.

"Da, now!  That is better!" she said, beaming benevolently upon them.
"Madame understands things, and is no longer jealous of me.  Oh yes,
you were, my dear!  I could see it in your eyes.  And quite right
too.  I would have felt just the same myself.  But there was no
reason, I assure you, my dear.  He is a fine man is your man, and
easier to get on with than most.  But my own dear man still stands
first with me, and will do as long as I live.  Now it's all right.  I
have arranged matters with Marya and Dmitri.  They can make room for
me with a little squeezing, so I'll just take with me what I need
now, and the rest can wait till to-morrow," and she bustled away
towards the inner room.

"What does she mean?  You are not going, Madame?" cried Hope, with
the eyes of a startled deer.

"Why, child, you don't surely think I know no better than that?  Da!
It is like your kind heart, but it's ill coming in between man and
wife.  I've not been married twenty years without learning one or two
little things, and that's one of them.  Why, it'll be quite like a
new honeymoon for you.  No, indeed!  How would I like it myself, and
don't I wish I had the chance!  Ah God!  Yes!"

"Don't go, Madame!  Pray don't go!" cried Hope desperately.  "There
is no need whatever for you to go."

"And you been parted from him for nearly two years!" said Madame
reprovingly.  "Why, my dear, you would hate me like poison before
morning."

"Oh, I won't!  I won't!  I promise you I won't!  I will love you all
the more if you will stop, dear Madame.  I beg of you to stop."

"Nu, then!  I do not understand!" said Madame, looking curiously from
Hope to Pavlof and back again.  "It is a cold wife, surely.  Have you
been bad to her, or is she not thawed yet?  What she needs is your
arms round her again, Serge Petrovitch.  She has forgotten the feel
of it and is a little bit afraid of you.  I will take myself off as
quick as I can, and then you can have her all to yourself," and she
went on into the inner room, murmuring, "No, no!  I know better than
that," and they heard her still rumbling to herself like a
good-humoured volcano, as she gathered her things together.

Hope's eyes, as she turned on Pavlof, were the eyes of the hunted doe
at bay.

"She must stop," she said, in a fierce whisper.  "If you don't make
her stop I will go out and sleep in the snow, whatever comes of it."
And, seeing by his face that he was at his wits' end, her own came to
his relief, "Tell her I am ill and need her help."

"Anna Vassilievna," he said, going to the door of the inner room.
"My wife begs you to stop--for a night or two at all events.  She is
worn and broken with the journey.  She would be grateful for your
company and assistance."

"And you?  You say so too?" said Madame, coming to the door and
looking out on them in unqualified surprise.  "Well, well!  You are a
strange pair, surely!  But if you ask it, Serge Petrovitch, I may not
say you nay, after all you have done for me.  But I must run across
again and tell Marya and Dmitri, and assuredly they will think me
crazy--and you too, no less."

And presently she was back again, and set about getting supper ready,
but each time her eyes lighted on Hope's downcast face and languid
figure, she shook her head and said to herself, "Da!  I do not
understand!  I hope she hasn't got the fever."

And Paul Pavlof fell asleep on his mat before the stove just before
daylight, pondering vaguely the strange workings of the feminine
heart and mind, slightly oppressed at thought of this complication of
burdens thrown upon him by Hope's unexpected arrival, yet with a warm
inner glow at his heart, like the core of heat in the white ashes of
the stove, at thought of her there under his roof.  Hope!  Hope
Ivanovna!  Ah!--Hope Palma!

But in spite of it all, or because of it all, when he did fall asleep
he slept soundly, for in the short space of an hour he had passed
through livelier emotions than Kara usually knows in a year.




CHAPTER XII

HOW HOPE CAME SLOWLY BACK

It took Hope Palma many days to accommodate herself to the strange
circumstances in which she found herself, but it needed very little
simulation on her part to play the role of invalid.

Five thousand miles of travel hold certainties of discomfort under
the best of conditions.  Five thousand miles with convict
convoys----!  One shudders at the bare thought of it, when the mere
sight of such a travelling party chills the heart and haunts the
imagination for days.  It is liberty and humanity at its lowest;
Might trampling Right in the mud; the apotheosis of sheer brute force
and, as often as not, of sheer brutality.  You cannot get away from
facts, and these things are.

To any woman such a journey must needs have been packed with horrors.
To one like Hope Palma, trained from her earliest days to the most
vital sympathy with her burdened fellows, vicarious sufferer in all
their woes, and suffering the more the more she knew and
understood,--to Hope Palma those nightmare months of travel were like
the brush of a vicious censor blotting out the brightness of life
with a raw black smudge.  But the brush of the censor obliterates the
desirable, which still at times peeps tantalisingly through; and the
things that would show through this venomous smudge were horrors
which neither time nor will could efface.

She had forced herself to the needs of that terrible journey by sheer
force of will, and had the need continued she too would have endured.
But, the necessity over, and the tight-strung nerves loosed, they
lapsed in the recoil to a flaccidity quite abnormal.

For many days she lay spent and spilled, and apparently careless of
living, her one primal desire for quietness and solitude.

Madame Roskova's kind heart craved much larger ministry, both bodily
and mental, than was permitted it.  She would have coaxed back and
built up her patient's strength with cunning dishes, and reasoned her
away from the past with assurances of present safety and comfort, and
promises of future happiness.  But Hope begged so plaintively to be
allowed just to lie at rest that Madame could but comply.

"Just to lie quiet, dear Madame Roskova, that is all I require.  I
have been sorely bruised, and healing is in quiet," said Hope.

"Da!" said Madame.  "I am glad I stayed.  Perhaps, after all, you
know best, child.  When one is all unstrung like that one woman is
worth ten men, even if one of them is one's husband and a doctor.  I
know!"

Pavlof, too, began to fear that her health had suffered permanent
injury through the trials and hardships of the road, but he knew also
that the hardest blow of all had been the one that had fallen upon
her just when she believed she had reached the goal of all her
strenuous endeavour.  He knew that a sick heart makes a sick body,
and at risk of forfeiting the esteem of Madame Roskova, and greatly
to the exercising of her mind, he judged it truest kindness to Hope
to obtrude himself upon her as little as possible.

And Madame Roskova's wonder grew with the hours.  That two people,
presumably attached to one another, could come together, after two
years of arduous separation and biting anxiety, and treat one another
as coolly as did these two, struck her as something quite abnormal
and worthy of serious attention.  It was plain to a much meaner
intelligence than hers that here was a serious breach of some kind,
and her well-meant efforts at the healing of it caused them no little
inconvenience.

Man-like, and strong in his own inflexible uprightness of intention,
Pavlof saw no good grounds for Hope's extreme distaste to the only
arrangement possible under the circumstances.

After all--except for the delicacy of the previous conditions that
had obtained between them--it was the arrangement which not only had
the sanction of the Free Command, but was definitely required by it
for the safety of the female members.

It was hardly to be expected, perhaps, that he should enter into Hope
Palma's feelings in al!  their depth and intensity.  These were hers
by nature and by training and by force of singular circumstance.

Every hair of her head was precious to him.  To save her from injury
or insult he would suffer any extremity.  And she knew it, and knew
too that his love for her, veil it as he might, was as strong as ever
it had been, and here they were placed in surely as curious and
trying a relationship as ever man and woman endured.  Perhaps she
feared for him.  Perhaps she feared for herself.  Perhaps she knew
not what she feared, and yet felt the very sense of fear a torment
and a treason.

And in the shadow of that fear a coolness lay between them which
sorely troubled the soul of Anna Roskova.

Madame Roskova, however, was much too discreet to talk about the
matter outside.  Here was something beyond her understanding, and at
times she was hard put to it to keep herself in hand.

She would have given much to feel herself at liberty to discuss the
whole affair with Marya Verskaïa.  But Marya was young and a
chatterbox, and not to be trusted in so delicate a matter.  Besides,
she had never been married, and so could not be expected to
understand all the fine shades of abnormality which Madame's own keen
eyes and ears detected in the relations of Hope and Pavlof.

She had seen many strange things in her life, and some very terrible
ones, had Anna Roskova, but none had ever struck her as more curious
than the behaviour of this strange pair.  She puzzled over it, shook
her head over it, communed much with herself over it; did everything,
in fact, which a much-tried and bewildered woman possibly could do,
except talk about it to other people.

She was not by nature a silent woman.  In fact, to hear her cheerful
tongue going at times you might almost have thought she enjoyed
hearing it herself, and possibly you would not have been very far
wrong.  But she had learned wisdom and the golden virtue in a bitter
school and over more important, though never more puzzling, matters.
And concerning any subject she considered better not talked about she
could be as silent as the grave, or as loquacious as a prize parrot,
and, in the latter case, with just as little import of information.

But if she denied herself outside she made up for it inside.  She
spoke seriously to Paul and feelingly to Hope.  She reasoned, she
argued, she lectured, but she could not turn them from their curious
ways.  And surely no sorer trial can any woman be called upon to
endure than an insoluble puzzle right under her nose.

Not that she could bring herself to let them see that she was beaten.
That would have been worse even than the actual fact.  They saw, of
course, that she was much exercised in her mind about them, and at
times they were hard set to evade her pointed sallies.

"Serge Petrovitch!" she broke out one day in her brusque, motherly
way, "you are not doing your duty by your wife."

"How then, Anna Vassilievna?" he answered quietly.  "All that she
needs at present is rest and she is getting it.  You see----"

"Oh yes, I see what I see.  But all the same--" and a cryptic nod
comprehended all she declined to put into words, and startled
Pavlof's fears lest her womanly insight should have pierced their
shaky armour.  "Has she ceased to care for you, then?" and his fears
vanished.

"I have no reason to suppose her feelings have changed in any way,
Anna Vassilievna."

"No!  Then how in Heaven's name did she ever come to marry you?  You
have not changed to her.  I see that well enough.  But she--why, it
seems to me that she is absolutely afraid of you at times.  Have you
been hard to her----?"

"Never in my life."

"Well, well!  It passes belief.  Maybe in your long parting she has
found--but nay, she is an angel for goodness.  That I know, but as
cold as ice.  And then, if so, why would she follow you here?  Well,
well!  It just means that you will have to begin all over again,
Serge Petrovitch.  You will have to woo her as you did before."

"She will be all right again soon, Anna Vassilievna.  It is just that
she is worn out with the road."

"Ah da!  The road has worn her body, no doubt, but not her soul.
There is fire and to spare behind that cold face unless I am blind.
You must break down the barriers if you want to come into your own
again, Serge Petrovitch."

"We must give her time, Anna Vassilievna."

"Ah da!  Time!  Life is not long enough to waste in waiting.  Let
yourself go, Serge Petrovitch.  Do as your heart bids you.  Your eyes
are bright for her, and your heart is soft to her, when you are in
here.  But when you get in there it is like two icebergs meeting."

"She will come to herself if we give her time," was all she got for
her pains, and then she would try her hand on her patient in the
inner room with equal fortune.

The days passed very slowly in that narrow little room, but after all
those months of arduous travel Hope was content simply to lie still,
and would have been still more content if she could have lain without
thinking.  For much thought concerning the pass she was in tended
only to confusion and tribulation of mind.

Madame Roskova was kindness itself, but to Hope's quivering anxieties
there was danger to their present tranquillity in the very plenitude
of her thoughtfulness.

"Wouldn't you like to tell me all about it, my dear?" Madame would
ask, in so sympathetic a voice that Hope could hardly resist it.  For
it was the thing of all others that would have relieved her own mind
and the situation in every way.  But Paul had decided otherwise, and
he doubtless understood things better than she.  And Madame's very
next words confirmed the wisdom of his decision.

"There is trouble of some kind between you, I can see, and there is
nothing eases one's mind like a good talk."

And therein lay the danger.  For what was said in the inner room
might well get outside under similar compulsion, and all their lives
would be in peril.

So--"The only trouble is that I am a weaker thing than I thought,
dear Madame Roskova," Hope made shift to answer.

"Da!" said Madame.  "Weaker!  And you come five thousand miles with
the convoys, and been giving yourself away all the time, I'll be
bound."

"It tells upon one afterwards," said Hope wearily.  "When one is in
it one just goes on and on.  But afterwards it all comes back upon
one in a heap.  It seemed to me at first that if I lay still all the
rest of my days it would not be too long to rest, but your kindness
and the quiet are giving me new life.  I am very, very grateful."

"Well, well!" said Madame, permitting no evidence of repulse.  "You
know your own business best, my dear.  But don't starve him to death.
Good men are none too plentiful, and Serge Petrovitch is much above
the average.  He thinks of every one else before himself, and many of
us wouldn't be here but for him.  And when one sees him sore and
troubled one cannot but feel for him.  He loves you as much as ever,
my dear.  I can see it in his eyes," and if the little room had not
been so dim she would have seen the sudden tumult of colour that
flickered tremulously over the sweet, pale face.

Again and again, with the persistency of a much-puzzled woman, she
returned to the charge, and did her best to arrive at a proper
comprehension of this strange married pair; and that not simply for
the satisfaction of her womanly curiosity, but that she might do what
she could to make matters straight between them.

And many a sigh she heaved as she wished herself in Hope's place and
her own dear man in Serge Petrovitch's.  How different things would
have been between them!  Ay, though the road had worn her to rags.
For every scrap of her would have clung to his heart and drawn fresh
life from it.  Well, well! folks were built on very different lines
and some of the lines were uncommonly queer ones.

But worn out bodies revive more quickly than sick souls.  Time came
when the little inner room could no longer offer sanctuary to Hope's
troubled modesty without provoking suggestion of perversity, and
visibly returning strength left her no excuse for not joining the
others.  She had spun out the fine thread of her bodily weakness till
it was threadbare, and persistence must obviously before long
translate "I can't" into "I won't."

She was looking forward with dread to the levelling of her defences,
and the openness to attack to which the common routine of daily life
in so circumscribed a sphere must expose her, when there came to her
temporary relief one of those ghastly prison happenings which are
possible only under the terrible irresponsibility of autocratic and
bureaucratic power.

The tension within the little hut was slackened by the
counter-irritant without, but at a cost in bodily suffering to those
chiefly concerned which brought home to Hope, in tragic fashion, the
rigours of the _régime_ under which the community at Kara lived.




CHAPTER XIII

HOW HOPE GOT GLIMPSE OF HELL

The Free Command at Kara was a community hybrid of the
ticket-of-leave and exile systems.  Prisoners who had served their
terms in the prison or the mines without discredit were permitted to
live outside, where and how they could, on condition that they did
not leave the neighbourhood.

Government made them a trifling allowance of a few pence a day, they
were permitted to receive remittances from home if there was any one
there able to send them, and they might supplement their meagre
incomes within certain very narrow lines if they could find any means
of doing so.  Exercise of the professions was absolutely forbidden,
and as most of them were professional men, or in training therefor,
their hardships were many.

Life in the Free Command was less like living death than the life of
the prisons and the mines, but it was subject to many bitter trials,
not the least of which was the constant and ruthless surveillance of
their insolent Cossack guards.  At any hour of the day or night the
sheepdogs might walk in upon them to see that they were still there
and plotting no mischief.

More than once, Hope, lying listless in her little inner room, had
been startled by the sudden intrusion of a coarse hairy face,
surmounted by a fur shako, and two dull eyes, which glared stolidly
at her and roved insolently round the room, and at last took
themselves disappointedly away.

The officer in charge of the political prisoners and their wolfish
keepers was one Captain Sokolof.  Sokolof was in most respects a
typical gendarme official, obstinate, conservative, none too quick of
understanding outside the circumscribed routine of his profession.
But, on the other hand, he was not intentionally more brutal than
circumstances seemed to him to demand.  He carried out the
instructions transmitted to him from headquarters to the very last
letter.  Of his own accord he never added to them, and that was much.

His position was not without its anomalies, but he did not allow them
to trouble him.  Colonel Zazarin, as Governor, held supreme power,
but Sokolof was in charge of the politicals, and was answerable for
them, not to Zazarin, but to the Minister of the Interior.  It was a
command within a command, but as Zazarin never interfered with
Sokolof they got on well enough and rarely clashed.

Sokolof's right-hand man was one Lieutenant Razia, a reduced copy of
his chief, smaller in body, smaller in mind, if anything still more
stubbornly wedded to the last letter of the law as demeaned by the
Ministry of the Interior, since all his hopes of advancement lay
therein; withal something of a brute in his callosity and harshness
to those in his power, and hated accordingly, both in the prison and
out of it.  He was a low-browed, black-a-vised fellow, with a
powerful projecting under-jaw, and most of his head behind his ears
like a monkey's.  Pavlof took a dislike to him at first sight, and
never had reason to change his opinion.

Captain Sokolof had had a sharp attack of typhus in the summer, and
was still unfit for duty.  During his sickness and slow convalescence
his duties and his mantle had fallen on Lieutenant Razin, and Razin
made the most of them.  So much so, indeed, that the souls of the
prisoners--to whom Razin, if he could have managed it, would have
permitted no such high indulgence--were stirred within them to the
supreme point of revolt.  And the revolt of the utterly helpless
against irresponsible power armed to the teeth is one of the strange
sights of the world.

An in-prisoner at Kara possesses nothing save his bare life, and such
trifling ameliorations as the irresponsibles of their grace permit
him.  These are at best capricious, and when the small mind finds
itself in power it loses no opportunity of self-magnification by the
arbitrary exhibition thereof.  It fusses and worries and curtails
privileges which, small as they are, are still to the prisoner very
spice of the life that is drearier than death.  Under such conditions
the trodden worms sometimes turn, and then comes the amazing sight of
the powerless fighting the all-powerful, ants _versus_ giants, a
struggle that stirs one even in the hearing.

How shall men--and women no less--without a weapon, make head against
their keepers armed to the teeth?  How shall men possessed of nothing
fight legionaries with the empire behind them?  Even when a man has
nothing, so long as he lives he has his life; and when a man counts
his life as less than nothing he rises above his nature and becomes a
menace and a danger to the oppressor.

The power which strips him of every thing but life thereby leaves him
his sole means of defence.  With their bare lives the abjects fight
the ruthlessness that would trample them below the mud, and they
generally win.

For, strangely enough, the autocratic power which condemns its
victims to extremest bitterness of life still objects to their dying.
Savage as are its methods, it still covets rank among the civilised
of the earth; and an acute, hypersensitive fear of forfeiting its
precarious position serves to hold its punitive hand just this side
of death.  It insists on life where death would be a grace.  At
times, indeed, its victims are driven to madness and despair.  But
that is not of first intention, it is incidental to the system, not
authorised by it.  For how shall a Government, which cannot keep its
sheep in hand, control the doings of its underlings and wolf-dogs in
the pastures five thousand miles away?

So when, through extra brutality, or the callous stupidity which is
kin to it, the oppressed are driven to despair, they calmly say, "We
prefer to die"; and, since other means are denied them, they say, "We
will die of hunger," and they refuse to eat.

Then it becomes a case of endurance and bitter suffering on the one
side, and of much trepidation on the other.  For if these men die
wholesale, and in such a manner, inquisition must follow and a
calling to account.  Yet the ruthlessness that has provoked so dire a
test fears for its future control if it yield too soon.  And so the
dreadful duel goes on.  On the one side threats and futile attempts
at forced feeding, followed in due course by promises; and on the
other side the long-drawn agonies of slow starvation and the
invincible determination to die sooner than give in.

Such is a hunger-strike among the Siberian exiles, and when Pavlof
came in one day from his visitation of the prison with a clouded
face, Madame Roskova was quick to perceive it.

It was the day Hope broke cover perforce and joined them in the outer
room, and Madame had been jubilantly waiting his coming to reap the
reward of her careful ministry.

"Here she is, Serge Petrovitch, and almost herself again!  A little
frozen yet, maybe, but you must complete the cure yourself.  Nu!
What's the matter with the man now?" as Pavlof bent and kissed Hope's
forehead, and the blood rushed up into her pale face to meet his
unavoidable salute.

"There is trouble up at the prison, Anna Vassilievna," he said
gravely.

"What, then?" she asked, startled.  For trouble inside the prison had
more than once sent ripples over the high stockade, and had led to
general restrictions and a tightening of bonds.

"Razin has gone too far.  He has nagged and bullied till they are
desperate.  They have declared a hunger-strike, and some of them are
not in condition to stand much of it."

"Da!  That is bad.  Who is in it?"

He named a dozen or so, and at mention of some of them Madame broke
out into expressions of pity.

"Da!  They will die," she said forebodingly.  "No one knows what it
is like till they have been through it.  We tried it once in the
women's kamera at Irkutsk.  They took away all our underclothing,
that we had bought with our own money too, and made us wear convict
clothes.  And they took away our mats and made us sleep on the bare
boards, and they threatened to whip us.  So we struck, and sometimes
of a night I find myself lying in the cold and dark again, and not a
scrap of food inside my lips for ten days.  And mostly we were very
still.  The silence was like the coming of death, only full of
agonies at first.  And some of us moaned, though it was a point of
honour among us not to, and one night I bit my finger nearly through
and sucked the blood to keep myself quiet.  Ah God! a terrible,
terrible time!  And I am sorry for them."

"And how did it end?" asked Hope, anxiously horrified.

"Oh, they gave way when two of us died.  It was the fourteenth day, I
heard afterwards.  We lost count ourselves.  You see, we just lay day
and night without moving, and there was nothing to mark the time.  We
beat them," she said, with a gleam in her kind eyes, "but it was very
terrible," and sat, hands in lap, unusually idle, brooding over the
thought of it.

So deeply did their minds become engaged upon this matter that, for
the moment, their personal concerns fell into the background, and
Hope had time to accustom herself, unwatched, to the innumerable
little awkwardnesses of the false position into which fate had cast
her.

Pavlof almost lived in the prison, but refused to sleep there.  The
kameras at night are unwholesome at best, and he did not consider the
scattered huts of the Free Command wholesome places for women to
sleep alone in.

So he always came home to them sooner or later, and brought with him
the shadow of the silent struggle which was going on behind the grim
teeth of the great stockade.

He told them briefly of the grievous suffering patiently endured, for
the agonies come first, and are followed by the lethargy which,
failing respite, sinks quietly into death.

He told them, as the days passed, of the growing discomfort of the
authorities.  The strikers demanded the dismissal of the infamous
Razin, in addition to the restitution of their abrogated privileges.

Too ready a compliance on the part of the governor would be
equivalent to the hanging of a sword above his head for similar
emergencies; too late a compliance meant loss of life and trouble
with the authorities at home.  Colonel Zazarin was a man of wrath in
those days, and it was dangerous to approach him.

He would endeavour to strike the happy mean--happy, that is, for
himself, but a lengthening horror for the rest--by yielding to the
prisoners' demands when, in his opinion, they had purchased the right
with a sufficiency of suffering.  The risk lay in missing the
psychological moment when the scale should stand on the even balance
between life and death, and on Pavlof, as acting medico, was laid the
heavy responsibility of deciding when that moment had arrived.

Day after day he spent in the gloomy kameras, gloomier now than ever,
with death in its grimmest form hanging over them, waiting with the
patience of the inevitable till the time should come to drop silently
and finally down.

Several times each day he registered the falling temperatures and
weakening pulses of the sufferers, suffering much himself in all that
they endured.  More than once he urged Zazarin to step down and save
them.  But in Zazarin's judgment the malcontents had not yet suffered
enough, and he held grimly aloof.  For the doctor being a prisoner
himself, Zazarin took measure of him by himself, believed that he
would magnify the risks, and so discounted all his representations.

Night after night Pavlof came home with gloomier face; and, full of
the bitter thoughts his reports evoked in her, Anna Roskova went
about her duties in the silence of a deeply touched soul which knows
and understands.  Her critical eye no longer troubled itself with the
shortcomings of this most curious married couple.  Death was abroad,
nay, close at hand, and this was no time for hypercriticism of
abnormal curiosities among the living.  So, through the tension
without and the sufferings of many, Hope's personal troubles were
lightened somewhat, and her mind had little time to dwell on itself
for thought of those others lying in the deepening gloom of the
kameras till death should set them free.  The respite was grateful to
her, though the indirect cause of it shocked and wounded her sorely.

Madame Roskova questioned Paul minutely as to the symptoms of his
patients each night, and lived again her own bitter experience in his
telling of them.

"You will lose some of them, Serge Petrovitch," she said, with gloomy
emphasis, on the twelfth night of the strike.

"I told Zazarin so yesterday.  I have told him so twice to-day.  Two
or three are just on the line and may slip over at any time."

"He is a brute.  What does he say?"

"He says that those who pull through will not forget it as long as
they live."

"He is right.  It wouldn't be surprising if others besides did not
forget it either.  The only surprising thing about it is that a man
like that has been allowed to live so long."

"He is a hard man," admitted Pavlof wearily.  He had just come from
an ineffectual tussle with the hard man.

"Hard men and soft men are all alike when they are dead men," said
Madame grimly.

"That does no good, Anna Vassilievna.  The next man is just the same.
The others never learn."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Madame.  "If one man is killed for
his brutality the next is like to go warily lest he follow."

But Pavlof shook his head.  "Force never was a remedy, and it never
will be.  If you killed half-a-dozen Governors there would still come
one who would grind us all to powder.  The spring is poisoned.  Until
the source is sweet the water will be bitter," and weary as he
was--for the bruising of the inner man tells also on the outer--he
picked up his cap and flung on his coat, and went back to see if the
imminent shadow had settled down on any of his patients.  If Zazarin
lost any of them it should not be for lack of warning.

Hope and Anna Roskova sat before the stove hopeful of better news
when he returned.  But he did not come back that night, and they
understood that matters were at a critical stage.

In the kinship of the great shadow, Anna Roskova began to speak of
things that had come within her own experience, and Hope sat frozen
with horror at the recital of hardships and persecutions almost past
belief--of solitary confinements, prolonged till richly dowered minds
gave way; of brutal whippings, the indignities alone of which would
have sufficed to break most women's spirits; of life in the huts of
the Northern barbarians, which some of their company had endured and
marvellously survived; of batterings at the hands of brutal Cossacks;
of despairing suicides; of more merciful shootings deliberately
provoked.

And in the hearing of such things, bravely borne by men and women
whose gravest fault was too great a love for their down-trodden
fellows, Hope's own troubles seemed light and of small account.  She
took shame to herself for taking them so much to heart, forgetting
that the wearing of her body had had much to do with the depressing
of her soul.

She longed to confide in Madame Roskova.  The very relation of the
whole matter between herself and Pavlof would have been such a mighty
relief, both as to the past and as to the future.  In the light of
full knowledge Anna Roskova could have made things so easy and
straightforward for her.  But Pavlof had judged otherwise, and to act
against his advice might bring down upon them, and on Serge, troubles
beyond her understanding.

If Madame Roskova had some dim expectation that her own unburdening
might provoke response in kind, she was disappointed.  She gave Hope
every opportunity, endeavoured even to lead her gently in that
direction, but, in the fear of committing herself, Hope hardly dared
to open her mouth about her own concerns, though she could question
Madame eagerly enough as to the details of these terrible happenings.
And Anna Roskova misjudged her of a cold and reticent nature, and
marvelled at its alliance with so frank and beautiful a face.

It was midday before Pavlof came in, tired to death, but in great
relief of mind.  The hunger-strike was over.  One of the strikers had
died in the night.

"Who?" asked Madame anxiously.

"Sophie Rubova."

"Ah, the poor child.  I knew her mother.  Well?"

"We did our best to save her by forcing her to swallow.  But it was
too late.  She was a mere shadow and too frail to stand any handling.
I went at once to Zazarin.  He was for blaming me.  I reminded him of
my three separate reports yesterday, of which I had copies, and he
shut up.  He came down to the prison and pledged his word to satisfy
all their grievances.  If he had only done it yesterday he might have
saved the poor little Sophie.  But perhaps she is better dead.  She
would have suffered from it all her life, as some of the others will."

"It is simple murder and that man is a devil," said Madame Roskova
bitterly.  "May God cast it all up to him when his time comes!"




CHAPTER XIV

HOW THEY LIVED TOGETHER AND YET APART

As Hope had foreseen, the recovery of her health, sufficient at all
events to permit of her undertaking household duties, was the signal
for Madame Roskova's departure.

She had hinted at it many times, and had yielded as often to Hope's
earnest entreaties and remained.

"My dear," she would say of a night, with more than a suggestion of
reproof in her manner, "Serge Petrovitch and I have been very good
friends, and I am greatly beholden to him, but he will begin to hate
me soon if I keep you away from him like this.  It is not in nature
and it is not right.  If you really want me to stop, you two occupy
this room, and I will sleep on the hearth out there."

"No, no, Anna!" Hope would make haste to reply.  "You must not go.
Serge is quite content and so am I, I do assure you.  It is enough
for us that we are together," and then would she blush rosy red in
the merciful darkness and wonder if her soul was imperilled past
redemption by such unblushing lying.

And Anna Roskova said little but wondered much, and sighed for her
own lonely exile in Yakutsk, and thought again how different it would
have been with them, and deemed Hope but a cold wife.

But with returning health and the retuning of her jangled nerves,
Hope's outlook on life became to assume its normal aspect.  Matters
began to settle themselves into their proper places and to take their
proper proportions.  She saw that no one was to blame for what had
happened, that the strange mischance which had cast her into Pavlof's
keeping, while her husband wandered at large between Yeniseisk and
London, was the outcome of no plot, but a valiant attempt to benefit
her.  She recovered her trust in herself and her faith in Paul
Pavlof.  She saw that Pavlof was right, and that the only thing
possible to her was to wait patiently till they should hear from
Serge.  And she set herself bravely to adapt herself to the required
conditions.

And so it was with a certain equanimity that she one day received
Madame Roskova's announcement that Marya Verskaïa was sick and had
begged her to come and stop with her, and she was going on the morrow.

"Da!" said Madame, when Hope raised no objection, but simply
expressed her regret at Marya's illness.  "So you are reconciled to
him at last and don't mind my going!  That is right and as it should
be, and I am glad of it."

"I am very, very grateful for all your kindness, Anna.  I never can
forget all you have done for me.  But--as you say----"

"Da, child!  That is all right!  I am rejoiced to think that all is
right again between you.  I have thought you a stone, for the lack is
not on his part.  He loves you as much as ever.  He is on fire for
you, and no wonder.  I can hear it in his voice when he speaks to
you, and see it in his eye when he looks at you.  He just worships
you, my dear.  So be you good to him, for he is a man beyond most."

And Hope knew it all and was troubled for him.  For she knew that the
fire would never break forth to her undoing.  It might burn and burn
till it consumed him, but the flame would never scorch her nor the
smoke besmirch.

"You will let me bring in some of the others now and then?" asked
Madame Roskova, before she went next day.  "They are all hungry to
see you, and they will talk and talk and it will do none of you any
harm now.  It has been all I could do to keep them away.  But now you
are all right again----"

"Surely, Anna!  I shall be glad to see them now.  While I was lying
broken there it would have driven me crazy, but now I shall be glad."

So Madame Roskova squeezed into a corner of the little hut up the
valley with Marya Verskaïa and Dmitri Polokof, and sorely missed the
wider atmosphere of the doctor's house.  For Marya had a lively
tongue, and her alleged sickness did not extend to it or in any way
affect it, and ceaseless chatter becomes at times a weariness to the
flesh, to say nothing of the soul.

Dmitri, when he heard of Madame Roskova's coming, breathed a silent
but fervent "God be thanked!" and welcomed her warmly.  Marya
launched twenty questions at her concerning Madame Palma before she
had got her cloak off, and Anna, knowing her friend, replied with
discretion and supplied no grist but only chaff to Marya's chattering
little mill.

So Hope Palma and Paul Pavlof entered upon a new phase of the
strangely twisted story of their lives--a phase which tested and
tried them both in many ways, and was to Pavlof as the breaking of
seals and the dipping, chancily and hazardously, into the pages of
the unknown.  He learnt much of woman and her ways, and at times it
set his head spinning, and at times twisted his heart-strings.
Learning is bitter-sweet; at times a deep delight, and again, a long
travail; and the understanding of even one woman was beyond the
wisdom of the Preacher whose experience had been wider than most.

They sat long before the stove in silence that first night of their
solitariness, both their minds running swiftly in the same direction
but on different lines.

When would they hear from Serge?

Would they ever hear from him?

Supposing they did not?

Supposing they heard of his death?

The silence was verging on the irksome when Pavlof broke it, in fear
that it might become painful to her.

"I am glad you let Anna Vassilievna go, Hope Ivanovna.  It tells me
that you trust me."

"She has been very good to me and I shall always be grateful to her,
but----"

"Since you can trust yourself in my hands, it will make things easier
for you to be without her, I think."

"It would have been impossible to go on much longer like that."

"She is a good woman----"

"She was growing importunate about us.  If we could only have told
her the whole matter--"

"A whisper of it getting out would have destroyed us all.  Anna
Vassilievna is more trustworthy than most, but the matter is so very
strange that it would have been almost too much to expect her to keep
it entirely to herself.  Even if she did not speak of it her manner
might have set folks wondering, and one cannot be too careful when
lives are at stake."

"I have no doubt you are right.  In any case it is too late to tell
her now," she said quietly.

There was in this new atmosphere a sense at once of relief and
restraint.  With Anna Vassilievna's puzzled eye no longer on them,
they were able to be themselves again, without necessity for guarding
every word and look.  And this in itself was a mighty relief, for
false pretence is mother to awkwardness, and the natural man is the
honest one, the man who is just himself and claims no more.

And now, too, they could discuss their affairs in a way that was not
possible before, and therein also lay elements of enlightenment.

But, even in this new freedom, there was also a novel sense of
restraint, in the ever present knowledge that they two, of all people
in the world, were alone together in surely as strange and anomalous
a companionship as the world had ever seen.

And these mingled feelings again made at once for speech and for
silence, and so their talk was intermittent and discursive.

Pavlof, when he spoke to her, kept his eyes rigidly on the glowing
embers, lest she should see in them that which would not be
suppressed, but which he still would not have her see.  And how
should he, untutored man, know that she saw it all in the very
stiffness of his manner, that it cried aloud to her in every tone of
his voice whenever he pronounced her name.

For to woman has been given a sense denied as a rule to man.  She
knows by instinct when a man loves her.  And Hope Palma knew that
this man loved her still, in spite of himself, as much as he had ever
loved her, and that was with every fibre of his being.

And so, when her eyes rested on him, she already found a difference
in him since Anna Vassilievna left them.  For eyes, after all, are
but windows, and the soul that looks out of them colours all it sees
with somewhat of itself.

And yet, again, perhaps, after all, there was in him a subtle and
almost indefinable change bred of these new circumstances--the
unintentional outward manifestation of these mixed feelings of
freedom and restraint.  He was at once stiffer and gentler than when
Anna was there.  For then he had to assume a warmth of demeanour
befitting their supposed relationship, and to both of them it was
merely an assumption and meant nothing.  And now that no assumption
was necessary, though all the warmth was in him still, his fear lest
his real feelings should show through stiffened his manner and made
it seem unduly cold and formal.

Many were the nights they sat so, during the first weeks of their
release from Madame Roskova's kindly supervision, discussing at
times, and from every point of view, Serge's chances of escape and
the prospects of their hearing of it, but as often sitting in the
silence of their long, long thoughts.

"You really think Serge would be able to get clear away, Paul
Ivanuitch?" she would ask.

"From all we could learn there was no great difficulty, Hope
Ivanovna. It is not like Kara, you see.  Will you pardon me reminding
you again that here I am Serge Petrovitch----"

"Oh, I am sorry.  I cannot get used to it."

"It is only that I fear if you call me Paul Ivanuitch in private it
may slip out at other times and lead to trouble."

"I will remember.  You see, I have always thought of you as Paul
Ivanuitch, and it is not easy to begin thinking of you as Serge
Petrovitch."

"I know, and I am sorry for the necessity.  If it were not of
importance I would not ask it."

"And when do you think is the soonest we could hear from him?"

"He would get away in the early spring.  It might take him some
months to get back to Russia.  He would strike up north, which would
make it longer but safer.  Then he would seek you first.  Where would
he learn that you had come out after him?"

"Old Masha would tell him that, if he found her."

"He would seek her at once when he could not find you.  Where would
she be?"

"I had to send her back to her people in Old Khersonese.  They had
been very good to me when I was ill--when my baby was born."

"Ah--God, yes!"--with a face full of sympathy--"I did not dare to ask
you, Hope Ivanovna.  Serge told me.  What--did it----?"

"He died.  And I was glad.  Such a dear little fellow!  But when he
was dead I knew it was best so."

"It was very sore upon you, Hope Ivanovna."

"It was hard to lose him, but I knew it was better for him, and so I
did not mourn for him, and in my heart I have him always."

It was only round the stove at night, however, that they had time for
disjointed conversation, or, as the case might be, for brooding
thought.  Pavlof was working energetically with brain and hand to
stamp out the hidden germs of typhus from the prison kameras--as far
as that was possible without burning the whole place down.  It was an
almost impossible task.  Hercules himself would have given it up in
despair and applied the cleansing flame.

He talked hard and worked harder.  But the Governor, absolute as were
his powers over his prisoners, would not authorise the expenditure of
a single rouble on sanitary matters without express permission from
headquarters.  Roubles were none too plentiful and had to be
accounted for to the last kopeck.  Men and women were sent there
because they were superfluous.  As Zazarin tersely put it.  "Lives
are cheap, but money is always dear.  If we tell them a man is dead
that ends it, but roubles never die, and we have to account for them."

And Hope had the housework to attend to, and, since it was but a
small house, and she had much time and a natural instinct for
neatness and making the most of things, she brought and kept it up to
such a high plane of comfort that Paul Pavlof hardly knew himself in
it.  Comfortable, in a way, it always had been under Madame Roskova's
rough-and-ready housekeeping, but Anna Vassilievna's time had always
been subject to many outside calls from the sick and needy ones,
which had not yet fallen upon the newcomer, and--well, Hope's ideas
of comfort went further than Anna Vassilievna's.

Pavlof was so full of his Augean labours that he must discuss them
with her of a night, and Hope rejoiced in the new element as a relief
from the tension of those long brooding silences, which at times
became beyond endurance painful.

Then Madame Roskova began to bring in her friends, who had been
waiting impatiently to make Madame Palma's acquaintance, and once
they began coming the little house was rarely free of them.  For,
since the privilege of visiting among themselves was about the only
privilege the Free Command possessed, they availed themselves of it
to the full.

Their lives were hard and meagre, but in many cases their capacities
for enthusiasm, and even their enthusiasms, had survived their
sufferings.  How they managed to live on the trifling allowance made
by the paternal Government they would have found it difficult to
explain.  Their condition, indeed, was almost analogous to that of
the proverbial villagers who wrung a livelihood out of one another's
washing.  Anna Roskova, for instance, earned scanty kopecks by
mending and stitching for the officers of the guard.  Then there were
occasional trifling remittances from friends at home, some of which
reached them and some of which did not.  But all helped one another,
and among them they fought the wolf from the door.

They were most of them men and women of education and utterly unused
to manual labour, save such as the mines had painfully taught them.
And, since there was no opening for the professions, even if they had
been allowed to follow them, they just grubbed along from hand to
mouth as best they could and stubbornly refused to starve.  They ate
little and thought and talked much.

Paul Pavlof--whom they knew only as Serge Palma--was better
circumstanced than most, by reason of his quasi-official duties.  But
his own wants were of the smallest, and his hand and house and slim
purse had always been open to all who needed help.

Naturally, that house became the life-centre of the community and had
rarely been without visitors of an evening, until the arrival of that
least expected of all visitors turned the world upside down for some
of them.

While Hope lay in the little inner room, desiring nothing but quiet,
Anna Roskova had rigidly forbidden visitors the house, and the
cheerfulness of the community suffered eclipse.  Now that the shadow
had passed they returned with doubled enjoyment, and Hope need never
lack company.

They rejoiced in her courage in compassing that wearisome journey,
and one and all made much of her.  They brought her books and papers,
such as they had, and were ready to sit and talk by the hour of
Russia and their nipped hopes and blighted endeavours.

When the distasteful day was over they came quietly in, one by one,
and, over the steaming samovar of coarse brick tea, lived their lives
again, and even ventured at times to entertain hopes of the future.

Their eulogies of "Serge Petrovitch," his courage, his self-denial,
his sympathetic care of both hale and sick, knew no end.  They rang
the changes on his high qualities of heart and mind, till--when she
remembered that the Serge Petrovitch of these encomiums was not her
Serge Petrovitch--she sometimes tired of hearing them.  And again, at
times, as the praises of this Serge Petrovitch were ringing in her
ears, they would attach themselves by some strange perversion of the
senses to that other Serge, and she would think more tenderly of him
than ever.

And then when, one by one, the rest had crept quietly away to their
comfortless little homes, envious somewhat, perhaps, of the happiness
of Palma and his beautiful wife, they two would sit brooding over the
handful of ashes in the stove, thinking out their own thoughts, their
elbows almost touching, but between them a great fixed gulf.

"Is he alive or is he dead?" Hope would ask herself.  "Is he in outer
exile or pining in prison?  Or has he won through to freedom, and is
he spending himself and risking himself trying to find out what has
become of me?  Shall we ever learn what has become of him?  How long
shall I wait here?  Where can I go if I leave?"

And all her questions remained perpetual questions and there was no
answer to any of them.

And Pavlof, at her elbow, gazed steadily into the little core of rosy
life among the grey ashes, and asked himself--

"Is he alive or dead?  Shall we ever get word from him?  And if we do
not, what is to become of Hope Ivanovna?  She will not be content to
remain here.  And yet--and yet----"

He wished her nothing but good.  To compass her happiness he would
willingly lay down his life, as he had done once already in taking
Serge's place at the mines.  He wished Serge nothing but good.  He
had proved it.  And yet--and yet----

If Serge was dead--if the fiction of their lives could blossom into
fact!  Ah, the glory and the joy of it!  The heaven of Kara!  He
would ask no better than to live there and die there, so she were
there too.

How was it possible to restrain such thoughts with that quiet figure
at his elbow, with the sweet, clear-cut face, and the great brooding
eyes?

But when at last she rose and he quietly bade her good-night, though
his voice told nothing of what was in him and the shadows veiled his
eyes and face, she read him like a book, and held him in honour
because of the strong, true heart that was in him.

And when she was gone he unrolled his mattress and stretched himself
on it before the stove, and dreamed of heaven on earth in a Kara hut,
such as none but he would have rejoiced in--unless he were blessed
with the love of a Hope Ivanovna.




CHAPTER XV

HOW PAVLOF LEARNED HARD LESSONS

So the wintry days of their strange, anomalous life dragged on, and
held no weariness of waiting for Paul Pavlof, rather a fulness of
content as of one who, believing his treasure was lost to him for
ever, has unexpectedly found it again.

But it was not so with Hope, and Pavlof got many an amazing sight
into the sealed book, and learned more of women's ways than most men
learn in a lifetime.

For he had his regular duties outside which kept his highest
faculties alert and active.  And she had too much time for painful
thought, and, to a woman of Hope Palma's nature, the very fact of
having to live and act so flagrant a lie as circumstances had forced
her into, was to her feelings as the rasping of a file on a raw wound.

At times her heart grew sick with the weary indefiniteness of it all.
She said to herself that she might wait and wait for ever, and
waiting is the hardest work in the world.  Then, when the fit was on
her, she would break out, as she brooded over the fire of a night--

"Is this to go on for ever?  Shall we ever hear from him?"

In their private intercourse she had come to discard the use of any
appellation when addressing him.  It lent a curtness to her speech
which was foreign to her, but he understood her feeling, and suffered
it without resentment.  Paul Ivanuitch she must not call him, and
Serge Petrovitch felt to her each time like a fresh endorsement of
the lie that troubled her.

"We shall hear in time, Hope Ivanovna."

"You say it and say it, but shall we?"--defiantly.  "Suppose we never
hear?"

"Then--but we shall hear, Hope Ivanovna.  There has barely been time
yet for word to come, even if he got through at once.  If I could
shorten the time for you I would, but I cannot."

"It breaks my heart to think of him searching and searching and
finding nothing, and wondering what has become of me."

"It is very sore for you, but we are doing the only thing possible."

"In the spring I will join a convoy and go back and look for him."

"If you think well," he would answer gloomily.  "But where you would
look I do not know.  He might well be on his way back here in some
guise or other, and then you would pass him on the road."

"You do not want me to go," she would fling at him.

"I would give my life to serve you, Hope Ivanovna.  But I could not
counsel you to go in search of him, for I fear it would be fruitless.
He promised to let me know in such a way that no censor could guess
what he meant.  The moment we hear I will do everything in my power
to further your going.  Till then you are safest here, and I think
Serge would have it so."

At other times she would fall into such a state of dull depression
that Pavlof could hardly get a word out of her, and then he went
gloomily, and watched anxiously for a recrudescence of the sickness
from which she had suffered at Irkutsk.  But it was heart-sickness
that at such times made the body seem sick, and she would not allow
him to doctor her.

And again, in the baffling vagaries of her brooding thought, she
would find herself doubting him--him whom her better self knew to be
the very soul of honour.  And more than once her resentment at this
sore bondage of fate showed itself unworthily in words that cut like
arrows.  It was all his fault.  If he had let Serge come on to the
mines she would have found him there.  It was Pavlof's stupid
interference that had set everything wrong and landed them all in
this hateful coil.

And Pavlof, if he understood but dimly, trusted much, for he loved
much.  He suffered acutely because his hands were tied.  There was
nothing he could do but bear with her always with the utmost
gentleness, and that he did.

"It is Hope Ivanovna," he would say to himself.  "And she is tried
beyond bearing."

He had given his life for her husband's, and she resented it and
regarded him as an interferer.  It taxed his equanimity to the utmost
at times, but never by word or look did he show sign of what was in
him, nor did he ever depart by a hair's-breadth from the straight
line he had laid down for himself.  He kept strictest guard on voice
and look, and tuned them delicately to the necessities of the case,
and bore with her patiently like the gallant gentleman he was.

But if he never flinched under her flailings, and showed no sign of
wound, she knew when her arrows pierced.  Then, in due course, she
would recognise the wrong she had done him, and the swing of the
pendulum would carry her to the other extreme.  To salve the wounds
she had dealt she would unbend towards him and become sweetness
itself.  To wipe out the memory of her ungraciousness she would
become more than gracious.

And then in turn--and it needed a stout heart and a set jaw at times,
for her sweetness was harder to be borne than her undeserved
bitterness--it seemed to be he who was cold and hard, and held her at
a distance.

But these were her extremes.  Between times, and always, except when
these gloomy fits mastered her, she was just her own sweet,
high-spirited, clear-souled self, deeply interested in all his doings
and in the welfare of the community, and life became sweet to Paul
Pavlof.

If ever man was tried and tested to his heights and depths, it was
Pavlof in this earlier period of their companionship.

To live in such strange case with the one woman who was more to him
than all the rest of the world--so close to her--one with her to the
general eye--bound, by the exigencies of the case, to tender her
before others all those little observances of affection in which his
heart would have rejoiced beyond words had they only been
real--outwardly, all the happiness he had ever dared to hope
for--inwardly, the keen sting of the mockery of it all!

Yes, he suffered much.  "Without sorrow no one liveth in love," says
old à Kempis.  But at the heart of the sting was that keen, deep joy
which is the very soul and core of love.

Can one wonder that his thoughts slipped brakes at times and ran wild
and free?  The wonder would have been if they had not, for after all
he was but human.

Suppose no word ever came from Palma?

He had done all he could for his friend.  But, at best, his chances
were about even.  Some indeed escaped.  Thousands got away every
spring, and blindly prowled the steppes and forests till the winter
drove them in again.  But the percentage who got clear away to
freedom was not large.  Still, there was always the chance, and Serge
Palma had staked on that chance, and he was a man of intelligence and
resource, and would strain every nerve to win through.

And if no word came?

Then--well, it would either mean that he had failed and been
recaptured, or that he was dead, which was much the same thing;
or--there was the trouble--that the word he had sent had never got
through.

He might even then be vainly striving after news of his wife, while
she sat here waiting in vain for news of him.  And so it might go on,
month after month, till Hope grew desperate.  Then she would
desperately set out to find him, an utterly hopeless task, to search
the whole wide world to find one man, and that man as like as not
dead.

If no word came, their position would remain just as it was until
Hope left him, and was lost to him for ever.  While she remained, he
felt as a man may feel with whom a priceless gem is left in trust,
and lies for safety in his banker's care.  He gets no actual good of
it.  He dare not wear it.  He may look at it at times, that is all.
But still the knowledge that it is there, and in his charge, gives
him a certain glow of satisfaction.

Just so Paul Pavlof carried in his inmost heart the priceless jewel
of his love for Hope Palma.  She belonged to another, and that other
his friend, and so to him she was sacred.  But no power on earth
could keep him from worshipping her with all the might that was in
him.

But, dimly behind all this, lurked two possibilities, either of which
might solve the situation.

The one--that Palma, if recaptured, might be sent to the Kara
mines--a more than likely possibility.  For though the officials, for
the benefit of their own pockets, might wink at escapes, recapture
entailed severest punishment.

The other--that definite news might reach them, from Serge himself of
his escape, or through some of the constantly arriving prisoners that
he was dead.

In his capacity of doctor, pending the arrival of a successor to the
late official, Paul had access to the prisons, and he questioned all
newcomers cautiously for news.  But in this the utmost care was
necessary, for his position was utterly irregular and in flagrant
contravention of all official rules.  It was dependent on the caprice
of a man who had every reason to regard him as an obstacle in his
path.  It was only the general fear of a further outbreak of the
terrible prison scourge, which permitted him to exercise his
profession at all.  For typhus is no respecter of uniforms, and when
once it got loose there was no knowing where it would stop.

Colonel Zazarin dropped in occasionally to see if Madame Palma was
sickening of life at Kara; the gendarmes called at least once every
day, as they did at the house of every out-prisoner, to see that they
were still there; and of friendlier visitors she had no lack.

But at times Hope Palma's heart grew so weary of this shadowed
waiting, that she came to feel, at last, that news of any kind, even
the worst, would be better than no news at all.




CHAPTER XVI

HOW THEY SAT SIDE BY SIDE WITH A GULF BETWEEN

One day, as winter was drawing towards the spring, Pavlof received a
customary order to inspect a convoy of newly-arrived prisoners.

Since the epidemic of the previous year the officials had exercised
unusual precautions, more with a view, however, to their own safety
than from any special care for the rest.  These entailed no
expenditure of money and little trouble for themselves.  Each convoy
as it arrived was carefully inspected, for life in the _étapes_ was
an inducement to disease.  To one who had passed through those
hotbeds of vice and infection himself, it seemed a miracle that any
could possibly come through uncontaminated.

The authorities at St. Petersburg--busy just then with more important
matters--had taken no slightest notice of the Governor's request for
a successor to the late medical officer.  So Pavlof, in the exercise
of his duties, subjected every arrival, male and female, to careful
examination, and promptly isolated every suspicious case.  With a
view to the utilisation of waste material, they were tended in
hospital by female prisoners of some standing, under the distant but
arbitrary oversight of Cossack sentries, whose natural density led
them at times to interfere between nurses and patients when neither
had dreamt for a moment of overstepping the most rigid disciplinary
bounds.  But they were, for the most part, dull-witted, low-browed,
bullet-headed fellows, whose narrow understandings were capable of
little beyond the fact that these were prisoners and they their
warders.  Coarse-grained by nature, their feelings had become
pachyderm through constant contact with suffering humanity, and their
highest aspirations might safely have been packed into a glass of
vodka.

Many a strange meeting took place in that wretched hospital.  In
spite of the vigilance of the officials, it became a regular bureau
of information concerning the happenings in the outside world.

The news, indeed, that trickled through was many months old, but it
was of a very definite character, and concerned matters of very
special interest which the rigid censorship would never have admitted
in any other way.  For the letters to the Free Command were subject
to severest scrutiny and most abominable mutilation, and reached them
occasionally, when they reached them at all, in fragments which taxed
their ingenuity sorely at times to make head or tail of.

Among the abjects subjected to Pavlof's scrutiny that day was one
whom he recognised, in spite of travel-wear and tangle, and a quick
glance of surprise passed between them.

Mikhail Barenin had been one of the circle in Odessa to which Hope
Arskaïa and himself, and later Serge Palma, had belonged.  Paul
promptly consigned him to hospital as a suspicious case, and
presently visited him there.

"So you have come to join us, Mikhail Mikhailovitch?" he whispered,
as he laid a professional hand on his patient's wrist.

"And you, Paul Ivanuitch?  How come you on the side of the
oppressors?"

"Force of circumstances.  The doctor died of typhus.  They were
scared out of their lives, so they let me take his place till a new
one comes.  It enables me to serve my friends at times.  But listen,
Mikhail Mikhailovitch, and do not forget!  I changed names on the
road with Serge Palma, and here I am known by his name."

"I will remember.  You may wear it without fear of disturbance."

"How?  You have news?  Tell me quick," and his heart was in his
throat at thought of what this might possibly mean for him--and to
Hope.

"Serge Petrovitch--Palma--is dead.  He was shot in an attempt to
escape."

Pavlof's face burned red as his released heart sent the hot blood
whirling on its way.  He ground his teeth to keep his face from
twisting.  He closed his eyes for a moment lest the light in them
should blaze his secret abroad.

"You are sure of this, Mikhail Mikhailovitch?" he asked, when his
thumping heart gave him leave to speak.

"Quite sure of the report.  I was not there to see.  But it was
accepted as true before I left."

"We will speak of it again"--as the Cossack sentry sauntered towards
them.  "I can keep you here for some days.  The rest will do you
good.  Remember, I am Serge Palma."

The other nodded and closed his eyes wearily.  The comforts of a
prison hospital were slight, but it was heaven compared with the
pestiferous étapes and crowded kameras and the drudgery of the mines.

Paul Pavlof had enough to occupy his mind that day, and as he lay on
his mattress before the stove at night his thoughts tossed him to and
fro and gave him little rest.

Before morning he had decided that Mikhail Barenin must be told of
Hope's presence there, and how it came about.  For an unlikely, but
still possible, chance encounter between them, even at a distance,
might otherwise lead to trouble.

As to telling Hope of the report of Serge's death, he could not make
up his mind.

He debated it with and against himself, and tried to look at it in
every possible light.

If he could have been absolutely assured of its truth he would not
have hesitated.  But he could not be sure.  It might be true.  It
might very likely be true.  It was just as likely to be true as not.
Nay, he said to himself at last, it was more likely to be true than
not.  And thereupon brought himself to with a round turn and took
himself soberly to task.

For after all, looked at coldly, calmly, judicially--points of view
only to be arrived at after severest condemnation of the
self-confessed prisoner at the bar--it might not be true, and, above
all thought of himself, was his thought for her, and--ay--of her.
For, do what he would, now that the door of possibility, of
probability--must he with shame confess it,--of hope, was unlatched
by Mikhail Barenin's news, his thoughts refused the leash and ran
freely.  They leaped barriers, and climbed ladders whose end might
rest in Kara snows, but whose summits touched rosy heavens.  For a
man may control his judgment, his words, his looks, but his thoughts
have a will of their own and a way of their own, and when they take
the bit it is time for him to pray that he may be delivered from evil.

He saw Barenin again next day, and under cover of a careful
examination of his patient, while the sentry looked on suspiciously
from a distance, he managed to tell him what he wished.

"Put out your tongue, Barenin," he said, "and listen to me before the
watchdog barks.  Hope Palma is here--keep your tongue out, man--she
came expecting to find her husband, of course.  We have been waiting
news.  I have not told her yet lest it should not be true.  I am
supposed to be Palma.  She is supposed to be my wife.  She lives in
my house since it is not safe for a woman to live here alone.  But
she lives only in hope of word from Palma so that she may join him.
Now you understand the situation."

"I understand."  There was a twinkle in his eye as he added, "For
your sake I hope the news is true."

"I wish only her happiness."

"We know that who know you.  It was a surprise to us all when she
married Palma.  Every one thought----"

"Here comes the sentry.  Your wrist----  So!  You must remain here a
day or two still.  I will see you to-morrow."

At home he imposed so strict a guard upon himself, lest the tumult
which Barenin's news had excited in him should escape in look or
tone, that to Hope it seemed that he had suddenly become cold and
distant as never before.

Time and restored health had made her almost her old self again,
capable once more of calm, wide views of life, and less given to fits
of bitter despondency, though these indeed still came upon her at
times.  Now, taking blame to herself for his coldness, she tried back
in her mind for cause given, and failed to find it in spite of most
rigorous searching.

She knew him too well to believe him capable of ill-feeling for her
past offences; and had she not shown him by subsequent gracious
meekness that her declensions came not of herself, but of her
circumstances?

Finally, unaware of the fundamental upheaval wrought in him by
Barenin's news, she said to herself that the complexities of their
position were trying them both too hardly, and that the time had come
for a change.

Yet where to go and what to do?  Any move might be the wrong one and
deprive her of the news for which she was waiting.

She could not, like Anna Roskova, find another lodging.  For where
should Serge Palma's wife live except with Serge Palma?  And as to
getting away, the risks and difficulties would be enormous.  The
nightmare horrors of the convoys and rest-houses still overwhelmed
her at times, and, deep in heart, unacknowledged, not to be thought
about, but still there, was a deep, comforting sense of peace and
security in Pavlof's guardianship, and a very great disinclination to
lose it.  She was at her wits' end, and sorely troubled in her mind
as to what course to pursue.

Paul had not dared to tell her of Barenin's presence at Kara.  She
would inevitably ask if he brought any news, and then he must
disclose the whole matter.

Meanwhile he gripped his heart and treated her with the gravest
courtesy.  He provided for her comfort in every way within the
compass of his power and the limited possibilities of Kara.  But, by
reason of the fire that was in him, he bore himself coldly perforce,
hard as it was to do so, lest the slightest divergence from his
narrow line should lead him astray into the open country of his
heart's desire, and show her that which he was doing his best to keep
from her.

And she?  Trust her, she knew, somewhat at all events, of that which
was in him, in spite of all his iciness and aloofness.  And perhaps
she feared somewhat for herself, and perhaps she feared somewhat for
him.  But always, except at those rarer and rarer intervals when her
heart got twisted awry with the long strain of waiting, she thought
of him warmly and gratefully.

Yet, now and again, after sitting in long silence before the stove of
a night, the falseness and awkwardness of their position would spur
her to speech, though the result was always the same.  And--

"How much longer are we to go on in this way?" she would jerk out.

"What would you do, Hope Ivanovna?"

"Oh, I do not know, but I feel that I ought to be going."

"Where would you go?"  At which she would shake her head hopelessly.

"I do not know, but I feel myself a burden to you."

"You know better, Hope Ivanovna," and he would strive to make that
statement as colourless as possible.

"Shall we ever hear?" she would ask.

"God knows," and he thought of Barenin.

They never got much further than that, and she remained there,
waiting, waiting, waiting, for the news which never came--a captivity
of the spirit, harder to bear in some respects than the thraldom of
the mines, though here, indeed, redeeming features were not entirely
lacking.

But as time passed, and the absence of the promised word from Serge
himself lent countenance to Barenin's news, Paul decided at last that
she must be told.

He was quite aware that the anxiously expected letter might even then
be lying in the hands of the officials as a suspect, might have been
there for months, might never be delivered.  Such things were by no
means uncommon.  Many a perfectly innocent letter, full of homely
tidings into which morbid officialism read things undreamt of by the
writer, was never delivered at all, and many a heart sickened and
died of starvation in consequence.

He had a great fear, too, that this news of Barenin's, when she heard
it, might bring about changes in their delicate relationship--changes
which might not be for the better.

It seemed to him, indeed, at times that matters could hardly be more
trying for them than they were, and yet--there was no knowing.  This
word of Barenin's might be like the dropping of an acid into a
delicate solution, resulting in spicules and facets, in the instant
formation of frosty points and angles where, before, all was
colourless quiescence and limpid clearness.  For, after all, Hope
Ivanovna was a woman, and, little as he knew of women and their ways,
he had seen enough of late to know that they are unaccountable at
times and not to be understood of men.

She would regard him with different eyes.  Would her glance be more
kindly?  Or would he find there, or imagine, new suspicions of
himself and all his motives?

She would understand, in part at all events, the coldness and
aloofness to which he had schooled himself so rigorously.  Would she
ascribe it to fear on his own account or on hers?

Would she after all understand that his coldness was meant in
kindness--that if he had been over cold it had been through fear of
being over kind?

For while Serge lived--if Serge lived--he stood between them as
inviolable as a law of God.  But if Serge were indeed dead, then
there was no law, of God or man, that could keep them apart--if both
their hearts so willed it.

No further news filtered through to them.  Serge's promised letter
never came; and at last he decided to tell her, and, having decided,
still put off the telling from day to day in dread of the result.

Then one night, as they sat in silence before the stove, he said
abruptly, "You remember Mikhail Barenin?"

"Surely," she said quickly, and gazed at him hungrily.  It was a link
with the past.  It might mean news.

"He is here--in the prison."

"Ah?" she said with a quick swallow of her hopes and fears.  "And he
brings news?"

"He brings a rumour--but it may not be true."

His words prepared her for ill news.  She eyed him anxiously.

"He says that when he left Odessa it was understood there that Serge
had been shot in attempting to escape----"

"Ah!" she gasped.  "And it was through you----"

Then her little round chin sunk on to her chest, and her bosom heaved
convulsively.

"Yes," he began bitterly.  "It was through me----" and stopped.

It was unjust, cruelly unjust.  But he choked it down and sat in
silence gazing into the ashes.  Jangled heartstrings emit strange
discords at times, even in a man, and he knew it.  And this was a
woman, and the woman he loved more than anything on earth.

All the same, as he sat there, life felt to him like a handful of
grey ashes.  All his hopes were trembling in the balance, but not by
a word would he sway the balance either way.

"Give her time, give her time," he said to himself.  "It is Hope
Ivanovna.  She will come to herself."

And she did.  For the sobs died away at last, and presently she
stretched a trembling hand round towards him, and said falteringly,
"Forgive me, my friend--I was unjust.--You did it for the best----"

He took her hand very gently, and bent and kissed it, and she got up
and went away to her closet.

The grey morning light showed how little she had slept.  Her face was
white and anxious, the circles round her eyes were darker than ever
Her first words were--

"When did Mikhail Barenin come?"

"Three months ago."

"And you have known it all this time!  Oh, why----"

"We do not know even yet that it is true, Hope Ivanovna."

"Does Mikhail believe it is true?"

"He said it was generally accepted as true," he said gravely, "but
rumour often lies, and rumour from Siberia----"

"Why did you not tell me before?"

"I did not wish to distress you----"

"Why did you tell me now?"

"I thought much before I did so.  I tried to view the matter from all
points.  I decided at last that it was right you should know.  I
could not but see the distress the long suspense is causing you."

"It is terrible," she said miserably.  "It will kill me.  This not
knowing if he is alive is worse almost than knowing that he is dead."

"It leaves us hope."

"Hope dies of want," she said sadly.

"Hope must not die," he said.  "When hope dies life is not worth
living."

It was bravely said, for he could not but know that, if that other
hope did finally die through lapse of time, then there might be
hope--ay, and Hope for him.




CHAPTER XVII

HOW PAUL FOUGHT THE TERROR AND MADE A FRIEND

As Kara slipped slowly out of its winter fetters, and the skies
brightened and the earth softened to the spring, typhus began at once
to make head again in the crowded prison.

With the very inadequate means at his disposal Pavlof fought it, day
and night and life by life; but in spite of his most strenuous
efforts the fever spread like a prairie fire.  The conditions were
perfect.  The harvest was ripe.  Last year's sparks still smouldered
in the pallid forms of the grey-coated prisoners and needed little to
fan them into flame.

What one man could do almost single-handed, that Paul did.  But he
was like a lone man on the prairie beating wildly at the flames with
his coat.  He flung himself body and soul into the fight, without
thought of himself, without undue thought even of Hope, but not
without thought for her.

He insisted on Anna Roskova returning to his house to keep her
company while he was away, and he himself lived--not in the prison,
for that meant almost certain death--but as near to it as he could,
in the guard-house adjoining, where he could be at death's call at
any and every moment of the day and night.

The scourge grew with the heat.  That year, when the cuckoo cried,
the desertions were on an unparalleled scale.  The captives fled for
dear life as well as for dear freedom.  And the guards almost winked
at their flight, for if they stopped it would only be to feed the
fever and to divert the attention of the doctor from sufferers of
more consequence.

Captain Sokolof, in charge of the political prisoners, had had a sore
wrestle with the fever the previous year.  Pavlof had foretold
another certain outbreak in the spring, had advised him to apply for
leave and go home, had warned him urgently of the danger of stopping.

Sokolof accepted the advice, the warning, the danger, but he did not
go.  Stopping might possibly mean risk to life.  Going meant certain
loss of pay and position.  As a soldier and a poor man he took the
risk for the sake of the position and the pay.

It was an essential part of the captain's duties to inspect the
prison kameras at regular intervals.  The atmosphere of the kameras
was that of a newly-opened sewer.  Nevertheless, since the
regulations called for inspection, Captain Sokolof inspected them and
met the fever again half way.

By midsummer half the Cossack guard was down, the rest went in mortal
fear, and Pavlof's star stood high.  They looked to him as their only
possible saviour, and followed his instructions implicitly.

Harsh, hard, ignorant peasants most of them, with little feeling and
less intelligence, this insidious, creeping death struck panic into
them.  It is doubtful what they would have stopped at doing if Paul
had so ordered.  But he wisely restricted his measures so as to
offend as little as possible against their instincts of discipline,
and they never dreamt of obstructing or thwarting him.

In spite of all warnings, Captain Sokolof kept on his feet to the
very last moment, and was in and out of the kameras long after he
should have been lying quietly in a tent on the hillside.

But the most obstinate and determined of men must knock under when
typhus says the word, and there was no exemption for Sokolof.

The man's courage, which after all was perhaps quite as much dogged
obstinacy, appealed strongly to Paul, and he determined to save him
if salvation were in any way possible.  He camped him out on the
hills unknown to himself, and set Hope Palma and Anna Roskova to
nurse him through the crisis.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW THE NEWS CAME THAT DREW THEM TOGETHER

Hope delayed makes the heart sick, but it does not kill.  And the
sick heart craves human sympathy as the storm-beaten flower craves
the sun.  And when the sun shines the flower turns towards it and is
grateful.

As the weeks and months passed and brought no further news of Serge,
Hope's expectation began to weaken, and at last to die.

"Surely," she said to herself, "if he were alive he would have
managed to send the promised word to Paul in some way.  Mikhail
Barenin's news must be true."

Pavlof, in rigid honour, suggested the possibility of the word having
been duly sent and having been arrested on the way.

Pressed to the wall by her questionings, however, he had to
acknowledge that the prearranged message would have come in such a
form that the most vindictive or hyper-sensitive censor could not
possibly have read into it any but the most patently domestic
intelligence.

Pressed still harder, he had to confess that, in spite of the hopes
he so constantly impressed upon her, his own were growing weaker.

With a heavy heart he offered to do all in his power to further her
wishes, whatever they might be, even to the point of helping her to
leave Kara.  But was forced, in discussion, to acknowledge it a
useless risk and likely to lead to no result.

"You want to get rid of me," said she.

"I would count my life as nothing if it could help you," was his
reply.

It may not be accounted very surprising that, under conditions so
complex, Hope Palma's heart turned somewhat, and almost
imperceptibly, towards this man into whose companionship she had been
so strangely and so closely cast.

Her heart was sick.  It had fed on hope till hope was bare as a bone
and no longer afforded her starved soul any nourishment.

It was over two years since she saw her husband last.  She was very
human and she craved human sympathy.  Where should she turn for it
but to this man whose heart and hand were open to all, and who alone
could enter fully into her griefs and perplexities?

His unselfish devotion and ceaseless thought for others, his clean
heart and high bearing, these things were daily under her eyes, and
they wrought upon her as the soft rain and sunshine on the flower.

That he loved her still as passionately as ever, she knew, in spite
of all his cautiousness and frosty veilings.  But she knew, too, that
no word of love would ever pass his lips while the possibility of
wrong to his friend might remain.

Is it strange that, as the blank months drew drearily past, her heart
turned towards him?  And did so with no more sense of unfaithfulness
to her husband than a widowed heart may have, which aches for living
love while yet not wholly forgetful of the dead.

By slow degrees hope sickened and died, and she came at last to
believe in her heart that Mikhail Barenin's story must be true and
that Serge was dead.

Pavlof, however, though he hungered body and soul for that still
closer companionship with her which Circumstance, first handmaid of
Providence, seemed to be doing her utmost to bring about, found
strength and relief in the fierce fight in which he was engaged.

Hope, and his hopes concerning her, were never out of his thoughts,
but the typhus kept him busy.  Death no longer crept insidiously, but
stalked boldly, and snatched his victims where he would, and Pavlof,
beaten here and beaten there and losing everywhere, still faced him
valiantly and would not leave the field.

It was about midsummer--when the fever was at its worst, and the
kameras were like pest-houses, and his very soul was sick of the
losing fight, though no sign of it showed in his face or body--that
further news reached him concerning Serge Palma, and left him little
room to doubt that his friend was dead.

Among the new arrivals one day was a man suffering from a gunshot
wound in the thigh.  It was not of recent date, but had broken out
afresh through forced marching before the first healing was
thoroughly accomplished.

Paul had him placed in hospital, and patched him up again, and gave
instructions that he was not to move till the wound was perfectly
healed.  The man had bumped from Irkutsk in a springless teléga, and
the hospital bed, poor as it was, was heaven to his bruised bones and
torn flesh.

His name was Felix Ostrog.  He was of the people, a bright,
intelligent fellow who had imbibed evolutionary doctrines and done
his small best to spread them.  Hence--Kara.

It was in questioning him about his wound that Pavlof lighted on the
news that cleared his path.

"It was thus, barin," said Ostrog.  "There was in my artel in the
convoy a man named Pavlof----"

"Ah!" said Paul, with a sudden accession of interest.  "What was his
first name?"

"Paul, barin, Paul Pavlof."

"I knew a Paul Pavlof.  What was he like?"

"A bold fellow, with yellow hair and beard and blue eyes, a brave man
and fearless as the devil."

"Yes, yes, get on!"

"We were in the hills by Karnsk.  There are thick woods there, you
know.  Pavlof had been restless all along, and I knew he would make a
break when the chance offered.  It is no good one man bolting, you
know.  That gives one no chance.  We talked as we walked, Pavlof and
I and the others, and it was arranged that when he gave the signal a
dozen of us would try the trick in different directions.  Out of the
lot there would be a chance for one or two, and the rest must pay the
piper.  The time came.  We were in thick woods and we scattered like
rabbits.  It was shouts and shots, and screams from the women, and
then I was lying in the brush with this hole in me.  They found me
soon enough.  I had not got twenty yards away.  And one by one they
dragged the others in, all but two, who got clear----"

"And Pavlof was one of them?" asked Paul, in a fever.

"No, barin, Pavlof lay alongside me with a bullet through his head,
and he was dead.  It was a pity, for he was a fine-looking man----"

"You are sure he was dead?"

"Quite sure, barin, for he lay next to me, and they left him there
when they threw me into the teléga and formed up and moved on.  Oh,
yes; he was dead, or they would not have left him there.  And I saw
the hole through his head.  No man could live with a hole like that
in his head."

"So!" said Paul, very thoughtfully.  "Now you must lie quite still
till you heal up."

"I could lie quite still for ever, barin."

That night, as Paul went up the hill to see his patient in the tent,
his pulse was racing, and not with typhus.

Captain Sokolof was off his head and maundering fitfully of things
and scenes that did not redound over much to his credit.

Hope and Madame Roskova were sitting outside the tent to escape as
much as possible these unconscious revelations, and when Pavlof had
visited his patient, and given his nurses fresh instructions, and
promised them an orderly in case he got too much for them, he asked
Hope to walk back with him down the hill.

She looked at him with quick expectation, and as soon as they were
out of hearing, asked breathlessly, "Some news?"

"Yes, news, and I think definite and final," and he briefly told her
what he had learnt from Ostrog.

She walked silently by his side, and finally said, very quietly--

"I am glad you have told me.  Anything is better than that terrible
suspense.  Poor Serge!  Yes, he is dead----"

They spoke little to one another that night, and presently she turned
and went up the hill again, and he went back to his work.

But now his thoughts were unchained.  If Serge were indeed dead, and
there seemed no reasonable doubt of it, there was no earthly reason
why they should not come together, no reason why the long fiction of
their wedded state should not become fact at last.  And he went about
among his sick with a new light in his face, and a spark in his dark
eyes that gave the sick men more hope of themselves and their
prospects.

During the next few days he met Hope at least twice a day, but they
hardly spoke, and then only in the presence of others.  But Paul felt
his heart going like a drum each time he climbed the hill, at thought
of seeing her, and to his eyes she was changed.  She was no longer an
impossible Hope, but had suddenly become possible, and his thoughts
and his pulses raced to meet her.

On the fourth night after he had told her Ostrog's news, he found it
necessary to go to his house for a book he had promised to one of his
few convalescents.

There was a light in the window.  It might be only the police having
a rake round in his absence, though that was not very likely, since
discipline was much relaxed and he himself almost exempt from
supervision.

It might be Hope come down on some errand similar to his own.  He
quickened his step to the quickening of his heart, turned the handle,
and stood face to face with her.

For a moment they stood and looked at one another in a silence that
was full of voices, heart calling to heart till there was no sound in
all the world for them but the sound of it.  The fires long pent up
within him blazed out at last.  He could no longer have checked them
if he would.  He would not if he could.  His starved heart had burst
the bonds so rigorously imposed upon it through all these weary
months.  The wall of partition was down and nothing stood between
them.

The fire in his eyes evoked a responsive glow in hers.  He threw out
his arms towards her and strode over the dead past.

"Hope!  Hope!  My beloved!  You must come to me.  My heart is
breaking for you," and he wound his arms about her, and strained her
to him, and covered her face with hot kisses.

"At last!  At last!" he panted.  "My God!  it has been hard to wait.
And you----?" he flamed, fierce with the tumult that was in him.  Had
any intervened between them at that moment he would have rent him in
pieces.

For answer she wound her arms round his neck and strained herself
still closer to him, panting little sobs of joy and sorrow and pity,
and then lay still in his arms with a restful sigh.

"God be thanked!" he said, in a voice so deep with emotion that it
thrilled her as she lay against his leaping heart and knew that it
was all for her.

He slipped back the hood of her cloak and stroked her hair, and
kissed it and her eyes, again and again, and yet again and again, as
though he would never cease.

"My cup is full.  I have nothing left to ask for.  Kara is heaven."

"Paul," she said, drawing his head down towards her.  "You are sure,
quite sure----"

He stopped her with kisses till she held him away.

"Sure we are justified?" she jerked out, between her efforts to stay
him.

"My heart says so, dearest.  It has hungered and waited all these
months.  It would have waited still had there been any need."

He turned the lamp to a glow-worm glimmer, and they sat long in the
darkness, with no more than a whispered word between them now and
again.  It was enough that the barrier was down and they were
together.

"My heart was dying of starvation," Hope murmured one time, "and you
were so cold, so cold."

"Ah, you know why," he said.  "The fire was so fierce that I had to
cloak it with ice."

"And poor Anna!" said Hope again.  "She looked upon me as the last
strange product of civilisation, and no wonder."

"Yes, it exercised her greatly, but we will trouble her no more."

She was silent for a time.  Then she said softly, "You will wait
still awhile, Paul?"

"I will wait your time, dearest.  The knowledge that I have your love
makes a new man of me.  All the rest can wait."

Then at last he took her up the hill again, and parted from her in
the darkness before they reached the tent.  And so, back to his
patients, with a spring in his step and that light in his face which
was like a breath of new life in the pungent wards.

Thanks to Pavlof's unremitting attentions, and the careful nursing of
Hope and Madame Roskova, Captain Sokolof came slowly out of the
shadows on the hillside and knew to whom he owed his life.  His
prison kameras were cleaner and emptier than he had ever known them,
when at last he was able to resume his duties.  But the fact that he
still lived, where so many had died, was never absent from him.

He said little.  Talking was not his strong point.  But he never
forgot, and he took his own way of showing what was in him.

Colonel Zazarin had escaped the infection.  He believed that a
Governor's first duty was to keep himself in condition to govern,
even though he did it by proxy.  He kept aloof from the prisons,
therefore, and allowed no man near him whose duties took him into
them.  And so, for that time, he went free.  But, since over-anxiety
for life is not the best safeguard against disease, so in due course
Colonel Zazarin fell into another pit in spite of all his precautions.

All through the lingering summer months the unequal fight in the
prisons went on, a losing fight, incessant, heart-breaking.  But for
the inspiration of his new relations with Hope there were times when
Paul would have cast himself down, sick to death of it all, and
careless whether he ever got up again.  But the thought of her, of
her greater need than ever now of his help and comforting, of the
still closer union that time would bring--these things braced him
back to life.  His heart was glad and his body responded to it, and
brought him unscathed through the fiery furnace, though he spared
himself no whit.

It was not till the first snows came that the virulence of the plague
began to slacken, and it was a month longer before Paul felt himself
at liberty to occupy his own house again.

Hope had been there for some weeks past with Madame Roskova to keep
her company.  But the moment Madame heard of Paul's coming she
signified her intention of returning to Marya Verskaïa up the valley.

"And, my dear," she said, with impressive kindliness, to Hope, "I do
hope you will be happier together than you were, and will live
together as God meant you to do when He joined your lives."

And this time Hope did not ask her to stop.




CHAPTER XIX

HOW HOPE IMPOSED HER WILL UPON HIM

As Paul sat before the stove and watched Hope prepare his supper,
that first night of his return, his whole being ached for her.

But it was so much to have her love, and to have her there, that he
would ask no more till--till he could wait no longer.

After supper she flitted to and fro on her household duties like a
bird in its tiny cage, and there seemed no end to the things she had
to do, though what might be the necessity for them all he could not
tell, nor could she have told if he had asked her.

He sat quietly smoking for a time and watched her through the smoke.
Then he laid aside his pipe and caught her as she passed one time,
and drew her to his knee, and she felt the strong arm round her waist
throbbing furiously.

She had been vaguely nervous of she knew not what, and had been
making work to postpone its coming.  But she knew, as she lay in his
arms and looked up into the restrained eagerness of his face and the
lovelight in his dark eyes, that she was queen, and that her
slightest wish would be his law.

And as she lay there, and the tension of her nerves slackened, she
laughed softly to herself, and he looked at her in surprise.

"What are you laughing at?  My foolishness?  I count it wisdom."

"It was at my own," she said.  "I was a little bit afraid of you,
Paul."

"That you shall never be.  I am yours to command as long as life
lasts.  Whatever you wish shall be."

She lay silent again in his arms and then said softly--

"We will wait one month more--and then----"

"Then?"

"Then----" and she drew down his head and kissed him warmly on the
lips.




CHAPTER XX

HOW THE TIME CAME TO AN END

Thirty little days to the crowning of their lives.  Since Hope last
saw her husband a thousand long days had passed, wearily and full of
sorrows.  Since Paul last saw his friend, two-thirds as many.  And
the only news they had had of him in all that time had been reports
of his death.  Yet, to both of them, these thirty days seemed
freighted with all possibilities.

It was no mere whim or wish to feel her power which had dictated
Hope's decision to wait this one month more.

She believed they had waited long enough.  In her heart she had not a
doubt that Serge was dead.  But, with a desire to act with the most
scrupulous fairness to his memory, she would give Providence this
final chance of intervention, if that was to be.  Her conscience was
perfectly clean in the matter, and happiness was within her reach.
Yet, with a womanly instinct against over-haste in such a case; with
a womanly abnegation of herself where her own happiness depended on
her own out-reaching for it; and, perhaps, unconsciously to some
extent, as a final justification of herself should such ever be
needed, she deliberately imposed the bar of her will upon him for
those thirty days and watched their passage with very mingled
feelings.

As for Paul, he was happier than he had ever believed it possible for
mortal man to be.  So very happy was he that momentary fears of the
reality of it all would flit across his heart.

Could it be possible that Fate would trick them in those thirty days
and dash the full cup from their thirsty lips?

Yet surely they were justified in the step they were about to take.
They had waited and hoped--yes, hoped, he for her sake, and she for
Serge's--till hope had died of sheer starvation.  Now that a new cup
of happiness was held out to them should they not drink it?  And yet,
being no more than mortal man, he could not wholly still his fears.
For when the cup is filled to running over, filled so full that
heaven shines through the brimming rim and rings it with a crown of
light, man, being at best but of limited faith, must, always and
inevitably, fear lest the instability of all things earthly should
spill it ere he drink.

He believed they were justified, and in those final days of waiting
he drank deep of her love, deep draughts of pure delight which never
could be taken from him, come what might.

His thoughts overleaped the days to the last one of all--and the one
beyond it.  And he thought deeply, for the circumstances in which
they were placed were very extraordinary, and his whole desire was
for the smoothing of Hope's path into this new sweet life.

In the eyes of the law, and of the circumscribed world in which their
lives were cast, they were already husband and wife.

In the sight of God, and in the firm belief that Serge Palma was
dead, they knew of no adequate reason why they should not become in
reality that which they outwardly seemed to be.

And again, in the sight of the law of the land, Hope was free to
marry whom she would, since exile is legal death and death breaks all
legal ties, though he knew she would never dream of marrying if the
faintest hope remained to her of Serge's being alive.

Since no priest was available, and no formal ceremony was possible,
they must marry themselves; and if ever they reached a land of
freedom they would, for the satisfaction of the proprieties, go
through any such ceremony as the law of that land might require to
legalise their union there.

And so those thirty days passed slowly, swiftly.  Slowly, to the
thoughts that would outrun them.  Swiftly, for the happiness that was
compressed into them.

Each thought each had known the other, yet no day passed without its
new revelation.  They looked at one another with new eyes and each
found the other changing day by day.

Paul found new beauties of winsomeness in Hope each time he looked at
her, for the outward reflects the inward and her soul was at the
Spring, and in truth all she had gone through had fined her like gold
in the fire.

And to Hope, her lover's passionate devotion and high self-control
brought a depth of loving trustfulness which would have led her to
his bidding whatever it had been.

Their perfect faith in one another grew with the days.  Their love
expanded like a glorious flower when the winter of discontent is
passed, and the quickening rains and sunshine of the spring have
worked in it, and the summer of delight is come.

Their tiny rough house of logs and clay became a very shrine of
loveliness.  Its half-opaque windows were diamonds, its furnishings
of cedar-wood, its commonest utensils rarest china and purest gold.
For love transforms the world.

At times when he was away--for there was still much work for him in
the prison and the hospital--she would turn out her scanty stock of
clothing and set to work on it with the true womanly instinct for
adornment.  And many times she laughed at herself and her futile
attempts at turning old things into new, for fashions at Kara ran to
warmth and comfort and knew no other considerations.

But to him she was robed like a princess and her beauty increased
with the hours.  When he was away from her he hungered to be back.
When she placed his supper on the board he would bend and kiss the
fingers that held the plate, and throw an arm round her and draw her
close, and kiss her waist, her arm, anything that was part of Hope
Ivanovna.

For his heart had starved valiantly and without complaint for years,
and now the time of plenty had arrived.

How nervous and excited she was that last day of the thirty!  With
what passionate worship he had kissed her in the morning before he
left her.  And then he had come back and caught her to him again, and
strained her close, and closer still.  And then he flung up his arms
and cried "Ah God!  Ah God!" and went quickly.

And she could do no work that day, but fluttered restlessly about the
house, and stood and looked at the driving snow, and made futile
attempts at further cleaning up of the diamonds and the cedar-wood
and the gold, which were already polished beyond the polishing of
ordinary human hands.

And so the day passed somehow, but how she hardly knew.  She had no
desire for ordinary human food, and yet she ate, and prepared for him
a meal beyond the wont.

And when at last he came in, later than usual and smothered in snow,
his face was all aglow, with the whipping of the wind may be, and the
diamond windows hid their sparkles at sight of his eyes.

He was quieter than usual while he ate that night, and it is possible
that if he had been asked, five minutes later, on what he had fared,
he would not have known, for he was thinking of greater things.

Out of a full heart the mouth speaketh, but there are times when the
heart is overfull for speech.

When life is at its starry point speech is a desecration, and so they
sat before the stove in silence and gazed into its glowing heart,
while the minutes ran out and each one brought the new life nearer.

He drew her hand between his two hands, and felt the full tide of her
love pulsing through it as she felt his.

A solemn sense of expectation was on them.  The vague unrest was
gone.  The happy riot of their love-making was stilled.  Their time
had come.  The past lay a-dying, and the new life lay cradled within
the hour.

The very depth of their gladness filled them with a sense of awe.  It
was in no light humour that these two came together.

As the little German clock on the shelf told midnight, Paul stood up,
and she stood facing him on the instant, as though they two were
indeed already one, as though one thought and one heart already moved
them both.

"Dearest!" he said, in those deep tones that came right from his
heart and set her own heart thrilling in response.  "The time we have
waited for is come.  I do not ask if your heart is changed.  I know
it is not."

Her eyes were like stars as he looked deep into them, and found there
nothing but pure love and steadfast faith.

"You trust me, Hope Ivanovna?"

"With my life."

"We have no priest.  We can have no witnesses.  What we do is in the
sight of God alone."

"I am content."

"Kneel with me, dearest."

And they knelt by a chair--a chair that had been made by a carpenter
who had murdered his wife, and so had been sent to build up the
empire in the East.  But it was a well-made chair in spite of its
origin, and for these two it became a solemn altar.

They had no candles, no crowns, no carpet, no incense, no choir.
Nothing but the convict's chair and the rough wood floor, and their
two selves, and God.  But the chair was clean, and the floor was
clean, and their hearts were clean.

They knelt in silence for a time, such time as the priest, had he
been there, would have been praying over them.  And the little German
clock on the shelf cried "Quick!  Quick!  Quick!  Quick!" as though
he feared that something might step in between them even now.

But nothing was abroad that night.  The wind howled round the corners
of the house, and rumbled in the clay chimney.  It piled the snow
high against the windward side, and snapped the long icicles that
hung to the ground on the other side.  But inside there was a great
silence.

Then Paul took her right hand in his and said, in the voice that came
from his heart, "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit, I, Paul Ivanuitch Pavlof, take thee, Hope Ivanovna
Arskaïa"--she noticed it--"to be my lawful wedded wife.  Before
Almighty God I swear to honour and serve thee, body and soul, and to
defend thee against the world so long as life is left to me."

And she, sweetly and firmly, "In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit, I, Hope Ivanovna Arskaïa, take thee,
Paul Ivanuitch Pavlof, to be my lawful wedded husband.  Before
Almighty God I pledge myself to honour and serve thee, body and soul,
so long as life is left to me."

"Amen!" he said solemnly, and she "Amen!"

They remained kneeling for a time, such time as the priest, had he
been there, would have been invoking many strange blessings on their
union.

Then, still kneeling, they kissed as they had never kissed before.

He raised her gallantly, and stood, and looked deep into her eyes
again, and now they swam like stars in the sea, steadfast stars in a
calm, deep sea.

"My dearest, my wife, you shall never regret this that we have done,"
he said.

"I shall never regret it," she said, in a voice that set his heart
leaping to peals of silvery bells.  And she put up her arms, and drew
him down, and kissed him sweetly on the lips.




CHAPTER XXI

HOW THEIR CUP BRIMMED FULL

Winter was always a bitter time at Kara, a time of much hardship and
suffering to the ill-found and ill-fed prisoners, and to the members
of the Free Command a time of pinching struggle to make both ends
meet.  But it was also an opportunity for much self-sacrificing
generosity and the sharing of little with those who had less.  For
the Government allowance of twelve shillings a month did not go far,
when firing and lighting were added to the already heavy burden of
food and clothing; and the means of outside increment, few at best,
were almost eliminated by the absurd restrictions of the law.

Of course there were occasional remittances from home, some of which
reached their destinations, and were valued at many times their
intrinsic worth because of the remembrances they brought; but many of
which never arrived at all and wasted themselves on objects very
different from those intended by the senders.

It was a time of mutual help all round.  And if all outside was cold
black and white, inside was much rosy cheer and much good fellowship,
when the members of the community met at this house or that, to save
fires and lights for the rest.

But that winter was long remembered above all previous winters for
the delightful hospitality of the Palma cottage.

Serge Petrovitch had always been helpful and freehanded.  That winter
his and his wife's generosity knew no bounds.  The little house was
open to all, and scarcely a night in the week but its windows gleamed
like hospitable jewels, while all around was wintry desolation of ice
and snow, and above, a sky as grim as a curse.

The glowing heart of the rough clay stove never once died out the
winter through, and the hearts of its owners were warm to all the
world.

They were completely and absolutely happy.  The brimming cup had
reached their lips unspilled, and the deeper they drank of it the
more there was in it.  It overflowed on all around and carried new
strength to the weary and uplifting for all.

And Anna Roskova especially rejoiced and took credit to herself, for
she was convinced that it was her outspoken reasoning with Hope that
had removed the unbelievable estrangement between these two.  And
when she nodded knowingly to her hostess, and sometimes quietly
rallied her on the subject, Hope would smilingly acknowledge, what
all the world could see, that she was as happy as the day and night
were long.

For a time the police, as was their custom, used to intrude upon them
now and again to see what mischief was afoot.  But finding nothing
but cheerful, unconspiring faces and much merry talk, and always the
proffer of a cup of hot tea, their visits ceased.  Not but that they
would have liked to continue them for sake of the material benefits,
for cheerful faces and merry talk were none too common at Kara.  But,
though the sheep may perforce receive the sheepdogs with politeness,
they can never mingle on friendly terms.  Many a Cossack guard looked
enviously at the glowing windows of the Palma house that winter, and
wished himself a political prisoner so that he might be inside.

Captain Sokolof maintained very friendly relations with them, and
that was beneficial in many ways.  It lightened the surveillance of
his inferiors, and, since he insisted on Paul's acceptance of the
official salary for his medical work, it placed them in a position of
affluence compared with their neighbours, and their neighbours reaped
the benefit.

Sokolof never forgot that he owed his life to these two.  More than
once he hinted that he was working in their behalf, though he did not
specify how, and he constantly and openly expressed to them his
disgust at the neglect his communications suffered at the hands of
his superiors at St. Petersburg.

"Now if I had my way," he said once, "I would have every official of
the Ministry serve a term in Siberia so that they should know how
things really are.  They would learn a great deal that it would do
them good to know.  They have their pleasures and their functions and
their pressing matters close at hand, and Kara is very far away, and
Kara can wait."

Colonel Zazarin troubled them little.  He was not their immediate
official head, and only came in contact with them by a descent from
his pedestal.  They had shown him as plainly as they dared, when he
did call upon them, that he was not wanted, and by degrees his visits
fell off.  Then, too, he had had a great scare with the typhus, and
he still deemed it good for his health to keep aloof from prisons and
prisoners as much as he possibly could.

So all through that winter the heart of the stove glowed warmly, and
the samovar was always on the boil.  And Hope Pavlova baked
incessantly, and was busy and happy from morning till night, but
happiest at night when her little house was packed like a biscuit-box
with less favoured folk, whose faces smiled at sight of her in spite
of all their woes.

So radiant was she then that they wondered at her new rich beauty,
and discussed among themselves what had come to her.  And over their
tea and cakes, to which some of them had been looking forward with
keen anticipation all through the long cold day, they talked and
talked--these victims of great ideas, and very harmless victims, most
of them--and sometimes they laughed and sometimes even sang.

A smaller sphere could hardly have been found, nor a narrower, nor a
gloomier.  But these two, by the wealth of love that was in their own
hearts, and by the beauty of life that had come to them through their
love, touched all these smaller lives with the gladness of hope, and
strengthened them for the sorrows they had to bear.

It was in those long winter days and nights that Hope undertook to
introduce her husband to the peculiarities and beauties of the
English language, which she herself, as her mother's daughter, spoke
with ease and fluency.  He was an apt pupil, and made rapid progress,
and many a hearty laugh rose over their lessons and his first
barbarous attempts at pronunciation.  That was how, thanks to her
stringent drilling, he came, in later days, to speak English like an
educated Scotchman, an accomplishment which any man may be proud of,
and which stood him in good stead when the time came.

Yes, winter at Kara is a hard and bitter time at best, and for some a
time of dull anguish and black despair.  To such, as far as they
could get at them, Hope and Pavlof became minor providences, where
the major came like to be forgotten or abjured through utter
hopelessness and misery.

They cheered, and comforted, and fed starved souls and bodies alike,
and shared to the full their own overflowing happiness with those who
had none, and felt the richer for all they gave.




CHAPTER XXII

HOW THE CUP SPILLED

So the winter waxed and waned, and the skies began to brighten to the
spring.  The snows disappeared, except on the hills, the roads were
knee-deep tracts of mud, and Colonel Zazarin, having escaped the
typhus, was down with typhoid, and was a very sick man.

Pavlof prevailed on Hope and Madame Roskova to take charge of him,
since nothing but the most careful nursing could save his life.  They
both detested the man, Hope for sufficient reason, and Anna by
instinct, but neither was the woman to leave even an enemy in
extremity.

Pavlof had laboured mightily all through the winter on such necessary
sanitary improvements as might check, to some extent, the recurrence
of the fever when the warmer weather came.  And Sokolof, in the light
of the previous year's experiences, did what he could to help him.
He could give him free labour to any extent almost, but had received
neither money nor encouragement from headquarters in answer to his
applications, and so Pavlof's improvements must necessarily be of a
homely character.  But they were such crying evils that he had to
fight, the appeal they made to the senses was so vital, that a blind
man could have discovered them and known by his nose what needed to
be done.

It was a busy, happy time for him, and he asked no more, for himself,
than that the authorities at St. Petersburg should continue their
neglect of Kara and leave him in possession of the field.

But one afternoon there came rattling up from Ust Kara a strange
lieutenant of gendarmes, attended by two armed orderlies, and
evidently in a hurry.  He inquired for Captain Sokolof's quarters and
descended from his teléga there with an air of relief and much
stretching of the legs.

A quarter of an hour later Sokolof's orderly was hunting through the
settlement for "Serge Palma," with instructions to attend him to his
own house.

Thither came to him presently Captain Sokolof himself in great
perturbation of mind.  Paul, in fact, had never seen the hard face so
moved.

"Palma," said the captain, "I bring you ill news.  I tried to do you
a kindness and this is the result.  They have sent orders to move you
on to Yakutsk.  It is damnable.  I told them of all your good work
here, and this is their answer," and he delivered himself
volcanically of his feelings on the matter, while Paul braced up
under the blow.

"When?" was all that he asked at last.

"At once.  I am to deliver you to this man, and his instructions are
to carry you without delay to Yakutsk," and the hard face was all
twisted between indignation and pity.

"What must be, must," said Paul philosophically.  "The Governor will
probably die, but I suppose we can't help that.  What about my wife?
Is it province or town?"

"Province.  It is an awful life for a woman.  But she has the right
to go with you if she will.  I shall do all I can to get the order
reversed.  Perhaps Madame would wait----"

"I will see her at once.  Can we have till to-morrow morning?"

"I will arrange that.  It is damnable.  Let me know if Madame decides
to go and I will procure her conveyance.  There is Zazarin's
tarantas.  He will probably never need it again.  Oh, it is
damnable!" and Sokolof cursed his way back to his own quarters, while
Pavlof sat with his head in his hands and tried to look this last
blow of fate squarely in the face.

For life among the outer barbarians of the Yakut uluses, ignorant
even of the most elementary decencies of life, cut off absolutely
from civilisation, is life at its very lowest and its very worst.

How could he ask Hope to accompany him to such a place?  How dissuade
her from going?  Nay, he knew beforehand that she would go.  And,
sitting there in utterest misery, he forecasted the marring and
degrading of her bright young life and the breaking of their newborn
happiness.

But there was little time for sitting still.  Hope must be told and
at once, and he went off heavily to Colonel Zazarin's house.

He paid a somewhat perfunctory visit to his patient and beckoned Hope
out of the room.  She had seen the trouble in his face and followed
him anxiously.

"What is it?" she asked, with a hand on his arm.

"Bad news, dearest.  The worst possible news,"--at the moment he
could conceive no worse.  "A special messenger has arrived from St.
Petersburg.  I am ordered to Yakutsk."

"Yakutsk!" she gasped, for she knew all that it implied.

"Sokolof is beside himself.  He has been endeavouring to better our
condition.  He looks on this as their answer.  It is grievous
treatment, but there is nothing for it but to submit.  But, Hope, it
is possible it may be only for a time.  Sokolof, I know, will do his
utmost in the matter.  For yourself, dearest----"

"Where you go, I go," she broke in hastily.

"But, Hope--Yakutsk!"

"I know, I know.  But we will not be separated."

"God help us!" he said.  "I dare not think of you there."

"And I dare not think of myself anywhere but there, Paul.  No, we
will go together.  When is it?"

"To-morrow."

"To-morrow!  Then we have no time to lose.  I will go at once and get
things ready."

"And I must go and tell Sokolof that you decide to go."




CHAPTER XXIII

HOW ONE CAME BACK FROM THE DEAD

Captain Sokolof's orderly never for one moment thought of standing on
ceremony with the doctor, who was in and out of the very prison all
day long.  He showed him at once to the room where the captain was
entertaining his guest.

Pavlof crossed the threshold and stood numb and dazed.  His eyes
blinked at the newcomer in a stare of petrified horror.  Then they
wrenched themselves away and fixed hypnotically on Sokolof, who gazed
back, at him with pity.

Sokolof thought he understood.  He knew what Yakutsk meant.  He knew
that few survived it, and that most would prefer death to trying it,
and that for a woman it was impossible.

"She will not go?" said the captain commiseratingly.  "And yet, I
don't know but what she is right.  It is no place for a woman.  And
perhaps she will change her mind."

But Pavlof did not speak, did nothing but stare at him as if he were
a ghost.

"Take heart, Palma," he growled, in the nearest approach to
kindliness which twenty years in the _gendarmerie_ had left him.
"Take heart.  I will not rest till this matter is righted.  It is too
damnable!  There is some mistake.  This is Lieutenant Vinsky, who
brings the bad news."

But there was more here than Captain Sokolof remotely dreamed of.

Paul had put up his hand to the doorpost for support.  His head was
spinning.  The two men at the table and the lights in the room began
to swim slowly round and round.  The doorpost began to reel on its
own account and tried to slip out of his fingers.

For the man who sat there hobnobbing with Sokolof--trim, official,
booted and belted, perfectly satisfied with himself and his
surroundings--was Serge Palma in the flesh, and his bold blue eye had
winked encouragingly and admonishingly at Paul the moment he entered
the room.

"Vodka," said Sokolof, and sprang up and slid a chair under Pavlof,
and hastened to bring him brandy in a glass.  "It has been too much
for him.  Damn those--um----" for it is not always wise to express
one's feelings concerning one's superiors, even though the grounds be
ample.

"I am with you, Captain," said Palma heartily.  "Petersburg lacks
heart, and the Ministry of the Interior is destitute of the most
elementary bowels of compassion.  If they had to carry out their own
instructions they would learn many things they are ignorant of."

"It is true," growled Sokolof, but said no more.  Even people who
agreed with you in their hearts sometimes made the most of one's
indiscretions, and reported them behind one's back to one's undoing.

"So, Mr. Palma," said Serge, the instant he saw Paul pulling himself
together, "Madame is not inclined for Yakutsk?"

Paul shook his head vaguely, without looking at him.  His brain was
in a tangle, but, slowly and confusedly, it was beginning to work
again and to piece things together.

"It is truly a terrible place for any civilised being to go to," said
Serge.  "And one cannot be surprised at Madame's hesitation.  It is
natural.  But, after all, a wife's place is by her husband's side.
Perhaps, as Captain Sokolof says, she may change her mind before
morning.  It would be better for her to change it now than when we
are gone.  It is a bad journey at best, but we would do all in our
power to smooth it for her.  I think you should talk with her again
on the subject, Mr. Palma."

"Yes," nodded Pavlof, understanding dimly what was expected of him,
"I will talk with her again."

"And what, in Heaven's name, are we to do here without you?" said
Sokolof.

"You must get out a doctor before the summer comes," said Paul dully.

"Da!  Must!  That is all very well, but we are dependent on those----"

"Fools," suggested Serge heartily.

"Well, those gentlemen who sit in comfort in St. Petersburg, and
whose thoughts don't carry as far as Kara."

"I will go," said Paul, getting up.  "I will go--and speak with her
again," and he went out, feeling like one who has fallen on his head
and is going home to tell of the accident.

The thought of Yakutsk was horrifying to Hope.  But Paul would be
with her and that would make up for much.  He had made Kara a heaven
for her.  Well, they would carry their heaven with them wherever they
went,--ay, even to Yakutsk.  And perhaps it might be only for a time,
and then they would be allowed to come back to Kara.

What happiness the rough little house had held for them!  She would
have liked to take that chair with her--that chair at which they had
knelt the other night.  Perhaps Captain Sokolof would let her have
it.  She would get Paul to ask him.

It was hard to decide what else to take and what to leave, for if
they took everything they had they would still be bare at Yakutsk,
and in a thousand mile journey by teléga there was little room for
superfluous baggage.  Still, she would have that chair, whatever she
had to leave behind.

She flitted busily to and fro, arranging and folding and tying into
bundles.

She would put a bold face on matters and bear herself bravely, for
she knew his fears were all for her.  She would show him that he need
not fear.  The only thing on earth she feared was losing him.  Side
by side with him she could stand anything, even Yakutsk.

With such thoughts working in her, the face she turned on Pavlof when
he opened the door was to him as the face of an angel.  So high a
courage, so much of tenderness, so much of love were in it.  He never
forgot it.

"Paul, my dear----" she began, and broke off short at sight of his
ghastly face.

"Oh, what is it?" she cried, in new distress and terror, as he sank
heavily on a seat.

"Listen, Hope," he said quietly, but his voice was as strained and
unnatural as his face.  "I have other news for you--terrible news----"

"Ah!"  She jumped to it with womanly instinct.  He knew it by the
sudden pallor of her face.

"Serge--is alive and well."

"My God!" she gasped, and her hands fluttered gropingly, as though
they sought something tangible to hold on to.

"He is here, Hope," and he caught the wandering hands and held them.

"Here?  Oh, Paul!  Paul!" and her hands gripped his convulsively, and
the sudden tumult of her heart fined her voice to a terrified whisper.

"Dearest," he said, "we did what seemed right and our hearts are
clean.  A higher than Serge must judge us."

It was the right note, and it quieted her.  But they sat long in
silence and gazed desperately into the future, and it was full of
shadows.

"We must be very cautious, Hope--for his sake," he said at last.
"His life hangs by a thread.  A word, a sign, and he is lost.  It is
he who has brought the order to transport me to Yakutsk."

"Serge?--Paul, what are you saying?"  And she gazed at him with a new
fear in her eyes.

"No," he said, with a rough, quick shake of the head, "I am not
crazy.  It is as I tell you.  He has come here at risk of his life to
get me out of the toils.  The order he brings is, doubtless, forged.
The uniform he wears without a right.  It is bravely done----"

He tried his best to instil life and warmth into his words, but they
would not come to his bidding.  They were only words.

"But--" she said dazedly--"Yakutsk?"

"Do you not see?  That is only a blind like all the rest.  Once clear
of Kara we go where we will."

"You have spoken with him?"

"Only before Captain Sokolof.  But I understand it all.  Serge is
Lieutenant Vinsky.  I went to tell Sokolof that you would go with me."

"Oh, Paul!  How can we go?" she gasped.

"We must, Hope.  There is nothing else to be done.  Serge's life is
at stake."

"Oh, why--why did he not come sooner--if he had to come?  It is
terrible his coming now."

"Yes, it is terrible his coming now.  It is God's will, dearest, and
our hearts are void of offence.  We must think now of Serge.  It will
try you hard in the morning, Hope."

"I will be careful," she said, eyeing him breathlessly still, with
wide, amazed eyes,----"But you will come too, Paul?  We all go
together?"

"I must go.  It is for me he came."

"Does he not know I am here?" she gasped.

"I cannot tell what he knows.----But--yes----he must understand.  He
knows I am Serge Palma here.  He knows Madame Palma is here.  He must
have reasoned it all out.----Yes----I remember.----It was he who
suggested that Madame might change her mind----"

"Change her mind?"

"And decide to go.  Captain Sokolof did not believe you would face
it."

"He never had a wife."

"I must try to speak with Serge," he said.  "I must tell him.  It
will be terrible----"

"Tell him how we waited, Paul.  How we waited, and hoped, and
despaired.  And how we heard twice of his death----"

"I will tell him all.  It will be sore telling, Hope, and sore
hearing."

"Our hearts are clean, Paul."

"God bless you, dearest, and forgive me for bringing this trouble on
you."

"Not so," she said quickly.  "I share the blame if blame there is.
Have I not shared the joy of it?"

"God keep you, my dear heart," and he kissed her very lovingly and
went out.

And she sat looking into the future--the near and the far, with
woeful eyes and tightened lips.

He went straight to Sokolof's quarters, ostensibly to tell him that
his wife would go on the morrow, but determined, if he could, to get
speech alone with Serge.

And so he became witness of a curious scene between the captain and
the pseudo-lieutenant, a scene which, in very different ways, was
highly creditable to both.  It bore eloquent testimony to Captain
Sokolof's good feeling.  It spoke worlds for Palma's self-command.

The captain and his visitor had got on exceedingly well together,
since the latter endorsed to the full the former's exasperation at
the treatment Kara received from St. Petersburg.

No matter what the immediate subject of discussion, Sokolof would
constantly break out in bitter recurrence to his grievance.

When Paul was shown in to them, the matter of his translation was
uppermost again, and in a very acute form.

"Ha, Doctor, we were speaking of you," said Sokolof.  "I want
Lieutenant Vinsky to allow you one day more, while I telegraph to
headquarters and beg them to reconsider the matter.  It is out of all
reason.  They cannot surely have received my letters or they have not
read them.  It is inhuman.  It is brutal."

"I am indebted to you, Captain," Paul made shift to answer, as all
the disastrous possibilities of such a course crowded his brain.
"You have done all you could for me.  I would never forgive myself if
you did yourself any disservice by trying to help me further."

"Exactly!" said Palma quietly.  "That is the danger."  He pursed his
lips and shook his head dubiously.  "Do you know why Simonofsky was
removed from Barnaul, Captain Sokolof?"

"I can imagine, from the way you put it," said Sokolof, blowing out
smoke viciously.

"Exactly.  For alleged favouring of politicals.  He has had no post
since."

"I don't care a kopeck," said Sokolof stubbornly.  "This is no
ordinary case.  Besides, we need him here to keep down the fever.
That is reason enough."

"It is not for me to advise, Captain," said Palma, with another
dubious shake.  "You know who you are dealing with.  Telegraph by all
means, if you are willing to take the risk.  As for me, I have only
one thing to do, and that is to carry out my instructions to the
letter, much as I may regret them," with a bow to Paul.  "I have
strained them somewhat, perhaps, already, but--well, we could hardly
have started to-night, and besides, the unexpected question as to
Madame arose.  How is that matter decided, Mr. Palma?"

"Madame decides to go," said Paul.

"Bravo!" said the lieutenant.  "I thought she would.  Can't you
procure a tarantas for her, Captain--just for the first stage or two?
We shall strike the snow in the Yablonois and then it will be smooth
going.  But teléga travelling is the very devil, especially for a
woman.  My bones are aching yet."

"Zazarin has a tarantas," said Sokolof.

"He won't need it for some time to come," said Paul.

"If he ever needs it," said Sokolof.  "All the same I shall telegraph
at once, let them think and do what they please.  Help me, Vinsky, to
word it so that they will understand, the----"

"Blockheads," suggested Palma, with a smile.  "I will help you with
pleasure, Captain, only you understand, answer or no answer, I start
at eight o'clock to-morrow morning for Yakutsk.  What is the soonest
you can get their reply?"

"If they answered at once we might hear during the night.  It all
depends on things at the other end.  The Minister might be away, and
no one else would take the responsibility.  But I will have an
orderly waiting at this end so as to lose no time."

"Well, I can do this for you," said Palma.  "We will travel easily
and make no undue speed.  If you receive a favourable reply after we
have left, a messenger can catch us.  For your sake, Mr. Palma, and
for Madame's, we will hope it may be so."

"That will do," said Sokolof.  "Now--the telegram."

He hunted up an official form and began to write--

"To the Minister of the Interior.  Concerning political prisoner
Palma ordered to Yakutsk.  Typhus raging here"--"that's straining a
point, but it probably will be soon"--"Palma's services as doctor
urgently needed----"

"Say that the Governor is at the point of death," suggested Palma.

"Good!  That is stronger still," and he wrote in the addition, and
continued, thinking it out word by word--"Beg your permission retain
prisoner here for present.  See my letters."

At which the lieutenant laughed out loud.  "My dear Captain," he
said, "those last words would lose you both your place and your
request.  His Excellency is not accustomed to be addressed in so
terse a fashion as that.  His reply would probably be, 'Tell Captain
Sokolof to go to the devil--or to Yakutsk,' which is pretty much the
same thing.  Level it up to his altitude, my dear sir, or worse will
come of it.  It might do for the office, but it won't do for the big
man himself."

"It does read a bit brusque," said Sokolof, looking at the
objectionable words.  "What do you suggest?"

"You can't make it too flowery.  I would suggest--'Crave your
Excellency's gracious perusal of my letters concerning this
prisoner.'  When would your letters reach them, Captain?"

"Weeks ago, months ago.  Before you left, certainly."

"Of course, I forgot.  It is to those letters that you attribute
their present action and my presence here."

"Yes," said Sokolof, looking sober.  "I was forgetting that."

"Is it wise to refer to the letters at all, think you?  Why not base
your request solely on the ground of the typhus?"

Sokolof considered the point, tapping the pencil up and down between
his teeth.

"That is," continued Palma, "if you are quite decided on sending the
telegram at all.  It is doubtful if any good will come of it, and as
far as you yourself are concerned it would undoubtedly be safer not
to interfere."

"It shall go," said Sokolof obstinately.  "They may break me if they
like, but Palma saved my life and I do not forget."

He finished the telegram and gave it to his orderly to despatch at
once, bidding him at the same time station a messenger at the office
to bring him the answer without delay at whatever hour it might
arrive.

Pavlof marvelled at Palma's careless ease in face of so imminent a
danger.  For, if Sokolof's telegram passed quickly through from point
to point, and reached the Minister's hands, and was deemed worthy of
prompt attention, discovery was unavoidable, and the results to Serge
himself must be disastrous.

But he sat there smoking as coolly as if he had not a care in the
world, and Paul came to believe that the forethought which had
devised so bold a scheme must have provided also for such a
contingency as this.

But Palma's calmness was simply the courage of a brave man who had
calculated the chances in his favour.  He had done all he could to
improve them by delaying the telegram.  Now he awaited the result
with, at all events, outward equanimity.

It was then ten o'clock at night.  Taking into account the difference
of time between Kara and St. Petersburg, it would probably be five or
six in the evening before the telegram reached its destination.  The
chances were that the Minister would not be at his office--one chance
to the good.  Again the chances were that the telegram would take
considerably longer in transmission from station to station over
those 4,000 miles of desert--another chance to the good.

Even if it got to the Minister that night it was incredible that he
should remember who Serge Palma was, without inquiry and the turning
up of dossiers, all of which meant time and trouble.  And why should
the great man worry himself unduly over so very small an affair as
the sending, or not sending, of a poor devil of a political to
Yakutsk?--several chances to the good there.

If they troubled to investigate at all they would discover that some
mistake had been made by some one.  But mistakes--and very terrible
mistakes--were constantly being made.  If Serge Palma had been
ordered to Yakutsk by some one, some one naturally must have had very
good reason for so doing.  Serge Palma would be as safe at Yakutsk as
at Kara, and it is an awkward thing to interfere with accomplished
facts without very good grounds for doing so--a galaxy of chances to
the good in all that.

And Serge's mind had flashed over them as the smoke curled lazily
through his moustache, and he felt fairly safe.  And so he sipped his
vodka as quietly as if he had been in a Petersburg café without a
care on his mind.

Pavlof's mind had been so jangled by the day's happenings that it was
not working as sharply and clearly as usual.  He would not have been
in the least surprised if the orderly had walked in at any moment
with a telegram from headquarters exploding the mine on which they
sat.  If he could have spoken privately to Serge he would have urged
him to leave them to their fate and flee while yet there was time.

But he had no chance of speaking, since Sokolof never left his guest,
and, finding the atmosphere too electrical for his tight-strung
nerves, he begged the captain's permission to retire, on the plea of
packing his belongings for the journey.

"At eight o'clock we start Mr. Palma," said Serge.

"I will be here."

"And Madame?"

"And Madame."

"Unless she changes her mind again," said Sokolof.  "It is about the
only privilege we can offer her here, and, God knows, no one would
blame her if she did."

"She will not change her mind," said Pavlof, and withdrew, and went
wearily home again.

He felt utterly fagged out, body and soul, with the rending emotions
of the day, and he knew there was no rest for him that night.  Time
enough to rest when he got to Yakutsk.  From all accounts it was the
only thing to be done there.  Bah! he was forgetting.  His brain was
getting muddled with it all.  It was not to Yakutsk they were going.

He wondered vaguely where Palma would make for.  The Amur probably,
and Vladivostok.  But he would have it all arranged, and God grant
them a good deliverance!  For when they got clear of Kara their
troubles would only be beginning.  It was a desperate venture at
best, but they must go through with it and trust in providence.

He felt, however, more like a prisoner bound for Yakutsk than a
prisoner on the eve of enlargement, more of a bondman than he had
ever felt since he came to Kara.




CHAPTER XXIV

HOW THEY PREPARED TO GO WITH HIM

Hope had been busy during his absence.  Marya Verskaïa had come in,
and between them they had packed Hope's belongings into bundles, and
spread out all Paul's for his decision as to what he would take and
what leave behind.

The kind-hearted little chatterbox was loud in her lamentations over
their sudden departure, and her ceaseless flow of talk was to Paul
like the continuous dropping of small shot on a bared membrane of the
brain.

He hastily selected the most necessary things, constantly forgetting
that it was not to Yakutsk that he was going, but to freedom, where
all things were obtainable, or to death, where nothing would be
needed.

The philosophical paucity of his requirements astonished Marya
Verskaïa not a little.

"But Serge Petrovitch," she would urge, time after time.  "You will
certainly need this at Yakutsk.  There is nothing there, you
know--absolutely nothing.  You cannot possibly replace it."

"No, no.  I shall not need it.  I will do without it, Marya
Stepanovna."

And--"His brain has given way," Marya would plaintively murmur.

"You will give that to Polokof, and this to Hugo Svendt, and this to
Alexei Etelsky.  I shall not require them, I assure you," as she held
up remonstrative hands again.  "Anna Roskova will do as she thinks
fit with all the rest.  Now I will see you home, or the police will
think you have run away," for he knew that Hope's nerves must be as
tremulous as his own, and that Marya's chatter must be jangling them
in similar fashion.

Hope was still busy about the house on quite unnecessary work when he
got back.  She could not sit still for a moment.  Her great eyes
glowed luminously in their dark circles, in spite of their drooping
lids.

She turned them on him full of anxious questioning as he came in.

He shook his head despondently.  "I had no chance of speaking to him.
Sokolof never left us for a moment."

But he said nothing of that fateful telegram.  The load she carried
was heavy enough already.  Her strained, white face wrung his heart.
If the sacrifice of his own life could have smoothed her way he would
have given it, willingly and instantly.  But he knew that it could
not.  It was to him that she looked now, and he must live for her, to
defend her against the whole world, as he had pledged himself when he
married her.

"Marya was driving me crazy with her babble," Hope said wearily.
"But I could not get her to go.  You are quite sure it is Serge,
Paul?"

"Quite sure, Hope."

"Has he suffered much?"

"He looks gay and gallant, though I have no doubt he is as anxious as
we are."

"It is surely a very dangerous thing he is doing."

"He is risking life and liberty.  But he is a brave man.  We must do
nothing to add to his risk."

"I will be very careful."

"Will you not try to sleep for an hour or two, Hope?  There will be
no rest when once we start."

"Sleep!  I could as soon think of dying as of sleeping.  Which way do
we go!"

"Up into the Yablonois.  Then as Serge may have decided.  He has
thought out his plans without doubt."

"I will get ready the breakfast," she said, starting up again.

"It is only twelve o'clock yet," he said, with a wan smile.

"Well, some tea, then.  One must do something.  Will you not try to
sleep?  You look worn out."

"I could not sleep either.  We will have some tea."

So they sat sipping their tea and making pretence to eat, and Hope
jumped up every second minute to do some little job which did not
need doing, and Pavlof's teeth ground silently at times, as he
thought of that telegram speeding over the steppes, and the possible
reply speeding back for their destruction.  But he said no word of it
to Hope, and when he had got his pipe fairly under way, and the
soothing of the tea began to make itself felt, his wits settled down
somewhat, and matters began to look more hopeful, as they sometimes
have a way of doing when they have touched bottom.

He reproached himself as an ingrate for the feelings that would come
uppermost in his heart.  He tried his very hardest to feel grateful
to Serge for his gallant remembrance of him.  But he was painfully
conscious of a dull sense of regret, of injury almost, at his having
come back to life, and in so lively a fashion.

Far better if he had left them alone.  But then he could not know
that.  He had gallantly done his best, and in return they were going
to break his heart.

How would he take it?  Hardly, hardly.  How could it be otherwise?
If only he could have had it all out with Serge before he and Hope
met in the morning!  But that had been impossible.

And it would be hard for Hope too.  The sight of Serge's misery would
be dreadful to her.  The thought of it would darken her life.

But there was no escape from the coil.  Explanations were impossible.
Go they must, for Serge's life was at stake.  But the thought of the
explanations which must be made on the morrow hung upon him like a
great black cloud.

Liberty was good, but the love and companionship of Hope Ivanovna
were more to him than anything liberty could give him.  With her he
would have been content to spend the rest of his life at Kara.
Content?  Ay, happy beyond anything all the rest of the world could
possibly hold for him.  And now--their happy content must suffer
shock and be strained through bitterness.  It would survive the
shock, if they themselves survived the dangers of the road they were
about to travel, but it would always bear the imprint of it.

And, not without bitterness, he recognised all the irony of the
position.  How Serge was repaying him in kind, and most exactly, for
the service he had once rendered him.  For Hope Ivanovna's sake he
had undertaken Palma's burden, and so, all unconsciously, had been
the means of separating her and Serge.  And now Palma had come, at
risk of his life, to set him free, and, all unconsciously, was
threatening the new happiness which had come to Hope and himself.  It
was a strange turn of the wheel, and there was no escape from it.  He
strove to be grateful, but found it well nigh impossible.




CHAPTER XXV

HOW THEY STRUCK A FRIEND

Pavlof's heart was beating wild alarms as he led Hope to police
headquarters a little before eight the following morning.  What would
they find there, and how would Hope come through the ordeal?  Had any
answer come from St. Petersburg?  Was Serge even now under arrest and
this wild chance of liberty gone?  Verily he wished the chance had
never offered.

One false step, a look too much, and Serge was ruined beyond
redemption, and he pressed Hope's arm tight inside his own to brace
her for the test.

But as soon as they turned in through the big gate of the stockade,
the sight of Colonel Zazarin's three-horse tarantas and a teléga, at
the door of Sokolof's quarters, set his mind at rest.

So far no discovery had been made and all was well.  He arranged the
bundles in the tarantas to make as comfortable a seat as could be
managed for Hope.  He took her hand through his arm again for the
crucial moment, and they stood waiting for Sokolof and Lieutenant
Vinsky.

"Now," said Pavlof shortly, as they appeared in the doorway.

Hope shot one quick glance at Serge, and then her hand began to
tremble violently on Paul's arm.

"Steady," he murmured, "it will be over in a minute," and Sokolof and
Palma came towards them, saluting Madame as they came.

"So, Madame, you have decided to be courageous once more," said
Sokolof.

She bowed, not daring to use her voice or raise her eyes.

"Well, that is as it should be.  And be sure I shall do my utmost to
shorten your trials."

"It is very good of you," she murmured.

"This is Lieutenant Vinsky."  Hope bowed again.  "He will provide for
your comfort, as far as may be, on the journey, and you must remember
that he is only carrying out his orders.  Mr. Palma," he said,
shaking hands with Pavlof, "I shall not forget what I owe to you, and
I shall not rest till I get this abominable order annulled.  Now,
Vinsky is on tenterhooks to be gone.  So--  Adieu!  Adieu, Madame!"

They settled Hope among her bundles in the tarantas, and Pavlof and
the lieutenant disposed themselves as comfortably as circumstances
would permit.

"If you get any reply to your telegram, Captain, you know our route,"
said Serge, leaning over the side.

"Do not fear.  I shall send after you post haste if it is good news,"
said Sokolof.

Then the driver climbed to his seat, gathered up his reins, cracked
his long lash over his horses' heads, shouted an encouraging
"Noo-oo-oo!" and they started at a wild gallop for freedom.

The road was full of holes, and the holes were full of mud, and the
mud from six madly spurning heels came flying past their heads, and
Serge laughed gaily as he drew down the leather curtain in front.
Then, with his face still lighted by a broad smile, and a blaze in
his bold blue eyes, he turned to Hope, and took her hands in his and
kissed them, gloves and all.

"Oh, Serge!  Is it all real?" she cried, the words jerking out of her
to the bumping of the tarantas, and she, all in a red heat of
confusion, clinging tight to the side lest she should be thrown out
of her seat.  "Are you alive?  Am I awake?  Are we really going to
freedom?"

"All those," he said, with a hearty laugh of enjoyment.  "And
you?--you had given me up?"

"Yes, we had given you up," she began, but came to a stop.  For how
was it possible to enter on explanations such as they had to make,
when they were all three jumping in their places like marionettes,
and their words were shot out of them like pellets, to the
endangerment of their teeth.

"Serge!" began Pavlof, in the same difficult case.  "We have much to
tell you."  He had to shout to get this out.

"So have I," jerked Serge, nodding and smiling happily still.

Paul shook his head.  It was impossible.  He clung to his seat with a
grim face, not the face of a man rejoicing at his escape from prison,
rather of one riding to trouble.

Serge glanced at him questioningly once or twice, but it was on Hope
that his eyes turned most of the time, and he looked at her with the
hungry gaze of a man who has been overlong deprived of his rightful
food.

She found it hard to bear, and presently closed her eyes as though
the bumping of the tarantas was painful to her.

They passed through Ust Kara at speed, and gained the posting road,
and turned sharp to the east in the direction of Ignashina.  The
going was easier now, both as to speed and roadway, but Palma's
jubilant smile had faded by degrees for lack of response, and a look
of perplexity had taken its place.

There was something here which he did not understand, but nothing was
further from his thoughts than the actual fact.

He had looked for triumphant jubilation at the success of his
exploit.  Instead, he found sober faces and quiet acquiescence, and
nothing more.  But he put it all down to the effects of Kara, and it
was not till they drew up at the first post-house for change of
horses that Paul found his opportunity.

"I must speak with you, Palma," he said, as they dismounted.

"Nu!  We will go along the road," said Serge, with a look of
surprise, but just then the teléga came lumbering up and its
occupants jumped out and came towards them.

"Tea for the barina," shouted Serge to the post-master, and turned to
meet the others.

They were bright-faced young fellows, clad in green Cossack uniforms,
with bandoliers and Berdan rifles.  They saluted gravely, each with
one eye closed in a solemn wink, as they approached.

"Don't give yourselves away, my children!" said Palma.  "Drivers have
eyes, and these return to Kara.  Pavlof, this is Loris Blok, and this
Alex Rimof.  They are from Moscow.  Good boys both, and longing for a
fight before we get through.  We are going to walk on.  You two see
that Madame is attended to.  Now, my friend!" and he and Paul turned
and walked along the road.

They walked in silence for a time.  Never had Paul faced a more
difficult situation, and he scarcely knew how to begin.

"Well!" said Serge at last.  "What is it?"

"I am going to bruise your heart, Serge Petrovitch.  But you must
hear the whole truth, and you must not judge us harshly."

Palma looked sharply round at him.  His face crumpled perplexedly and
the jovial light had fled from it.  He was beginning to fear, if not
to understand.

"For two whole years we had no news of you, except news of your
death----"

"Ah!"

"Mikhail Barenin brought the first report.  That was fourteen months
ago.  Then one, Felix Ostrog, came saying you were shot while trying
to escape in his company near Tomsk.  That was nearly twelve months
ago."

"Go on!" said Palma grimly.  He began to understand.

"Hope Ivanovna waited for news of you with a breaking heart----"

"I sent you word."

"It never reached us.  Nothing but news of your death.  I was Serge
Palma.  She was supposed to be my wife.  Of her distress at finding
me there instead of you, I need not tell you.  She lived in my house
with Madame Roskova, the wife of Dr. Feodor Roskof, who is at
Yakutsk.  I held myself aloof from her till she deemed me cold and
hard.  I did not tell her Barenin's news for three months after I had
heard it, leaving her still the hope of your being alive.  But the
hope died, and she was in sore distress.  When Ostrog came, saying he
had seen you lying dead in the grass with a bullet through the head,
we had no further hope of seeing you again.  Before God, we believed
you dead.  My love for her was what it always had been.  Before God,
I would have died sooner than speak had I believed you still alive.
You must believe me, Palma.  She was in great distress and
loneliness, and I loved her.  She put me off for many months, still
hoping against hope.  And then----at last----we wedded----"

They had come to a stand long since and stood facing one another.

At the word, Palma's fist rose and dropped expressively, and his face
tightened grimly.  He turned and walked on without a word, and Pavlof
followed.

They walked on and on.  Would the carriages never come?  Would Palma
never speak?  It seemed to Pavlof as if they might walk on so, in
gloomy silence, for ever.  But he had no words wherewith to break it.
Of what avail words?  He had struck this man over the heart, and he
must have time to recover from the blow.

So, on and on, in a silence that was dreadful and seemed endless.

But all things come to an end, and at last they heard the carriages
coming up the road behind them, and still Palma said no word of what
was in him.

"Palma," said Paul, "do not break her heart.  She has suffered
enough.  She is innocent of offence in this matter, as I am also.
But, if you have anything to say, say it to me, here and now."

"There is nothing to say," said Serge with a groan.  "It is the will
of God.  But it is hard to bear.  She is all the world to me, Pavlof."

"God help us all!" said Paul, and the tarantas drove up.

They climbed silently to their places, and Hope's quick glance showed
her that the story had been told.  She had been very nervous as to
the outcome.  She was trembling now with anxiety as to what Serge
would do, and how he would treat her.

He took her hand in his, and bent and kissed it, not with the quick
passion of the former time, but reverently, as one kisses the hand of
a dead love.

She burst into tears of relief and gratitude, and her fears were gone.

They were on the great Eastern road now, and speech was possible.
And presently, when she had recovered her composure somewhat, he bent
towards her and asked very gently--

"And--the child, Hope?  What of it?"

"Ah!  You have not heard, Serge?"  The words came in a nervous
torrent.  "He died when he was three months old.--We did our best,
Marya Ostronaya and I, but we could not keep him.--And truly, Serge,
I was so broken with it all that I was glad when God took him.  Did
you not find Masha, then?"

"She died two months before I got there."

"Dear old Masha!  She was very faithful.  It broke her heart to be
sent away, but I could not take her with me.  Who told you I had come
here, then?"

"Nobody.  I knew you, that was enough.  That was my only fear in
getting away--that we might pass one another on the road."

"Then you did not know for certain till you got here?"

"Not till I got here.  As soon as I heard that Madame Palma had come
out to join her husband I put two and two together.  I knew it must
be you."

"And now--do you think it possible we can get clear away, Serge?"

"We will try for it anyway," he said valiantly.

"How do we go?" asked Pavlof.

"Up into the mountains to mislead them.  Then down again to the Amur
and the Vladivostok road."

"Won't that be dangerous?"

"Not for us.  I have fresh papers, giving you your freedom and
ordering me to see you safely out of Russian territory."

"You are well provided.  How did you manage it?"

"You remember Egor Anenkof?  He is employed in the Ministry of the
Interior and is a most useful man.  He has worked for years to get
into his present position, with the sole object of being of service
to his friends in trouble.  Some day he will be found out and then he
will come to the mines.  However, there are others."

"Who are these two with you?" she asked.

"Loris Blok and Alex Rimof.  They are from Moscow.  I had to have
orderlies.  That was where Muishkin made his mistake.  They are
capital fellows and bold as lions.  If it should come to a fight they
will be delighted.  In fact they will be somewhat disappointed if it
does not, I'm afraid."

"Oh, I hope there is no chance of that," said Hope anxiously.

"We will hope not," said Palma, with a quick glance at Paul, which
showed him that she had heard nothing of the telegram.  "But if they
should find out the trick and try to stop us we shall have--well, we
shall have to argue the point."




CHAPTER XXVI

HOW THEY FOUGHT IN THE CLEFT

The route Palma had chosen, when at last they turned off the posting
road, was a little-used track leading up into the Yablonois, rough
travelling amid broken black hills, whose feet were sparsely clad
with ancient growths of larch and fir, and their crests powdered with
snow.  At times the way led through dark defiles, with brawling
streams gnashing sudden white teeth at them as they passed, and then
they were crawling slowly over rugged humps of the hills, amid
ever-increasing desolation and a loneliness that grew more and more
profound.

Not one traveller did they encounter after quitting the main road.
Only once, in a distant hollow, they caught a glimpse of the beasts
and tents of some nomadic tribe, with thin blue wreaths of smoke
hanging over them.  But these were the only signs of humanity; they
conveyed no sense of friendliness and served only to accentuate the
surrounding loneliness.

Twice they had changed horses and drivers at lonely little posting
stations, and had obtained welcome cups of hot tea and such coarse
eatables as the places afforded.  But the tea atoned for all
shortcomings, and, apart from other matters, they were all in hopeful
spirits at the success which had attended their risky adventure so
far.

Palma indeed kept a cautious eye on the rear whenever they topped a
point of vantage.  And Blok and Rimof, bumping merrily along in the
teléga some distance behind the tarantas, had their faces turned
hopefully over their shoulders most of the time.

While the stout little horses scrambled painfully up the rocky ways,
the travellers in the tarantas talked quietly at times of the past,
and more briefly of the future.  Serge told them shortly of his first
escape and recapture, and of his final escape after another change of
names at Tomsk.  He congratulated himself and them on the forethought
which had long since led his father to deposit a certain portion of
his fortune in the hands of his old friend, Charles Gerrardius, the
great Geneva banker; just as he himself had made provision for Hope
by banking money in her name with Rothschilds' in London.  It was
thanks to this that his way had been comparatively easy when once he
got clear of Russian territory, and what a poor man could only have
dreamt of doing, a rich man had been able to accomplish--thus far at
all events.

As to the future, they spoke but little.  It was in the balances and
the scales might go against them.  To count upon it--even to discuss
it over-much--seemed to savour of presumption, and felt like a
tempting of Providence.

"Is there nothing we can do for Russia?" asked Hope sadly.

"Nothing!" said Serge sombrely.  "Until the ground is cleared of its
present growth, nothing!  And the clearing will have to come from the
bottom, I fear, since the top cares for nothing but keeping top.  The
reckoning day will come sometime and it will be a terrible one."

"Poor Russia!" sighed Hope.

"Poor Russians!" said Serge, "who sit quietly under the yoke and
suffer like oxen."

A shrill whistle from the rear stopped him.  He sprang half out of
his seat and leaned out, looking anxiously backwards.

Then he called to the driver to stop, and leaped down and went to
meet the teléga.

"What is it?" he asked, as it drew near.

"Bandits, brigands, nomads," cried Blok and Rimof eagerly, with nods
and winks behind the driver's back.  "About a dozen, as far as we can
see, mounted and coming up smartly."

"Ah!  Then it looks as if you were not to be done out of your fun,
boys."

He looked carefully round.  They were in an upland valley.  Ahead,
the road wound away into the mountains through a narrow defile, a
cleft with almost perpendicular sides of scarped rock.

"How far to the next station?" he asked the driver of the teléga, who
sat listening impassively.

"About twenty versts, barin."

"That is the place for us, boys," said Palma, with a nod towards the
cleft in the rocks.

"Couldn't be better," said Blok, with enthusiasm.

"We'll halt at this end," said Rimof.  "You go on and see if it is
better still farther in."

They could see the pursuers plainly now, as they bobbed over a
distant ridge and disappeared into the hollow.  Palma ran back to the
tarantas, out of which Hope and Pavlof were peering anxiously.  His
nod to Pavlof told him what there was to tell.

"Go ahead!" to the driver, "and smartly."

"Come, my little ones!" chirruped the driver, and the tarantas rolled
on into the cleft.

"What is it?" asked Hope.

"Brigands, the boys say"--so much for the benefit of the driver, who,
however, showed no interest in the matter.  "They may be after us,
they may not.  Blok and Rimof are anxious to have a chat with them."

He was looking out ahead as he talked, and examining the lie of the
land carefully.  They shaved an angle of rock with a heavy lurch and
turned sharp to the right.  Palma leaped out.

"That will do!" to the driver.  "Stop!  Loose your horses and take
them round that next loop and wait there."

"Yes, barin."

"You had better go too, Hope."

She hesitated a moment as if with the intention of objecting.  Then
she turned and went after the horses.

"The boys are waiting at the entrance," said Palma.  "This is better.
We will go for them," and he and Pavlof ran back along the road.

Five minutes later the teléga stood alongside the tarantas just
inside the sharp turn of the road.  The driver stolidly did as he was
told and followed his companion round the next loop with his horses.
Another five minutes' pulling and hauling and the teléga was in
position across the road, jammed tight against the left wall of the
cleft and blocking it completely, except a two-foot space between its
front and the opposite wall.  And the tarantas stood across the road
inside it, jammed tight against the right wall and leaving only a
similar space between its front and the left-hand wall.

The barricade was perfect, thanks to the formation of the cleft.  To
horsemen it was impossible, and to storm it on foot the attack must
come under, among the wheels, or over the top, or must wind in single
file through the narrow openings between the vehicles.

Palma laughed grimly when it was completed.

"If they work through that they'll deserve all they get," he said,
and the four men stood expectantly behind their barricade, and waited
events.

"Take this," said Palma, holding out a revolver to Pavlof.  "We can't
have the game spoiled by a handful of Cossacks."

Blok and Rimof, in their capacity of orderlies, carried Berdan rifles
with a bandolier of cartridges over the shoulder.

Presently the sound of hoofs echoed in the angle of the rocks above
them.  Then the regular footfalls turned into a confused trampling
and scrabbling, as the horsemen halted in a bunch at sudden sight of
the obstruction and backed away from it.

Palma stepped quietly between the two vehicles and confronted them.

"Well, what's the matter now?" he asked.

"You are Lieutenant Vinsky?" asked one, shaking his horse a step or
two out of the throng.  Pavlof, looking over the barricade, saw that
it was Lieutenant Tschak, Sokolof's right-hand man, _vice_ Razin
retired through the hunger-strike, but of exactly the same breed and
as like him as twin peas.  The rest were low-browed, heavy-faced
fellows of the ordinary Cossack type.  All their little black eyes
were fixed sullenly on Palma, as though casting up to him the account
of their long, hard ride.

Palma nodded curtly, and asked again, "What is it you want?"

"You and your party are to return," said Tschak brusquely.

"Ah! and why?"

"Captain Sokolof's orders."

"I am not under Captain Sokolof's orders and I shall not return."

"Then we are to bring you."

"Be advised, my friend, and don't attempt it."

"We have our orders," said Tschak.

"And I have mine."

Tschak shook his bridle again and his pony made a step forward.

Palma held up a warning hand.

"We shall both regret it if worse comes of this.  I warn you if you
try to pass that barrier we shall stop you," and he stepped back
behind the carriages and drew his companions round the angle of the
rock.

They could not see the enemy, nor the enemy them, till one or other
advanced.  The barricade, however, the crux of the matter, was
visible to both parties.

"We could get well ahead while they are thinking about it," said
Pavlof, from no feeling of cowardice, but from a simple vast distaste
for the killing of men, deepened in this case by the knowledge that
they were only doing their duty and had no personal animus in the
matter.

"It would only be a postponement of the evil," said Palma, "and a
throwing away of our chances.  We are impregnable here.----I'm sorry,
but the lives of ten Cossacks weigh nothing against what I am here
for."

It was late in the afternoon and the shadows were already abroad in
that gloomy cleft.  Palma passed round his cigarettes, and they
leaned against the boulders smoking quietly and listening intently.

Blok and Rimof were restless to be doing.  To quiet them their leader
gave them permission to steal into the tarantas and learn what the
opposing force was up to.

Blok was back in a moment, with a smile all over his face.

"They're doing the same as we are--sitting smoking and thinking about
it," he said.

"A rest before the assault," said Palma quietly, "and the last smoke
for some of them if they try that corner.  Keep a sharp eye on them,
Loris.  It will be dark in ten minutes, then they'll make a move.
The moment they do so, come back here both of you," and young Blok
slipped away to join his friend.

The shadows deepened in the well of the cleft till the barricade was
only a darker shadow among them.

Blok's voice whispered suddenly alongside Palma and Pavlof.  "They
are withdrawing down the valley."

"Out of earshot for instructions.  They'll come back presently.
Well, they've had their warning.  Fetch Alex, Loris.  They will come
with a rush, poor devils!  And their shooting will be wild and free,
and we can't afford any useless risks," and Bloke stole away again
into the deeper shadow.

Such waiting tries the temper of a man's courage as no actual
fighting can, and if his mettle lack steel it saps and runs, and
leaves him limp for the fray.  But to Hope, sitting solitary on a
rock behind the next turn of the road, this anxious waiting was more
terrible still.

She wove her fingers tight, and bowed her head, and prayed numbly.
Her life, and the lives of the men down the road, were at stake.
Liberty at such a price was dearly purchased.

Suppose Paul should be killed, what would life be worth to her?
Suppose they were all killed, what would become of her?--left alone
in the wilderness with these rough boors, who sat smoking impassively
and thought more--if they thought at all--of the safety of their
horses than of the lives in the balance down yonder.

She jumped up, and went to the bend of the road, and peered down it
into the darkness.  But there was not a sound, and her anxiety
deepened every instant.

She took a step or two round the corner, stopped, and stood
listening.  It was no good going.  Her presence would only hamper
them, and their hands were overfull as it was.

Then a sudden vicious spurt of flame ripped out of the ground in the
nearer darkness in front.  In a moment the angle of the cleft blazed
with intermittent flashes and echoed with shots and shouts.
Something sang past her in the darkness, and she ran back and dropped
on her rock, and held her hands over her ears.  And alongside her the
drivers grunted guttural ejaculations over their pipes, and the
horses stamped restlessly at the turmoil.

Loris Blok had withdrawn along the road with the rest after recalling
Rimof.  But he was one of those restless souls who find it impossible
to wait doing nothing, and he was aching for a fight.  He had in his
time suffered at the hands of the authorities, both as student and
prisoner.  He had seen his comrades beaten down and ridden over in
the streets of Moscow.  He had seen them shot down in the open and
done to death in the prisons, and he hated the doers of these things,
head and hand, from the highest to the lowest, with a very bitter
hatred.

The only fear he had was lest the enemy should withdraw--even now, at
this ultimate moment, when everything was shaping so well for a
settlement of old scores, and forces were, as he considered it, so
evenly balanced.

The pursuers were, indeed, nearly three to one, but the position was
against them.  It would be a tremendous pity if such an opportunity
were allowed to slip.  Sooner than let that happen he would venture
much.

Inch by inch, in the dark, he edged noiselessly away from the others
towards the barricade.  He knelt down and crept between the hind
wheels of the teléga and the rock wall.  He craned his head round the
corner, and became instantly aware of a similar approach from the
other side.

He waited in joyful suspense.  He held his breath.  His rifle barrel
slipped cautiously through his left hand, till his right hand was on
the lock.

There was a shuffling of many feet outside, a click of the tongue
such as one uses to start a horse, and Blok opened fire.

A guttural curse and a stumble, the crash of many rifles, the
splintering of wood, the spat of bullets on rock, and the bend of the
cleft blazed fitfully in the intermittent flashes.

But Blok lay still and fired no more.  He had disobeyed orders and he
had paid the price.

Half-a-dozen dark figures slipped in round the end of the teléga, and
some came out round the end of the tarantas, and some from underneath
it, and some stood and fired over it.  Other hands seized the teléga
and slewed it round into the roadway to widen the approach.

But, as the dark figures emerged from the darkness of the tarantas,
the three defenders opened fire, with revolvers and rifle, and man
after man went down.

The cleft boiled like a mighty pot in the light of the continuous
flashes.  It was full of wreathing smoke and vicious cracklings and
wild-flying lead.

That first shot from beneath the teléga had told Palma Blok's story.
He curtly bade the others grimp to the rock, but himself stood out in
the narrow way and shot down man after man as they issued round, or
crept from under, the tarantas.  One might almost have thought him
careless of his life.  When his revolver was empty, and still they
came, he ran in and used the butt on any head or face that offered.

Rimof's Berdan rang out alongside Pavlof as fast as he could snap in
the cartridges.  But the besieger's bullets were two to one in spite
of casualties, and presently Pavlof heard the clang of a rifle as it
fell on the rocky way at his feet, and then the sprawling fall of a
man.

He was bending to him, when, in the fitful glare in front, he saw
Palma fall in a heap also, and he ran forward to help him.  The men
behind the tarantas gave a hoarse shout, and the cleft blazed and
boiled again.  Pavlof felt a bullet rip through his coat.  Another
stung through his shoulder like the searing of a hot iron, and spun
him round and dropped him on Palma's body.

Then what were left of the besiegers came panting round the
barricade, and stumbled on the two bodies, and kicked them and cursed
them.  Pavlof sat up.  Palma lay still.

By Lieutenant Tschak's orders one of his men kicked some planks out
of the side of the teléga, and started a fire for the purpose of
ascertaining casualties.  He swore roundly as the bodies were dragged
up one by one and laid in a line.  Six of his men lay there dead or
wounded.  Blok was dead.  Rimof was dead.  By the crackling flames
Pavlof endeavoured to find out if Palma was dead.  There was a hole
in his breast from which the blood was welling, but he groaned as
Pavlof attempted to staunch it with his handkerchief.

"Dead?" growled Lieutenant Tschak, looking down at them.

"Wounded here," said Pavlof, pointing to the hole, "but he lives
still," and went on with his bandaging.

"The worse for him," said Lieutenant Tschak.

Then Hope stole silently into the circle of light, her white face
pinched and drawn with her fears.  She saw Pavlof, she saw whose body
he was bending over, and she ran to them with a cry.

"Is he dead?" she asked breathlessly.

"Not dead, Hope, but sorely wounded, I fear."

She had held herself with a tight hand till now, but at sight of
those stark bodies, and of this one, she broke down and sobbed
convulsively.

Serge opened his eyes and looked up at her in a dazed way.  Then his
glance wandered to Pavlof and rested meditatively on him for a
moment.  Then it passed on to the coppery glow of the firelight on
the rocky walls, and his brow puckered as though he were trying hard
to recollect all that had passed.

Pavlof saw his lips move and bent over him.

"Failed," he murmured faintly.

"No man could have done more, Serge.  We are very grateful."

"More harm than good.  Sorry!"

"Does it pain you?"

"Yes----I'm done----What will you do?"

"We are in God's hands," said Hope gently, and sank down beside him
and drew his head on to her lap.

The shadow of a smile trembled on his lips, and there was a
flickering spark in his eyes as he looked up at her.

"God keep you, dear," he said, very softly, and turned his eyes on
Pavlof again, and said, "And you."

A great pity for him filled Hope's heart.  She bent down and kissed
his forehead and he lay still.  And presently, as they watched him,
he sighed gently, and stretched himself out like a weary man.

Hope bent over him weeping.  She thought he was dead.  Pavlof stood
up.

"He will die if you move him," he said to Lieutenant Tschak.

"So!  He will have to be moved all the same," said Tschak.  "Where
are your horses?"

"Up the road," and having done all he could for Palma, he turned to
the others and examined their wounds, and showed their comrades how
to bind them up till better could be done for them.

And presently, the stolid-faced drivers came slowly down with the
horses, and led them stolidly past the row of dead bodies, and
harnessed them to their respective vehicles.

The only exclamation that fell from them was from the driver of the
teléga at the sight of the broken side.

"Da!  Some one will have to pay for that.  My word, yes!"

An hour later they were on their way back to Kara.  Hope and the
wounded men in the tarantas, Palma's head in her lap, and her heart
bruising for his sake with every bump of the heavy wheels.  The dead
were piled promiscuously into the teléga, and Pavlof rode one of the
dead men's horses.

Lieutenant Tschak was the only reasonably cheerful member of the
party.  He had been instructed to bring back the fugitives alive or
dead, and he was bringing them back, not one missing.

The bitterness and shock of the catastrophe were still too close and
sudden not to weigh heavily on the spirits of Hope and Pavlof.  For
the present they could only mourn their loss, without a thought for
the distressing complication which Serge's death would remove from
their path.  He had made a gallant attempt at their rescue, he had
given his life for them, and their hearts were very sore for him.

The Cossacks, whole and wounded alike, bore themselves stolidly.  If,
now and again, at the bumping of the tarantas over the rocky way, one
or another growled a curse, and feathered it at Hope with a white
side-glance, it missed its mark, for she took no notice.  She was
thinking of Serge and of Pavlof, and wondering dully what the end of
it all would be.

At the best, she supposed, it would mean Kara for life for Paul.  She
did not see how he could possibly have acted otherwise than he had
done.  But he had broken bounds and he must suffer the consequences.
Well, they had been very happy at Kara.  They would still be
together.  Her heart chilled at thought of what might have been, and
glowed again at thought of what was.

Suppose it had been Pavlof's head which lay like a clod on her knee,
ah, how desolate her state then!  So, even in the depths of her
distress, she found a ray of consolation and cause for thankfulness,
and these helped her to bear herself with a certain rigid composure.

It was long after midnight when they hammered on the door of the
post-house from which they had started out that afternoon, and the
startled postmaster came near to losing his wits when he saw the
gruesome company that summoned him.

The wounded men were carried in, one by one, and laid on the floor.
Serge would never have got into the house alive but for Hope's tender
care and Pavlof's insistent endorsement of it.  They were brutalised
by usage and careless to bodily suffering, those Cossacks of the
mines.  But some of them had been under Pavlof's hands in the
hospital and his word still had weight with them.  As it was, and in
spite of all their care, the handling started Palma's wound bleeding
again.  He was barely alive, but he opened his heavy eyes and groaned
as they carried him in, and seemed to wonder that they could not
leave him to die in peace.

Pavlof, with his one arm, could do little more for him or the others
than had already been done on the field.  His own shoulder was stiff
and painful, but the bullet had gone clean through without smashing
the bone, and it was only a question of care and nursing.

In the corner of the room allotted to them, they staunched Palma's
wound again and bound him up as well as they were able, and Hope
bathed Pavlof's shoulder and renewed his own hasty bandages; and
then, under his instructions, did what little could be done for the
others.  They suffered her ministrations in silence and gave her no
thanks, but still the occupation was a relief to her.  Even minutes
saved from the contemplation of one's own troubles are minutes gained.

In time, some black bread and tea, with "cutlets" of chopped meat,
were brought to them, and after their long fast, and all they had
gone through, they felt the need of them.  Paul succeeded in getting
a few drops of vodka down Palma's throat, and the onlookers
considered it good liquor wasted and did not scruple to say so.

Then the soldiers lighted their pipes and the atmosphere became thick
and pungent.  Their stolidity relaxed somewhat, and they roughly
fought the battle over again, and illuminated it with oaths and jokes
and jibes.  And to Hope--with the dead men lying outside in a ghastly
heap in the teléga, and Serge lying like death alongside her on the
floor, and Paul dozing fitfully against the wall--it was all a
nightmare of horrors, and she never forgot it.

She was weary beyond words, but she could not sleep.  Now and again
her tired eyes closed in repulsion against the acrid smoke and the
slimy things that crept about the walls; but there was no escape from
the sounds and the smells, and, bodily, as well as mentally, she felt
sick to death.

That night of purgatory seemed as though it would never end.  It was
but a few hours in reality, but to her it was a long-drawn, sickening
agony, which stretched back further than she could bear to think of,
and forward beyond all hope of amelioration.

But day broke at last.  The light stole dimly through the thick-paned
window, and the distorted shadows resolved themselves into the forms
of men lying huddled in uncouth attitudes.  Paul woke up with a
start, and, with a glance at her which pinched his lips for her
suffering, he bent over Palma to see if he were still alive.

He was breathing, but no more, and it seemed doubtful to Paul if he
would be got into the tarantas alive.

But Lieutenant Tschak had no compunctions about making the attempt.
Under his autocratic ordering, every man who could swallow got a bowl
of hot tea and a hunch of bread.  Then the sick were carried out,
with small attention to their groanings, and the funereal procession
set off at a foot pace for the journey home.  Two of the wounded
Cossacks got there before they reached Kara; and when they rumbled
slowly through Ust Kara, through which they had rattled so briskly
the day before, Hope's companions in the tarantas were two dead men,
and two sorely wounded, and Serge Palma--and him she feared dead,
since he showed no signs of life.




CHAPTER XXVII

HOW THREE CAME HOME AND ONE WENT FURTHER

As they jolted through the Lower Diggings and the settlement, all who
could turned out to see them pass, and so they came at last to the
political prison, where Captain Sokolof and a grizzly-bearded
stranger stood awaiting them inside the great stockade.

Sokolof listened with a grim face to Lieutenant Tschak's report,
while the wounded men were being carried into the hospital and the
teléga discharged its ghastly load.

Pavlof had got down stiffly from his horse, and Hope climbed down
from the tarantas as soon as Serge's body had been lifted down, and,
when he had disposed of the rest, Sokolof came across to them.
Hope's eyes swept his face anxiously for indications of their fate,
but found it inscrutable.  The grizzly-bearded man had followed the
wounded men into the hospital.

"Madame, you are at liberty to return to your own house," said
Sokolof abruptly.  "You, Mr. Palma, must remain here."

"May I not stop with my husband, sir?" asked Hope.  "He is wounded."

"It shall be seen to.  You will be better at home, Madame."

"You will be far better there, dearest.  God keep you!" said Paul,
and kissed her very tenderly, thinking it might well be for the last
time.

With the same fear in her, she took one long look at him, and then
went brokenly down the enclosure.  The great gate opened and closed,
the pointed black fangs of the stockade grinned derisively, and Paul
wondered if he would ever see her more.

He was still staring blankly at the gates, as though he could see
through them and after her, when Sokolof touched him on the shoulder,
and said quietly, "Follow me!" and strode away to his own quarters.

"You made a great mistake," he said, turning upon him abruptly, as
soon as they were in his room.  "What made you go with that man?"

"It was impossible for me to do otherwise."

"Da!  Impossible?  What hold has he on you?"

Pavlof hesitated.  He did not know where he stood, and least said
soonest mended.

"Who is he?" asked Sokolof again.  "And why had you to go with him?"

And still Pavlof made no reply.

"See, Mr. Palma, I have been your friend.  I would still be so.  But,
as I see things at present, it is an ill return you have made me in
this matter."

Pavlof made a gesture of dissent.

"Yes," said Sokolof, "an ill return, and calculated to damage me
sorely at headquarters.  An escape is nothing.  But to be gulled in
this fashion, and to call their attention to it myself by that cursed
telegram, which was intended entirely for your benefit----"

"He tried hard to dissuade you from it."

"For his own ends.  The result has been disastrous, and the matter,
and your share in it, must be investigated.  But, in the fact of your
going, you are not incriminated.  His papers were all in order, so
far as we could possibly make out.  In going with him you only obeyed
orders supposed to have come from St. Petersburg.  But that is not
enough for me.  There is that behind which I do not understand.  If I
am still to stand your friend I must understand it."

Upon which Pavlof took his fate in his hands.

"It is a strange story," he said, "and may try your credence at
times.  But I will tell you the whole matter, and you shall judge me.
The man who is dying in the hospital there is Serge Palma----"

"Serge Palma!" echoed Sokolof in vast surprise.  "Then who----?  Who
the devil are you?"

"I am Paul Pavlof."

At which Sokolof shook his head with a perplexed pinching of the
brows.  He had never heard of Paul Pavlof.

"But Madame----" he asked, with sudden inspiration, "Is she then not
Madame Palma?"

"She was Palma's wife.  She came out here to join him.  He and I had
exchanged names on the road.  He stopped at Minusinsk.  I came on to
Kara.  Instead of her husband, she found me here."

"You had known her before she married Palma?"

"Yes, I had known her and loved her.  But I was very poor, and she
was very enthusiastic on the subject of the people."

"And Palma was rich?"

"Palma was rich."

"I begin to see.  And now--is she your wife or Palma's?"

"She is my wife--now.  We awaited news of Palma.  We got only news of
his death----"

"Ah?"--as if he would have liked much to inquire how such news had
reached him.

"And so, after long waiting, we married.  Then Palma came, at the
risk of his life, to pay the debt he considered he owed me.  I was
quite happy here.  So was my wife.  His coming was terrible to us.
What could we do?"

Sokolof nodded.

"We could not refuse to go, though we had no wish to go.  If we had
refused, you would have sent us.  The only thing we could have done
was impossible, and that was to expose the man who was risking his
life for us.  Would you have done that, Captain Sokolof?"

"I would not."

"And what would you have thought of me if I had done it?"

"I should have thought you a cur."

"Exactly.  Now you understand the whole matter."

"Now I understand."  He paced thoughtfully to and fro.  Once he
stopped and faced Pavlof, as if about to speak, but thought better of
it and went on.

"I must keep you here for the present," he said at last, "till
inquisition is made into the matter."

"You will let me see to Palma and the others?"

"They will be seen to.  The man you saw with me arrived last night.
He is the new doctor appointed by headquarters."

"Ah, then I would be glad to have him strap up my shoulder."

"You are wounded?  Yes, I remember, Madame mentioned it."

"A bullet went through it in the _mêlée_, but I don't think any great
damage is done.  It was a narrow defile----"

"Don't tell me anything about it," Sokolof held up his hand.  "Tschak
and the rest will no doubt have quite enough to say about it.  A good
deal will depend on what they say.  I will send Irbatsky in to look
at your shoulder.  And, remember, the less said the better."

"Will you as a favour allow me to nurse Palma to the end?  It cannot
be far off.  You can understand--I feel as if I had used him ill,
though God knows, I never intended to do so."

"I will see what Irbatsky says.  I am a bit suspicious of him and
must walk warily.  Perhaps he will be glad of your help with the
wounded.  He is a drinker, unless I'm mistaken, which is perhaps the
reason for his coming here.  I will see you later."

And presently Dr. Irbatsky came in, and Pavlof bared his wound, and
the doctor washed and strapped it, talking meanwhile of the fight.

"Ach, so you were fighting, too, Mr. Palma?  Bad job, bad job!  And
no good came of it after all."

"I saw my friend fall, and went to help him," said Paul.  "It was
then that I got hit.  How do you find him, Doctor?"

"Bad, very bad.  It is a wonder he got back here alive."

"He can't last long?"

"Not many hours.  Might die any minute."

"I would be grateful for your permission to sit by him till he goes.
Can I help with the others also?  I am ready to be of use."

"Da!  I see no objection, if Captain Sokolof does not.  But you are
pretty well done up yourself and have lost blood.  You can hardly
keep your eyes open."

"I shall keep them open longer than he will."

"That's so.  Well, come along.  Captain Sokolof is with the prisoner
now, but I doubt if he'll get anything out of him."

They crossed the enclosure and entered the hospital, and found
Sokolof standing beside the bed on which Palma had been laid.

"Will he come to before he goes, Doctor?" asked Sokolof.

"He may, at the last.  Or he may just drift out like that.  He has no
right to be here alive after what he's gone through."

"You can wait by him, Mr. Palma," said the captain.  "I will leave
you an orderly.  If he shows signs of consciousness send for me
instantly.  It is of importance."

Pavlof bowed and sat down by the bed, and Sokolof and the doctor went
out.

Serge breathed so slightly and softly that Paul doubted at times if
he breathed at all, and more than once he had to bend close over him
to make sure.  He sat for a couple of hours in the dim light of the
tiny lamp, and found it hard to keep his eyes open, as the doctor had
said.

Then, suddenly, Palma made a slight uneasy movement, and Paul bade
the orderly fetch Captain Sokolof.

The captain was there almost immediately.

"Has he come to?" he asked quickly, as he dismissed the orderly.

"He has moved for the first time since I came, and it indicates a
change.  He has not spoken,"--and they sat and waited.

Presently a slow sigh from the bed, and they bent over it.  Palma
opened his eyes wearily and looked up at them.

"Do you know who I am?" asked Sokolof.

A faint smile flickered over Palma's lips.

"I want you to tell me who you are?"

Serge's eyes turned inquiringly on Paul, who bent down and took his
cold hand in his.

"Paul Pavlof," whispered Serge.

"And who is this?" asked Sokolof, indicating Paul.

He looked steadily into Sokolof's eyes and answered, "Serge Palma."

"I have thought it wise to trust Captain Sokolof with the whole
truth, Serge," said Paul, slowly and distinctly.

A faint surprise showed in the tired eyes.

"Now tell me," said Sokolof again.  "Who is this?" indicating Paul.

"Paul Pavlof."

"And you are----?"

"Serge Palma."

"And that is the truth as you are about to appear before God?"

"The truth."

"Now I want to know who furnished you with the documents you brought
here."

At that, the shadowy smile flickered over the dying man's lips once
more, but he made no answer.

"You will not tell me?"

"Never," came the feeble whisper.

They saw the lips move again presently, and both bent close.

"Hope?" he murmured.

"She is at home, Serge," said Paul.  "It has tried her hard, all
this."

"Sorry."

"We shall never forget it, or you.  You did nobly."

He looked at Sokolof, who bent down to him.

"I pay----not them."

Sokolof straightened up and pondered for a moment.  Then he bent down
again, and spoke slowly and clearly as Pavlof had done.  "Listen,
Palma.  I received from Petersburg last night papers authorising me
to set Serge Palma at liberty, on account of his services here, and
on condition of his leaving the country at once and never setting
foot on Russian territory again."

A great light glowed in the dulling eyes for a moment.

"That is Serge Palma," he said, in so loud a voice that it startled
them--and died with the beautiful lie on his lips.

Paul knelt down by the bed, still holding the hand which grew colder
and colder in his.  He forgot Sokolof and all else for the moment.
This man had given his life for him and for the woman they both
loved, and his heart was sore stricken at his going, and by so
sorrowful a path.

It was Sokolof who broke the silence at last.

"The pity," he said gravely, "that such men should be wasted."




CHAPTER XXVIII

HOW SOKOLOF PAID HIS DEBT

"It is true what I told your friend," said Sokolof, when they had
returned to his quarters.  "I had not intended to tell you until I
had finished my other inquiries, but I could not resist the
temptation.----A brave man.----It is a grievous thing that we must
have such against us.----But you understand, Mr. Palma--to me you
remain Palma.  I know nothing of the rest.  And you understand also
that if my inquiries implicate you in the fighting----"

Paul opened his mouth to speak, having no desire to skulk behind any
screen of silence.

But Sokolof held up a peremptory hand once more.  "Tell me nothing.
Anything you say might harm you.  It could not possibly help.  We
will say nothing to Madame at present, in case it goes against you.
For her sake I hope it will not."

"And when----"

"I shall have all the statements completed by to-morrow.  I can say
nothing more now."

"Was it Dr. Irbatsky's coming--no, I remember, you said he only
arrived last night----"

"I got a telegram from St. Petersburg the day you left, saying that
no orders had been sent to remove you to Yakutsk, and that a new
doctor was on the way with special instructions concerning you."

"I see.  If Dr. Irbatsky had only arrived one day earlier----"

"As doubtless he ought to have done.  But your friend would have
found himself in the lions' den.  It would be interesting to know
what he would have done."

"He would have faced the matter boldly."

"That without doubt.  But he would have found himself in a very tight
place."

"I think he would have got out of it."

"I'm inclined to think he would.  He would probably have offered to
convoy you to the coast and see you safely off Russian territory."

It was late in the afternoon of the following day before Sokolof
acquainted Pavlof with the result of his inquiries.

"I have discovered nothing to incriminate you, beyond the fact that
you were present during the fighting," he said.  "You received that
wound, I understand, in going to your friend's assistance when he was
down.  I am justified, therefore, in concluding that you took no part
in the fight.  I must insist on your not speaking"--as Pavlof opened
his mouth.  "I have asked each man specifically if he saw you in
active resistance.  They all agree that it was too dark to
distinguish persons, and that they never saw you till you ran in to
your friend.  And so, Mr. Palma, I shall act on the instructions
brought by Dr. Irbatsky and hand you your papers.  I have here also
certain documents from Palma's portmanteau.  You had better take
them.  They seem of importance--to Madame at all events.  Now you are
at liberty to go to her and acquaint her with this matter, and--you
can leave Kara when you will."

Pavlof wrung the generous hand in silence.  He could not trust
himself to speak.  Captain Sokolof had repaid him with interest.  He
took the papers and went out a free man.

He went quickly to his cottage, in such a tumult of emotions, that
Dr. Irbatsky, seeing him pass, took unction to his soul under the
mistaken impression that he and Sokolof must have been drinking
together, and argued well for his own prospective enjoyments of a
similar nature.

There was a light in the cottage, and Pavlof trod softly as he drew
near, and peered through the window.

Anna Roskova, and Marya Verskaïa, and Hope, were sitting at the table
with the samovar before them.  He wondered, in the vague way in which
one's mind, when tightly strung, wanders off at times on inconsequent
trifles, which of them had slept on the hearth the previous night.
He thought it would be Marya.  He was sure it was not Hope.

But none of the three looked as if they had slept for a week, and
there was little speech between them.  They had had time to say all
that could be said, and now only a dull and hopeless expectation was
left to them.

He turned the handle and walked in, and the three speechless women
were changed, after one moment of breathless wonder, into incarnate
questions.  They all talked at once and literally fell on his neck in
their excitement, till Marya, unable to express her feelings in any
other way, began to scream and beat her knees with her hands, and the
floor with her feet.

He got them quieted at last by declining to say a word till they gave
him a cup of tea, and Hope's hand shook so as she poured it out that
there was as much tea on the table as in the cup.  Then--

"They have set me free, Hope," he said, "and we can go when we
choose."

"Oh, Paul!"--at which Anna and Marya opened their eyes very wide, and
wondered if excess of joy had really turned her brain.  She clasped
her hands gratefully and gazed at him in wonder.  "And I was fearing
I might never see you again.  God is very good to us!"

"We have to leave Russia for good."

"I shall be glad to go.  It is hopeless.  And Serge?"

"He died last night."

At which she only bowed her head silently, for she had known that he
could not possibly live.

"Did he know?" she asked at last.

"Yes, Sokolof told him."

"I am going to tell Polokof, and Hugo Svendt, and all the rest the
good news," said Anna Roskova, jumping up.

"And I will go with you," said Marya, coming to her senses.

And they went off full of excitement and wonder, but, though they
often thereafter spoke together of the strange fact that Hope Palma
called her husband Paul, and that Serge was dead, they never
discussed it except between themselves, and they never got to the
bottom of it.

"Shall we go, Hope, or shall we stop and help them through the
summer?" he said thoughtfully.

"You have done enough, Paul," she said, startled at his suggestion,
for these last days had told on her.  "Oh, let us go."

"It is bound to break out again, you see, though it won't be as bad
as it was before."

"You have done enough," she said again.  "Your life has been at stake
these two years, and I--I long for the air of freedom."

"The man you saw in the prison yard was the new doctor, Irbatsky.  I
don't much like the looks of him.  I doubt if he has got much
constitution left.  If he goes under they'll be as badly off as ever,
and I feel that I owe Sokolof much."

"You paid the debt in advance.  You must think of yourself now----and
of me----and----"  And she leaned over to him, with the flush of a
heavenly hope in her face, and whispered in his ear.

There were stars in his eyes as he looked into hers and kissed her
glowing face.

"That settles it, dearest.  We will go at once--as soon as we have
buried our friends."

Then Dmitri Polokof, and Hugo Svendt, and Alexei Etelsky, and a host
of others came flocking in, to welcome Serge Petrovitch back and to
bid them both Godspeed.

Long after midnight the little house was still humming and swarming
like a beehive, till the wonder was that the walls could hold so
great an effervescence.  There were messages to friends to be
delivered, if ever the chance offered, and if not, then to be
conveyed by letter from the land of freedom to the land that was not
free.  And so many were they that Paul had to take them down on the
margin of a small Bible, in a species of shorthand which he had used
as a student, and which he had no fear of any one being able to read,
since at times he could hardly make it out himself.  Actual letters
he regretfully but firmly declined to carry.  But he took enough
notes to fill many pages and comfort many anxious hearts at home.

When at last they had their house to themselves--for Anna Roskova and
Marya Verskaïa flatly refused to intrude upon them, and billeted
themselves for the night among their friends--Paul came on the papers
Sokolof had handed to him.  He had stuffed them into his pocket and
thought no more about them.

"These are yours, Hope," he said.  "They are Serge's papers.  Sokolof
sent them to you."

They looked through them with tender respect and with no thought of
gain.  But among them they found a letter from Serge setting forth
the sums he had left in the hands of Gerrardius, the Geneva banker,
and with Rothschilds in London, and it stated that instructions had
also been left with both to pay over the amounts to Hope, in case of
his death.

It was a considerable amount, nearly 200,000 roubles.

But Pavlof said decisively, "That is for the cause--in some way or
other.  We will not touch it except for our immediate necessities,
and that we will replace as soon as possible."

"Yes," said Hope, in a glow of happiness at the thought.  "We will
send some of it here.  They are so miserably poor, most of them."

"I will arrange it with Captain Sokolof.  He is a man of his word.  I
am beginning to like him."

They buried Palma, and Rimof, and Blok, in the little cemetery of the
Free Command on the hillside, and laid them close against the Eastern
boundary, as near to freedom as was possible.  The white wooden post
which marks their resting place bears only the initials P.R.B.  But
to Paul and Hope Pavlof, who alone know all that lies beneath that
simple monument, the memory of those three brave men is a fragrant
and ever cherished possession.

And when they speak together of the great heart that lies at rest
there, their own hearts are very full--of the loyal-souled one who
went so boldly to his death for them--and of that Guiding Hand which
inspired and accepted the sacrifice, and turned it to their lasting
good.

The same day Pavlof made arrangements for their journey to
Vladivostok, and then went up for a last talk with Captain Sokolof.

He told him their decision as to Palma's money, and Sokolof did his
best to veil his impression that the joy of freedom had made them
slightly mad.

"Da!  200,000 roubles!" he said.  "That is a fortune not easily
arrived at.  And you will throw it away."

"By no means, if you will help us to make good use of it."

"I will help you, but it is throwing it away all the same."

"We don't think so.  I will send, to you direct, from time to time,
money to help our friends here who are in need.  Dmitri Polokof and
Madame Roskova will give you their names."

"I will see to it.  Are you taking any letters?" he asked, and fixed
him with a keen eye.

"Not one.  I knew you would ask."

"Messages?"

"That you can hardly stop me doing," said Pavlof, with a smile, "but
none that will do you any harm."

And next morning they shook him warmly by the hand, and even felt
some regret at parting from him.  For, if he was a hard man, he was
just, according to his lights and the cast-iron nature of his
environment, and to them he had proved a good friend and one who did
not forget.

Colonel Zazarin was still too ill to care a kopeck what became of
them or of the whole settlement.  His thoughts were wandering in such
strange and shadowy places that Anna Roskova sat in his room with her
fingers stuffed into her ears, and her heart full of loathing and
pity at these self-revelations of a tortured soul.

Captain Sokolof provided Paul with the necessary papers for securing
their immunity on the road, and furnished him with the usual orders
for post-horses at the various stations.

And so, with hearts at ease, such as they had been very far from
feeling on the last occasion, they once more turned their faces
towards freedom.  And if those who crowded to the cottage doors, to
wave them hearty farewells as they passed, envied them their great
good fortune, not one but acknowledged that none deserved it better,
and not one begrudged them the smallest piece of it.



THE END.



UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEARTS IN EXILE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


