The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Collector's Guide, No. 17, January 1940
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Collector's Guide, No. 17, January 1940

Author: Various

Editor: James Madison

Release date: May 30, 2020 [eBook #62287]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLECTOR'S GUIDE, NO. 17, JANUARY 1940 ***

                                  The
                           COLLECTOR’S GUIDE


       A Monthly Periodical Devoted to First Editions, Americana,
 Autographs, Old Newspapers and Magazines, Sheet Music, Playbills, Dime
  Novels, Current Auction Prices, etc. $2 per year. Single copies 25c.
Published by James Madison, P. O. Box 124, Grand Central Annex, New York.
                      Advertising rates on page 8.


                       No. 17    January    1940




                       Largest Buyers and Sellers
                                   of
                           FRONTIER AMERICANA
                             IN THE COUNTRY

                                * * * *

                       _Edward Eberstadt & Sons_
                    55 West 42nd Street    NEW YORK


                           RETZ & STORM, Inc.
                      598 Madison Avenue, New York

                     _Rare Books and First Editions
                   Autograph Letters and Manuscripts
                      Catalogues Sent on Request_


AUTOGRAPHS, DOCUMENTS, MANUSCRIPTS OF AMERICANS OF ALL TIMES or RELATING
TO AMERICA. HISTORICAL AND LITERARY, purchased for immediate cash. Fine
Single pieces as well as Collections. Also accumulations of such
material in large quantities.

                          Want List on Request

                      The American Autograph Shop
                    MERION STATION, PA.    U. S. A.


                             BEN BLOOMFIELD
                     65 University Place, N. Y. C.

Buys and sells autographs. HIGH PRICES PAID for collections and choice
single items.


    [Illustration: HART BOOKS]

_Please quote_

  Bibliography (Amer.)
  Books about Books
  Literary Biography
  Fine Printing and Limited
  Unusual Books

                             HART BOOK CO.,
                 1775 Broadway, New York    (Room 702)


                        Always Selling Old Stuff

including rare American periodicals, curious broadsides and song sheets,
and many other printed oddities you always wanted but never knew where
to get. Prices surprisingly reasonable. List free on request.

                                 PITZER
                 41 Woodlawn Ave.    Jersey City, N. J.


                          BLAND GALLERY, Inc.
                          Harry MacNeill Bland
                          45 East 57th Street
                             NEW YORK CITY

                  Early American Prints and Paintings
                            Bought and Sold


                          CASH BY RETURN MAIL
                                          _For Any Outstanding Items of_

  Kipling—Stevenson—Twain—Hawthorne—1st Printing of Lincoln’s Gettysburg
          Address
  Prints or Paintings of Fire Scenes
  Early American Children’s Books
  Specially Wanted, Outstanding First Editions in Science and Literature

                        BOOKSHOP OF HARRY STONE
                          24 East 58th Street
                            New York, N. Y.




                             CURRENT BOOKS
                 OF INTEREST TO COLLECTORS AND DEALERS


     _When writing publishers kindly mention_ The Collector’s Guide

SAN FRANCISCO THEATRE RESEARCH MONOGRAPHS (mimeographed), Lawrence
      Estavan, Chief editor. Vol. 9, XIX: The French Theatre in San
      Francisco, pages 1-107 ... The German Theatre in San Francisco,
      pages 108-150 plus appendices ... Vol. 10, XXI; The Italian
      Theatre in San Francisco, pages 151-202. Vol. XIII; Negro
      Minstrelsy. (These Monographs are not for sale but only furnished
      to libraries and educational institutions.)

THE SACRAMENTO RIVER OF GOLD. By Julian Dana. 12mo. 7th vol. in the
      “Rivers of America” series. Farrar & Rinehart, New York. $2.50.

WHISKEY REBELS: The Story of a Frontier Uprising. By Leland D. Baldwin.
      326 pages, with notes and bibliography. A study of the Whiskey
      Insurrection of 1794. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh,
      Pa. $3.

MARCY AND THE GOLD SEEKERS: The Journal of Captain R. B. Marcy, with an
      account of the Gold Rush over the Southern Route. By Grant
      Foreman. 433 pages, illustrations and bibliography. Presents
      evidence that a more extensive use was made of the southern route
      to the California gold fields than has been generally credited.
      University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Okla. $3.

TRAILING THE FORTY-NINERS THROUGH DEATH VALLEY. By Carl I. Wheat.
      Reprinted as a pamphlet from Sierra Club Bulletin, June, 1939.
      Wheat’s address is care of California Historical Society, 456
      McAllister St., San Francisco.

NEW YORK, PAST AND PRESENT: ITS HISTORY AND LANDMARKS, 1524-1939.
      Contains 100 views reproduced and described from old prints and
      modern photographs. By I. N. Phelps-Stokes. Published by the New
      York Historical Society, New York, 1939. Price to non-members, 75c
      plus 7c mailing fee.

THE BIOGRAPHY OF A RIVER TOWN (Memphis). Compiled by Gerald M. Capers,
      Jr., from its evolution as an Indian trading post. 292 pages, with
      illustrations, maps, charts, and an index. University of North
      Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, N. C. $3.50.

BOOK TRADE BIBLIOGRAPHY IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.
      By Adolph Growoll. Reissue in facsimile of original limited
      edition of 1898. Contains biographical sketches of Orville A.
      Roorbach, Henry Stevens, Joseph Sabin, Frederick Leypoldt, etc.
      Brick Row Book Shop, New York. $7.50.

TWENTY-THREE BOOKS AND THE STORIES BEHIND THEM. By John T. Winterich. 15
      illustrations that were not present in the original limited
      edition; also contains new index. J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia,
      Pa. $2.50.

PORTRAIT OF A COLONIAL CITY: PHILADELPHIA. 1682-1838. By Harold
      Donaldson Eberlein and Cortlandt Van Dyke Hubbard. Panoramic
      account of Philadelphia during this period. J. B. Lippincott &
      Co., Philadelphia. $15.

STOCKBRIDGE, 1739-1939: A Chronicle. By Sarah Cabot Sedgwick and
      Christina Sedgwick Narquand. Illustrated. 306 pages. Bicentennial
      Book Committee, Stockbridge, Mass. $2.75.

FARE TO MIDLANDS: Forgotten Towns of Central New Jersey. By Henry
      Charlton Beck. Illustrated. 456 pages. E. P. Dutton & Co., New
      York. $5.

ANNALS OF THE NEW YORK STAGE. By C. D. Odell. 11th volume, covering
      period from 1879 to 1882. Columbia University Press, New York.
      $8.75.

A CENSUS OF SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS IN QUARTO, 1594-1709. By Henrietta C.
      Bartlett. Revised edition. Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.
      $10.

FORGING AHEAD. By Wilfrid Partington. 8vo. A life of Thomas James Wise,
      collector and “manufacturer”, showing how he pulled not only the
      wool over astute collectors’ eyes, but also the silk, cotton and
      rayon. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York. $3.50.

DAVY CROCKETT: AMERICAN COMIC LEGEND. Edited by Richard M. Dorson. 8vo.
      Tales from the Crockett Almanacs, 1836-56 with contemporary
      illustrations. Rockland Editions, 350 W. 31st St., New York. $5.

ONE HUNDRED YEARS AT VIRGINIA MILITARY INSTITUTE. By William Couper. 4
      vols., approximately each 400 pages. Illustrated with maps,
      drawings and photographs. Vols. 1 and 2 now ready. Vols. 3 and 4,
      ready in March, 1940. Garrett & Massie, Richmond, Va. $12 for
      4-vol. set. Remit $6 for the two vols. now ready.

ONCE OVER LIGHTLY. By Charles de Zemler. 8vo. A history of barbering
      from the earliest times to the present. Published by the author,
      30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York. $3.75.

MUSIC AND EDGAR ALLAN POE. By May Garrettson Evans. 8vo. A
      bibliographical study. John Hopkins Press, Baltimore, Md. $1.75.

THE BALTIMORE AND OHIO IN THE CIVIL WAR. By Festus P. Summers. Portrays
      dramatic role of great railroad in a crucial period. G. P.
      Putnam’s Sons, New York. $3.

DRURY LANE CALENDAR, 1747-1776. Compiled from the playbills and edited
      with an introduction by Dougald MacMaillan. An account of the life
      and work of the 18th century actor and playwright. 398 pages.
      Oxford University Press, New York, in co-operation with the
      Huntington Library, San Marino, Calif. $7.

GHOSTS OF LONDON. By H. V. Morton. Odd nooks and corners of the London
      of yesterday and today. Dodd, Mead & Co., New York. $3.

PIONEER DAYS. By Charles L. Hyde. Early days in South Dakota. G. P.
      Putnam’s Sons, New York. $4.

BANK OF CALIFORNIA, San Francisco. A series of historical advertisements
      commemorating its founding in 1864, with woodcut reproductions of
      historical scenes. 24 pages.

SACRAMENTO GUIDE. 220 pages, with folding map, and illustrated with
      reproductions of early woodcuts, lithographs, and photographs.
      Sacramento BEE, 1939. Paper covers, 50c. Cloth, $1.

                        (_Continued on page 12_)
                       (_Continued from page 2_)

THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA, A MEDICO-GEOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT. By Dr. J.
      Praslow, who practised medicine in San Francisco from 1849 to
      1856. (A translation from the German edition issued in Gottingen
      in 1857). Published by J. J. Newbegin, San Francisco, 1939. $3.

MR. CIBBER OF DRURY LANE. By Richard Hindry Barker. 8vo. Colley Cibber’s
      life. Columbia University Press, New York. $3.

RECOLLECTIONS OF A TULE SAILOR. By John Leale. 300 pages with 19 pages
      of illustrations. Authentic details of San Francisco’s river and
      ferryboat traffic, told by a veteran master and pilot of San
      Francisco Bay since the early 60’s. George Fields, San Francisco,
      Calif. $3.

THE THEATRE HANDBOOK AND DIGEST OF PLAYS. By Bernard Sobol. A reference
      work about the theatre and its people, including concise synopses
      of nearly 1000 plays, etc. Crown Publishers, New York. $3.

  (_If otherwise difficult to procure, Current Books can be ordered from
  THE COLLECTOR’S GUIDE, at publishers’ prices. Free delivery. If
  unobtainable, money will be promptly refunded._)




                 Amateur Journalists Who Became Famous


In “The Career and Reminiscences of an Amateur Journalist,” Thos. G.
Harrison states that Nathaniel Hawthorne was really a pioneer member of
the clan, having gotten out six weekly issues of a periodical of this
description, called THE SPECTATOR, the first number appearing Aug. 21,
1820. Thus it predates by three years what many have heretofore accepted
as his first literary effort, in the SALEM GAZETTE, in 1823.

Prior to its appearance, Hawthorne, at that time a youth of 16, got out
a preliminary prospectus, stating that THE SPECTATOR would be issued on
Wednesdays, at 12c per annum, payment to be made at the end of the year.
In an early issue, Hawthorne advertised that he proposed to publish by
subscription, a new edition of “The Miseries of Authors,” to which he
promised to add a sequel containing facts and remarks drawn from his own
experience.

Truman J. Spencer, for many years a historian on amateur journalism,
questions whether a copy of either THE SPECTATOR or Hawthorne’s
prospectus, is in existence today. Here, then, is an opportunity for
ambitious bibliophiles and rare book speculators to ransack the garrets
of their ancestors, and “see what they can see.” Harrison states that
THE SPECTATOR was neatly written by the hand of Hawthorne. It was
probably manifolded by some crude reproducing process of that period.

    [Illustration:           _(_Courtesy Franklin Memorial Institute_)_]




                        THE JUVENILE PORT-FOLIO,
                                  AND
                          LITERARY MISCELLANY,

           DEVOTED TO THE INSTRUCTION AND AMUSEMENT OF YOUTH.

   A lasting wreath of various hue.—deck’d with each fragrant flower.

                          Vol. I.]    [No. 1.
                      SATURDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1812.


                              CONDITIONS.

A No. will be published every Saturday.

The price is _only Twelve and a half Cents_ per month, payable in
advance.

No subscription will be received for less than three months. At the
close of each year, a title page and index, for the volume; also, a list
of the names of the subscribers will be given.


                        TO THE JUVENILE PUBLIC.

The title to address the public, when a periodical work is first offered
for patronage, is established by custom, and a deviation from the
general usage, would be a breach of decorum, since the public now
demands, as a right, what formerly it granted as a courtesy; and, of
late years, more labour is bestowed in writing these “_Repositories of
promises_,” than in vamping up the original work. As it seems required,
therefore of every candidate, that he should publicly declare his
pretensions to favour, the Editor, in compliance with the general
custom, deems it necessary, briefly to state the intention of the
present work; and, in this, as well as in his Editorial capacity, in
general, he respectfully solicits from his patrons, that indulgence,
which the inexperience of youth so amply requires. In order, therefore,
to make up for his own deficiency, he respectfully solicits the favour
and assistance of such of the “_Literary Youth_,” as may have time and
inclination, to favour him with their communications. He has, also, the
promise of a few gentlemen of polite taste, to condescend their aid, “to
diffuse elegant and instructive literature, to soothe trembling merit,
and to ROUSE AND FOSTER INFANT GENIUS.”

The columns of the Juvenile Port-Folio, will consist of all the _variety
of subject_, and Miscellaneous literature, which Magazines, and other
periodical literary works, usually contain: Selected with particular
attention to those subjects, that are adapted to the improvement,
edification, and rational amusement of youth. In our searches after
variety, a preference will always be given to those pieces, which are
characterised by elegance of expression, chastity of thought, and value
of information. “Though we shall touch, like the Bee, upon every plant
in the garden of literature, we shall only extract from those which
produce sweets, and diffuse fragrance.”

Besides the more general subjects of literature, its pages will always
be open to such extracts of popular interest, as may be judicious and
entertaining; also a general selection of rare anecdotes, points of wit,
brilliant repartee, &c. Our purpose will be to render this department,
lively without licentiousness, brilliant without tinsel, and elegant
without elaboration.

In the region of the Muses, we particularly solicit aid, but we fear
“not from the voice of inspiration.” We may venture, however, to hope,
that the perusal of our selected poetry will excite emulation, as no
piece will be admitted, which cannot lay some claim to true genius and
poetical merit.

The Ladies will receive the Juvenile Port-Folio as an entertaining
companion, studious of their favour, by courtly manners and valuable
information; and the Gentlemen will find in it, a manly and correct
conduct, which we hope will not be unworthy of their regard; as, we
shall ever be anxious to please the Polite, the Learned, the Witty and
the Fair, with those views, we are emboldened to ask the patronage of
the public.

  “And, confident of praise, IF PRAISE BE DUE,
  Trust without fear, to merit and to You.”

But Hawthorne was not the first to publish a “boys’ paper.” From a
pamphlet on “Amateur Journalism,” issued by Will G. Snow of Meriden,
Conn., to commemorate “An Association of Amateur Journalists of the
Past,” called “The Fossils,” we learn that the earliest known American
example is THE JUVENILE PORTFOLIO AND LITERARY MISCELLANY, an eight-page
weekly, published from Oct. 17, 1812 to Dec. 7, 1816 by Thomas G.
Condie, Jr., at 22 Carter’s Alley, opposite Stephen Girard’s Bank,
Philadelphia, as per illustration herewith.

After the demise of Hawthorne’s periodical, amateur journalism seemingly
went into a slumber twice as long as the famed sleep of Rip Van Winkle.
However, in 1858, came the COOS HERALD of Lancaster, N. H., and by 1872,
approximately 200 amateur gazettes were being turned out. At this period
the juvenile journal considered as having the largest circulation, was
OUR BOYS, started in Chicago in 1871 as a “four-pager,” and which by
1873 had evolved into a 16-page periodical almost as large as HARPER’S
WEEKLY. In its prime it is said to have enjoyed a circulation of 10,000
copies per issue. Most of these sheets varied in size from 4 pages of 3
by 4 inch dimensions to 32 pages, measuring 10 by 12, the latter about
the width of four ordinary newspaper columns. The average life of an
amateur paper was estimated at 8 months, which period was ample to
disgust most youthful journalists with the hardships of an editorial
career.

In 1869, it was deemed advisable to organize an association for mutual
acquaintance, social intercourse and to assist the cause of amateur
journalism throughout the United States. A meeting was held in New York
at the residence of Charles Scribner, from which evolved the National
Amateur Press Association. Nellie Williams, a 13-year miss, is credited
as being the first “female of the species.” She issued the PENFIELD
EXTRA soon after the commencement of the Civil War. It had been planned
to issue an amateur journal at the Centennial Exposition of 1876, and it
was said that $5000 could have been raised without difficulty for that
purpose, but Director General Goshorn would not allot space, claiming
that the word “amateur” savored of infancy of mind.

When approximately half a century ago, George Harrison announced himself
as a candidate for the presidency of the Western Amateur Press
Association, his ambition did not meet with unanimous endorsement, if we
consider the following outburst from a rival sheet:

  “We smelt the smell of a dead rat when we received a copy of the
  WELCOME VISITOR, stating that Harrison is a candidate for the position
  of President of the Western Amateur Press Association, against Wyn
  Morris. We can inform the gentleman from Indiana that he is on the
  hull of a sinking ship, and when he grasps for the exalted position he
  has in view, it will melt before his eyes, and he will gradually sink
  into the waters of oblivion. George, dear George, you are left
  sure.”—AMATEUR IOWAN.

To this not over-delicate prognostication, the Harrison clan replied in
kind as set forth below:

  “THE IOWAN no doubt smelt its own smell, eh. As for Harrison being
  left in the race, we beg to inform our IOWA contemporary, in all
  probability it is entirely mistaken. No other candidate now in the
  field has a better chance than he.”—The WELCOME VISITOR.

Let us quote one more expression of opinion, as one contempt-orary to
another:

  “In our estimation nothing is so contemptible as to publish an article
  against an individual and then refuse to send him a copy of the paper
  containing the attack. The low-lived editors of the YOUNG DEMOCRAT
  should paste this in their hats.”—THE ACORN, St. Louis.

At the time Mr. Snow wrote his “Amateur Journalism” pamphlet, in 1922,
the Fossil Library, consisting of 50,000 old amateur papers, was located
at 150 Nassau St., New York. It has since been moved to the Franklin
Memorial Institute, Philadelphia, where it will be permanently preserved
under the care of the Curtis Family of SATURDAY EVENING POST fame. The
second largest collection is owned by Truman J. Spencer, of Hamden,
Conn., while Vincent B. Haggery of Jersey City, N. J., has one of the
very few known files of the official organ of the National Amateur Press
Association, embracing 63 years. Any one interested can obtain
information as to other fine collections by writing to Edwin H. Smith,
Librarian of the N.A.P.A., 524 N. Kenmore St., Philadelphia.

As to amateur journalists who subsequently reached exalted ranks as
authors or publishers, Mr. Spencer has kindly furnished me with the
following list:

FRANK B. NOYES, publisher Washington STAR, at age of 12 ran the TIMES.

THEODORE BODENWEIN (recently deceased), publisher of the New London DAY,
at 17 ran the THAMES BUDGET.

E. H. STAIR, owner Detroit FREE PRESS, ran OUR BOYS AND GIRLS, in 1873.

JOSEPHUS DANIELS, publisher of the Raleigh NEWS AND OBSERVER, and
ex-Secretary of the Navy, at age of 12 ran the CORNUCOPIA.

RICHARD W. GILDER, for many years editor of the CENTURY MAGAZINE, ran
the REGISTER at 16.

CYRUS H. K. CURTIS, S. E. POST AND LADIES’ HOME JOURNAL publisher,
conducted YOUNG AMERICA at the age of 14.

JOHN THAYER, well-remembered as publisher of EVERYBODY’S MAGAZINE and
the SMART SET, when only 13, ran the PRINTER.

GEORGE B. M. HARVEY, one of the final publishers of HARPER’S WEEKLY,
issued the DEMOCRAT when only 14.

There were many other eminent publishers that lack of space compels us
to omit. And as for authors who became famous, Robert Louis Stevenson
issued the SUNBEAM MAGAZINE when 16; Frank Baum who wrote “The Wizard of
Oz” published the HOME JOURNAL in 1868; and Walter Pritchard, New York
theatre critic, and author of numerous books on the drama, joined the
amateur ranks at 12.

According to Mr. Spencer, amateur journalism still exists and continues
to hold a fascination for many youths of today. From the speculative
standpoint, however, there is at present no active demand for an oldtime
collection thereof, although probably some individual with an ample
purse and a nostalgia for youth, would be happy to possess one, and pay
well for it. But who and where he is, it will take a wiser person than
the editor of this publication, to identify.

Collectors of this interesting phase of Americana, will look forward
with pleasurable anticipation to the publication of a book entitled
“History of Amateur Journalism,” on which Truman J. Spencer has been
working for years. The outline of contents will comprise, DEFINITION AND
DESCRIPTION ... THE PIONEERS ... EXCHANGING AND ORGANIZING ... THE
NATIONAL AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION ... RIVAL ORGANIZATIONS ... SECTIONAL
AND LOCAL ORGANIZATIONS ... LITERATURE AND BOOKS ... THE FOSSILS ...
APPENDIX. Full information as to the date of publication, price, etc.,
can be obtained by writing to Truman J. Spencer, 2525 Whitney Ave.,
Hamden, Conn.


The famous rooming house at 61 Washington Square, N. Y., conducted for
more than fifty years by Mme. Katherine Branchard, and since her decease
in 1937, by her daughter-in-law, is no more. During their years of
struggle it was a haven of repose for Willa Cather, Frank Norris, Gelett
Burgess, Theodore Dreiser and Adelina Patti. After their departure from
the Branchard House, which incidentally is over 100 years old, they
wrote her letters from all parts of the world, and these should produce
some good autographic material.

Mrs. Adelaide M. Faron, of the Walt Whitman Society of America, and
Librarian of the Hempstead Library, Hempstead, Long Island, N. Y.,
recently held at the Adelphia College, Garden City, N. Y., an exhibition
of rare items and newly discovered manuscripts pertaining to the “good
gray poet”.

Here is a little good advice from that past master of sheet music
knowledge, Wm. McDevitt, 2079 Sutter St., San Francisco. In his very
entertaining monthly called BOOK-COLLECTING (50 cents a year) he
says:—“In buying first editions of old songs, you will be safer in most
cases if the sheet music doesn’t contain ads on the back cover; you will
generally do well to distrust copies with the copyright line on front
apparently worn out with repeated printings.”

The large mass of propaganda from both foreign and domestic pressure
groups is being collected and classified by the Carnegie Library of
Washington and the Washington and Lee University of Lexington, Va.

The Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C., has acquired a
collection of photographs of real Wild West Indians, made by John K.
Hillers, 66 years ago.




    [Illustration: RICHARD S. WORMSER
    _Books_]

                          RARE    OUT OF PRINT
                     22 WEST 48TH STREET, NEW YORK
                     _Telephone_    _Cable Address_
                  BRYANT 9-9276    BOOKWORM, NEW YORK




                     Good Investments In Autographs


       _Written for_ The Collector’s Guide _by Mary A. Benjamin_

    [Illustration:                                  _Allied News-Photo_]

Frequently I am asked, “What is a safe investment in autographic
material over a long period of years?” The answer may well come from my
experience gained in this field during the past decade. The boom years
of 1928 and 1929 sent many items of a literary, historical and musical
character sky-rocketing, although subsequently they shot down just as
suddenly, 1938 seeing prices at probably their lowest level in 25 years.
And yet, just as in the case of rare books, some forms of autograph
material suffered less than others. The knowledge thus gained, helps
materially to light the pathway as to what is the best sort of
autographic material to consider for future investment.

Today, the safest buy seems to be good Presidential letters written
either before or during their terms of office, preferably the latter.
These letters must have worthwhile contents. Uninteresting documents of
our Chief Executives are all too common and sell at nominal figures.
Signers of the Declaration of Independence and of the Constitution are
also excellent, that is, if the contents measure up. In the literary
domain, authors’ letters about their works are always sought for,
although prices are more inclined to fluctuate than on historical items.

Of late, increased interest has been evinced in the “War between the
States,” or, as it is called up North, the Civil War. An added lure is
that prices for this sort of material, are almost at rock-bottom, as
collectors are just beginning to wake up to its importance. The years
will see good war letters of famous Federal and Confederate Generals go
very high. The upward swing has already begun.

A new field which has sprung up recently is that of State collections.
The country has heretofore been too young to care much for the
historical records of individual localities. But with the development of
the nation, this interest has steadily grown, and today, all letters
relating to internal politics of individual states or cities are being
sought, the competition having a healthy effect upon prices.

Early Mormon material, and records pertaining to Texas, Michigan,
Colorado, Virginia, California, etc., are in active demand, thus
enabling the average dealer to place them without difficulty almost as
fast as received. Furthermore, whereas a collector may become
discouraged in buying a complete set of Signers because of the
super-rarity of a few names, there is little difficulty in obtaining the
two or three Signers belonging to the collector’s home state, to say
nothing of famous Generals, literary lights, composers, etc.

The one, almost unchanging code of the collector should be to buy
hand-written letters of good date, and of unusual, historical, or
otherwise excellent content. Fine items seem to hold their value pretty
well, even in times of financial stress, and with the years should edge
upwards in price. Less desirable items will fluctuate considerably. To
sum up, good autographs provide the best expectation for at least a fair
dividend on the money invested. On the other hand, common items that
have little to recommend them except cheapness, are almost invariably a
disappointment as far as the hope of satisfactory returns, are
concerned. There are occasional exceptions but this rule holds true 98%
of the time. In closing, may I also stress the importance of being sure
that what you purchase is genuine. Unless you are an expert yourself,
the safest way is to acquire your pen treasures only through a dealer on
whose reliability and experience you can absolutely depend.


Walter Hart Blumenthal, rare book specialist at 1775 Broadway, New York,
is frequently called upon to contribute articles on odd books, such as
for example a Shorthand Bible, a Latin Life of Washington, “Alice in
Wonderland” in Esperanto, and a book bound in human skin. Shortly THE
COLOPHON will present an article by Mr. Blumenthal on books in which the
text and illustrations are pierced into the vellum, letter by letter,
the pages being backed by colored silk. In all the world, only seven
such early volumes are known, he states.


Rare book dealers should make good chiropractors because they know so
much about “spines”.... To make Book Week successful, avoid displaying
Weak Books.... It requires no earthquake to produce “shaken” books.




                                 WANTED
                              AUTOGRAPHED
                        FREE FRANKLED ENVELOPES

                             WARREN L. BARR
                  420 21st St., N. W.    Canton, Ohio


                             THE BOOM IS ON
                                 _THE_
                           COLLECTOR’S GUIDE
                     _formerly a Quarterly, is now_
                           Published Monthly
                        _except July and August_


                           ADVERTISING RATES
                         The Collector’s Guide

                            Full page    $15
                         ½ and ¼ pages pro rata
                        Less space, $1 per inch.

                                Discount
                       On three insertions, 10%;
                          Six insertions, 15%.

For rates on front and back cover spaces when available, please address
publisher.




                       _A Book Stamp Innovation_


    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

As Flodden W. Heron aptly observed in a recent issue of the ARGONAUT, it
is estimated by the Postal Department that one person out of every
fifteen is interested in stamp collecting. There are over twenty-five
journals issued exclusively for stamp collectors, and three hundred and
two American newspapers maintain stamp departments. In addition
sixty-four radio stations conduct regular stamp broadcasts. Book
collectors constitute a much smaller group, and to date there has been
no connection between these two enthusiastic armies of “acquisitioners.”
To bring these two groups into closer cooperation, Mr. Heron recently
suggested to the Pacific Philatelic Society of San Francisco the use of
postage stamps of authors as association items for collected books.
Investigation disclosed that postage stamps had been issued in honor of
nearly one hundred authors.

He states that the idea occurred to him when coming into possession of a
Stamp Case, invented by Lewis Carroll of “Alice in Wonderland” fame. It
contained twelve pockets for stamps of different denominations.
Progressively this gave birth to the thought of using stamps as
association items in connection with first editions, artistically
affixing them to fly-leaves, inside covers, or occasionally to title
pages. Time will increase the scarcity or rarity of the stamps, and in
some instances, as with certain bookplates, greatly enhance the value of
the books to which they are affixed. Of course we must bear in mind that
the number who collect stamps exceeds greatly those whose interest is in
rare books. At the same time, many high school and college students and
other groups, would like to collect books but cannot afford the prices
of first editions. However, if postage stamps are classified as
association items, thousands can buy books not first editions, but good
reading copies. The inserting of proper stamps, will permit of book
collecting on an inexpensive scale, because it is only necessary to
watch dates, and acquire first-day “covers” for merely the regular price
of the stamps. And as time goes on, these first issues will have
increased value for book insertion, quite aside from their desirability
to stamp collectors. For example, a copy of “Leaves of Grass,” issued by
the Modern Library, with a first-day Whitman “cover” laid in, should
fetch over double the cost of the book within a year after the stamp was
issued. And this, in spite of the fact that a postage stamp in
connection with a book can not be compared with an author’s inscription
or presentation. It can be more likened to a bookplate, which has been
added to the volume by some one other than the author. Two of Mr.
Heron’s favorite authors are Lewis Carroll and Sir Walter Scott, and as
he could find of them no existing postage stamps, he had two made, for
his personal use, which serve as illustrations for this article. We feel
certain that Mr. Heron will be glad to answer any question pertaining to
book stamps on the part of those interested, if they will address their
inquiries to him at Mills Building, San Francisco.


Temple Scott, rare book expert, died on Sept. 30th. in Edinburgh. Among
his many activities, he had been adviser in the assembling of some of
the notable private libraries of this country, including those of Jerome
Kern, and the late William H. Woodin, former Secretary of the Treasury.
The Kern collection was considered one of the most valuable ever gotten
together in America, and in 1929 was sold at auction for $1,300,000.
Also remembered are some of Mr. Scott’s outstanding purchases including
the letters of Lord Chesterfield for which he paid $75,000, and the
original text which Sir Walter Scott prepared for a definitive edition
of his novels, and which set him back $150,000.

The first volume of Dr. Greg’s “Bibliography of the English Drama to
1640” is reported as ready. Information regarding it can be obtained
from R. B. McKerrow, Picket Place, Wendover, Bucks, England.

Mrs. Nellie Dumont, widow of the minstrel king, Frank Dumont, died
several months ago at her home, 1207 Green St., Philadelphia, Penna.,
where she had resided for 60 years. Mr. Dumont in his lifetime,
possessed an unusually fine collection of theatrical material, and to
this day, as far as we know, it has never been definitely established,
just what became of it.




                              “COLLECTING
                          NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC
                               MAGAZINES”

The only book on the subject. 72 pages, 4 pp. illustrations, 10
Chapters. Lists values of all issues, special numbers, supplements.
Information on reprints, binding, maps, formats, bibliography.

                                 $1.00
                            EDWIN C. BUXBAUM
                     Box 327    Swarthmore, Penna.
                 Wanted to Buy: Geographics before 1907


                     _We are always anxious to buy_
                             Rare American
                            CHILDREN’S BOOKS
                         _of every description_


                           PEGASUS BOOK SHOP
                   144 East 61 St.    New York, N. Y.


                          HISTORY OF THE BOOK
                           COMBINATION OFFER

SIX ORIGINAL LEAVES: (1) Manuscript leaf on vellum; (2) Chinese Block
Printing, 1440; (3) Nuremburg Chronicle Leaf with woodcut 1493; (4) Leaf
of Justinian printed in red and black by Bautista de Tortis, Venice,
1496; (5) Sallust leaf by J. Ibarra, Madrid 1772; (6) Kelmscott Press
leaf with woodcut initial printed by William Morris, 1893.

                  _The group sent postpaid for $5.00_

                           DAWSON’S BOOK SHOP
                          627 So. Grand Avenue
                        LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA

Catalog of early printing sent free on request.


                          Mail Bidders Wanted
                            Catalogues Free

                             ALBERT SAIFER
                             Book Auctions
                        Correspondence Address:
                   142 S. 11th St., Philadelphia, Pa.
                Consignments Solicited—Rates on Request

A list of old magazines and newspapers that are worth real money, in the
February issue of THE COLLECTOR’S GUIDE.




                       HOW TO TELL FIRST EDITIONS




When the date of the publication is not in brackets, it means that the
same will be found on title page. When, however, it is in brackets,
thus, (1931), it indicates that said date is printed either on the
reverse side of title page, or in some other part of the book. Or,
possibly, the date does not appear at all, in which case the brackets
are merely authoritative information supplied by the bibliographer.
Furthermore, our endeavor has been to list only authors and books for
which there is a reasonably active present-day demand, and which have a
speculative future.


                     LOUISA MAY ALCOTT (1832-1888)

LITTLE WOMEN. 2 vols. First volume has no announcement for “Little
      Women, Part Two” at foot of last page of text, nor has it “Part
      One” on the backstrip; Second volume has the notice regarding
      “Little Women: Part One” at page IV. Usually bound in green or red
      cloth, but other colors show up occasionally. Boston, 1868-1869.


                   THOMAS BAILEY ALDRICH (1836-1907)

THE STORY OF BAD BOY. Generally regarded as the story of his own
      boyhood. Has “scattered” for “scatter” on page 14, line 20, and
      “abroad” for “Aboard” on page 197, line 10. Green cloth binding.
      Boston, 1870.


                         HERVEY ALLEN (1889- )

ANTHONY ADVERSE, New York, 1933. 105 copies de luxe edition, 3 vols.
      signed. Trade edition is in one volume, with publisher’s monogram
      on copyright page. On page 352, line 6, Xaxier for Xavier. On page
      397, line 22, the word found is repeated. On page 1086, line 18,
      ship for shop.


                       SHERWOOD ANDERSON (1876- )

WINESBURG, OHIO. New York, 1919. First printing said to have both
      unstained and orange stained tops.


                        T. S. ARTHUR (1809-1885)

TEN NIGHTS IN A BAR ROOM. Philadelphia, 1854. This holds priority over
      an edition the same year published in Boston.


                       IRVING BACHELLER (1859- )

EBEN HOLDEN. There is a pine-cone design on backstrip with rounded top.
      In later editions, a flat top was substituted. Boston (1900).


                      RAY STANNARD BAKER (1870- )

ADVENTURES IN CONTENTMENT. By David Grayson (pseudonym). New York, 1907.
      Green pictorial cloth, about 1-3/16 inches thick. Illustration on
      page 110, shows cows grazing. Second state is bound in dark green,
      olive cloth, without illustration on page 110, of man plowing.


                          JOHN KENDRICK BANGS
                              (1862-1922)

A HOUSE-BOAT ON THE STYX. New York, 1896.


                             EDWARD BELLAMY
                              (1850-1898)

LOOKING BACKWARD, 2000-1887. Comes in gray, green, yellowish and perhaps
      other colors of cloth; also in paper wrappers. Cloth-bound copies
      hold priority. They are said to have been issued in the Spring,
      whereas those in wrappers didn’t appear until Fall. The first
      state has printer’s imprint on copyright page. Boston, 1888.


                      AMBROSE BIERCE (1842-1914?)

THE FIEND’S DELIGHT. By Dod Grile (pseudonym). London (1872). Vignette
      on title page. Red-brown pictorial cloth. American edition, 1873,
      had no publisher’s advertisements at back.

NUGGETS AND DUST. By Dod Grile (pseudonym). London (1872) First edition
      of author’s first book. Original yellow pictorial wrappers. Should
      have half-title, with two pages of advertisements preceding the
      half-title, and ten pages of advertisements at the end.

THE DANCE OF DEATH. By William Herman (pseudonym). San Francisco (1877)
      First state has on its title page, in addition to title and
      author, the words “Author’s copy”. Has no press notices at back of
      book. Second state has imprint of Henry Keller & Co., 543 Clay
      St., 1877. THE DANCE OF LIFE by Mrs. Dr. J. Milton Bowers, and
      purporting to be an answer, is sometimes considered as a companion
      piece.

TALES OF SOLDIERS AND CIVILIANS. Issued in green cloth and probably also
      other colors. White end-papers. E. L. G. Steele, San Francisco,
      1891.

BLACK BEETLES IN AMBER. Has imprint of Western Authors Publishing Co.
      Cloth and wrappers. San Francisco and New York, 1892.

                          (_To be continued_)




General Stock of Americana, sea books, local New London, and Conn.
material, first editions, prints, autographs, etc.

Write me your wants on your special subjects.

                           TRACY’S BOOKSTORE
                  60 Meridian St.    New London, Conn.


CITY BOOK AUCTION. Sales of Books, Autographs, etc., held every Saturday
at 1.30 P.M. Catalogues free. Consignments solicited. Rates on request.

120 Fourth Ave., New York City




                              Stick ’Em Up


As a preface to “Books on Western Gunmen,” by Guy J. Giffen, in the
Quarterly NEWS-LETTER of the Book Club of California, an editorial note
states that not the least interesting subdivision of Americana is that
relating to the bandits and gunmen of the Old West. The extensive
literature on the subject offers a tempting field to collectors with a
taste for the history and legend surrounding this phase of the Winning
of the West. Mr. Giffen’s extensive library of books on Western outlaws
is the result of a hobby of years’ standing.

Mr. Giffen’s article maintains that any well-rounded collection of
Western Americana should have a division of books on gunmen, and
mentions a number of men and titles that will serve as a general guide
to their selection. Of particular interest are the books on Murrieta.
“Joaquin Murrieta, the Brigand Chief of California” was published by the
CALIFORNIA POLICE GAZETTE in 1854, and is now very rare, only two copies
being known, both in private collections. According to Franklin Walker
as set forth in “San Francisco’s Literary Frontier,” John Rollin Ridge,
partly of Indian blood, who came to San Francisco in 1850, furnished the
GAZETTE with much of its source material when he wrote “The Life and
Adventures of Joaquin Murrieta, the Celebrated California Bandit.” In
1859, the GAZETTE reprinted the story with additions but also in this
instance, only two copies are known to have survived. Of the many later
treatments of Murrieta, one of the best is “The Life and Adventures of
the Celebrated Bandit Joaquin Murrieta,” translated from the Spanish of
Ireno Paz, by Frances P. Belle. (Chicago, 1925).




                       _Edward Eberstadt & Sons_

      _Specialists in Old and Rare Books Relating to the Far West_

                          55 WEST 42nd STREET
                                NEW YORK


                         _WANTED AT ALL TIMES_

 Americana, State and Local History, Exploration, Overland Narratives,
                          Confederate Imprints


    All Scarce or Interesting Items, Relating to California, Texas,
 Oklahoma, Colorado, Utah, Wyoming, the Middle and Far West, the Early
                         and Confederate South


                      CATALOGUES ISSUED REGULARLY

This is a readable account of his exploits, but it credits him with
superhuman ability, and relates incidents that could not have happened.
In Mr. Giffen’s belief, Murrieta’s true history has not yet been told
and at this late date, it is unlikely that it ever will be. It may be
interesting to collectors of Murrietana, to note that in 1880, a play
was produced at the Adelphi Variety Theatre, San Francisco, purporting
to picture the life of Murrieta. It was called “The Scarlet IX.”

Stories of two California bandits of a much later date, Evans and
Sontag, are related in “The 25th Man”, published in 1924. The author, Ed
Morrell, gives a readable account of his experiences with these outlaws,
bearing however a bit heavily on the first person. The exploits of Evans
and Sontag were also offered to the public in dramatic form, at the
National Theatre, San Francisco, in the early nineties, some of the
bandit’s children having been engaged as a sort of “added attraction.”

C. B. Glasscock’s “Bandits and the Southern Pacific” (New York, 1929) is
also an interesting narrative. “Old Waybills”, by Alvin F. Harlow (New
York, 1934) while primarily concerned with the pioneer express
companies, gives entertaining accounts of Black Bart, Jesse and Frank
James, Sam Bass and the Daltons, and indicates a sincere effort to
gather the facts. The books of Owen P. White have added much to
present-day popular knowledge of the outstanding killers and peace
officers of the Old West. His “Them Was the Days” (New York, 1925),
“Trigger Fingers” (New York, 1926), and “Lead and Likker” (New York,
1932) make exciting reading and present a true picture so far as the
truth can now be known. “Triggernometry” by Eugene Cunningham (New York,
1935) is another sincere endeavor to treat the gunmen as human beings
rather than supermen.

Returning to books about individual bandits, one of the best is “Wild
Bill Hickok—Prince of Pistoleers”, by Frank J. Wilstach (New York,
1928), this work also containing many illustrations of more than passing
interest. “Wild Bill” (James Butler) Hickok has been much written about.
Probably the best account of his connection with the famous McCanlas
affair was published in the NEBRASKA HISTORY MAGAZINE for April-June,
1927. In it, the story of Colonel Nichols, published previously in
HARPER’S MAGAZINE of February, 1867 (and copied practically by every
biographer of Hickok) is disproved.

Of nineteen volumes dealing with the James gang, “The Rise and Fall of
Jesse James,” by Robertus Love (New York, 1925) seems the most thorough
and unbiased biography. An important and scarce James item is “The Trial
of Frank James for Murder,” by George Miller, Jr., privately printed in
Missouri in 1898. It gives in detail information not to be found
elsewhere. The list could go on indefinitely, for the period of the
gunmen extended from the Civil War to the middle 90’s, and the
literature on the subject is limitless. Much of it, of course, is lurid,
sensational material, written solely for entertainment and with no claim
to historical accuracy. But there are also many more pretentious works:
good, bad and indifferent. Many otherwise excellent biographies of
Western gunmen are marred by the fact that the author’s treatment is
colored by his admiration or contempt for his subject. But, perhaps,
that is a failing of biographers in general.




                         Everything relative to

                       North Carolina Literature

Old books, letters, pamphlets and newspapers bought and sold.

                           S. W. WORTHINGTON
                        Wilson    North Carolina




                               INCUNABULA


In a recent article in the New York TIMES, Philip Brooks, noted rare
book commentator, remarked that there is nothing particularly mysterious
about incunabula. A polysyllabic Latin word with an impressive sound, it
means simply cradle books, or books published during the infancy of
printing. They occupy only a short span in the history of books, no more
than about fifty years, from the middle to the end of the fifteenth
century. To many collectors they are the true aristocrats, not only for
their antiquity, but often for their artistic beauty. For nearly 500
years printers have been trying but none have been able to approach the
typographical perfection of the Gutenberg Bible, which was finished
around 1455. Even the paper of these ancients is of superior quality
that they will outlive most books issued today.

Mr. Brooks further declared that while a common objection to collecting
incunabula is that they are incomprehensible, being printed in dead
languages that nobody reads nowadays, it is nevertheless a fact that
before the end of the century, books were being published freely in the
vernacular, and Caxton and his successors were making valuable
contributions to English literature in their native tongue.

Since the middle of the seventeenth century, when the output of the
fifteenth century first began to attract notice as collectible objects,
they have been subject to such intensive scrutiny that they are now the
most thoroughly bibliographed books in the world. From Panzer
(1793-1803) and Hain (1826-1834), who described 16,300 titles, the
scientific study evolved through the brilliant work of Bradshaw and
Proctor until its culmination in the British Museum catalogue.




                          B. LOGIN & SON, Inc.

              _Chemical and Medical Periodicals and Books_

                  29 EAST 21st STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y.

 Quote Chemical, Medical, Biological, Technical, Agricultural, Natural
 Sciences & All Kinds of Scientific Magazines, Biographies of Medical &
                              Chemical Men

             _Chemical and Medical Books Especially Early_

Moreover, collectors today who look somewhat wistfully on the mounting
prices of fifteenth century editiones principes (which means first
editions) of Gutenberg Bibles even in single leaves, or of that familiar
favorite, the Nuremberg Chronicle, are probably unaware that many
incunabula are still available for much less than $100. The elusiveness
and high price of all incunabula are as much a fiction as the belief
that it is impossible to identify individual volumes.

It is generally admitted that there are in existence some 40,000
separate editions of books published during the fifteenth century. No
one has yet had the hardihood to attempt to count all the known copies
of these editions. One of the best modern efforts to gauge their extent
was that of K. W. Hiersemann in his “Verlagskatalog”, Leipzig, 1924. He
estimated that there were at least 450,000 pieces of incunabula around,
or an average of more than eleven copies of each known edition.

In undertaking to investigate the present-day holdings of incunabula in
all countries, Fremont Rider, librarian of the Olin Library at Wesleyan
University, reported that Germany, the birthplace of printing and native
home of most incunabula, is still, according to the latest available
records, the largest holder of such books. With 105 libraries owning a
hundred volumes or more, it registers a total of 115,927 volumes. Italy
ranks second with 70,721. France makes a poor third with 35,278, just
nosing out Great Britain’s 34,045. Austria comes next, outranking the
United States, which can muster 22,166 volumes. Poland, Switzerland,
Czecho-Slovakia, Spain, Holland and Russia follow next in order. In the
25 countries listed with libraries of a hundred or more volumes, Mr.
Rider has located 380,750 titles.

The outstanding single collection of incunabula is in the Bayerische
Staatsbibliothek at Munich, with its 16,000 volumes. The British Museum
comes second with 11,500, the Bibliotheque Nationale third with 10,000.
The Huntington Library’s 5,200 take sixth place, while the 3,600 in the
Library of Congress entitle it to rank seventeenth among the libraries
of the world. Despite the great influx of incunabula into this country
in recent years, the resources of the European collections are
incomparable. It is perfectly true that most American libraries regard
the acquisition of a single incunabulum as a rare treasure, while many
unheard-of European libraries of religious orders or princely families
own far more volumes than our largest and richest universities.




                          JAMES F. DRAKE, Inc.
                            24 West 40th St.
                                New York

                             First Editions
                               Rare Books
                               Autographs

       _We are particularly interested in unusual Kipling items._

Mr. Rider’s analysis makes no attempt to assay the contents of the
various collections, as his concern is only with a quantitative
analysis. Some of the scarcest and most important incunables have found
their way into this country. As a result of an inquiry among the 236
most likely sources in the United States, a table is shown giving the
relative sizes of incunabula collections in twelve institutions and over
a hundred colleges and universities. Following the Huntington and the
Library of Congress are Harvard University with 1,860 volumes, the
Pierpont Morgan Library with 1,800 and the Newberry Library with 1,634.
The Folger Shakespeare Library contains a surprisingly large
Shakespearean ancestry of 250 fifteenth century sources. The summary
leaves out of account the growing private collections, confined mostly
to this country, whose numbers should materially affect the figures and
perhaps the order of rank. Otherwise it gives a satisfactory account of
the distribution of incunabula in public institutions.




                     Collecting Medical Literature


                    _An Interview With An Authority_

Hello, Henry Schuman.

Hello, James Madison.

Since moving from Detroit to 730 Fifth Avenue, New York, are you
continuing to make a specialty of medical rarities?

Yes indeed, in fact more so than ever.

What class of collectors go in for medical books?

Mostly members of the medical profession, but also general collectors
along scientific lines of which medicine is an integral part.

Do collectors of medical literature aim to cover the entire field?

Not in most instances. They usually specialize in branches that
encompass their special interests, such for example as physiognomy,
transfusion of blood, heart disorders, venereal ailments, etc.

Has a well-selected medical library that was already assembled at say
the turn of the century, increased or diminished in value?

Increased I should say, or, from a very conservative estimate, at least
held its own. This is due, no doubt, to the permanent interest such a
medical library holds. On the other hand, authors of literary classics,
especially from the beginning of the 19th century on, are subject to
increasing or waning interest due to a change of popular favor and
appreciation. In the case of modern authors such as Hemingway, Faulkner,
etc., this is even more noticeable. The “white-headed” literary lion of
today may be on tomorrow’s bargain shelf, and vice versa.

Is the number of collectors of medical literature increasing?

Somewhat, I should say. In the late twenties, Dr. Henry E. Sigerist
became head of the Institute of Medicine at John Hopkins University
where his outstanding accomplishments, combined also with his splendid
achievement in promoting the Bulletin of the History of Medicine, did
much to stimulate new interest, especially among the younger men.

Which is the best medical bibliography?

Probably the best, and certainly the most concise is Garrison’s “History
of Medicine”, first published in 1914 by W. B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia. The fourth edition was issued in 1929 and is revised and
comparatively up to date. It sells for $14.

How can one get posted on the prices of medical literature?

The Sanders Price List of Medica Incunabula gives some prices of early
medicine. The cost is $10. As far as more modern medical books and
miscellany are concerned, I believe the best guide is dealers’ lists who
specialize in this sort of thing. I myself get out occasional catalogues
of medical rarities, my latest one being issued to honor the seventieth
birthday of Dr. Harvey Cushing, who is since deceased.

How do you procure the medical material that you resell?

There is no royal path that a dealer can pursue. One source is medical
libraries privately owned, and which on the decease of the owner, have
come into the possession of heirs who have no special interest therein,
and who therefore are not adverse to turning them into ready cash.
Europe, which may be termed the cradle of old medicine, holds most of
the rarities, especially those of ancient vintage, and my correspondents
on the other side are constantly on the watch for me.

How highly are medical periodicals regarded by collectors?

They play, as a rule, ‘second fiddle’ to books and pamphlets. They are
quite bulky, and in harmony with the modern scheme of architectural
contraction, collectors are not inclined to grant them shelf room. The
best modern outlet for medical periodicals appears to be colleges and
universities, although in many instances, the seller pro tem is apt to
be met with the rubber-stamp response of “Insufficient funds.”

Have many facsimile reproductions been made of rare medical books and
pamphlets?

Only a negligible number thus far and which have sold rather
indifferently. However, with the increasing interest displayed in the
collecting of medical literature, facsimiles will come more and more
into their own.

Are many medical works sold at book auctions?

Hardly any, I should say. Medical books at best interest but a modest
pro rata of collectors. Therefore, except in occasional instances, it
has not been found profitable to include them in auction catalogues.

Who are the modern American trail blazers as far as stimulating interest
in the collecting of medical literature is concerned?

In my opinion, Drs. Oliver Wendell Holmes, William Osler, and Harvey
Cushing.




                       _A New Aid to Collectors_


Early in the year, the Pinwheel Press, of 142 So. 11th St.,
Philadelphia, will publish “Early American Sheet Music” by Harry
Dichter. This is probably the first attempt to aid collectors and
dealers in this fascinating field of Americana. It will be illustrated
with many full-page reproductions of esteemed sheet music covers and
also give much useful bibliographical information. A business
announcement in this issue, gives full information as to its cost in the
several editions.




                      _About The New York Mirror_


In 1823, George P. Morris in conjunction with Samuel Woodworth
established the New York MIRROR. In those days Woodworth was considered
quite a poet, his most permanent obeisance to the muse being “The
Bucket”, later more fittingly known as “The Old Oaken Bucket”. The
MIRROR lasted until 1842, but returned from its journalistic grave the
year following and was known as the NEW MIRROR. It ran for a year and a
half and stated in its last issue in Sept., 1844, that it was being
discontinued because the Post Office charged it magazine postage which
was much higher than that required of newspapers. Perhaps, to avail
itself of this discrimination, it became a daily about this time, a
weekly edition being gotten out for the benefit of the former NEW MIRROR
subscribers. From Sept., 1844 to February, 1845, Edgar Allan Poe, so the
“Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America” reports, was employed
as critical writer. Perhaps this explains why “The Raven” was printed in
the EVENING MIRROR, on Jan. 29, 1845, “by permission”, from the advance
sheets of the AMERICAN REVIEW where it appeared a few weeks later. While
the MIRROR copy is usually spoken of as the second appearance of “The
Raven”, most collectors prefer it to its AMERICAN REVIEW appearance and
it commands a higher price, although in neither case as much as one
might conjecture.

After Willis and Morris withdrew in 1845, Hiram Fuller took charge and
with certain minor changes of title, the periodical continued until
1857. Soon after Fuller came into control, he was sued by Poe for having
published the Thomas Dunn English article reflecting on his character.
Poe was awarded $225 damages.




                           WALTER R. BENJAMIN
                   655 Fifth Ave.    New York, N. Y.

               AUTOGRAPH LETTERS AND HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS

BUYS—

Leading expert in autographs will purchase for immediate cash large
collections or single items of historical or literary importance.
American or foreign.

SELLS—

Collectors! Send for sample copy of THE COLLECTOR, a magazine for
autograph and historical collectors, established 1887. See prices quoted
on letters, guaranteed authentic, of the great Kings and Queens,
Statesmen, Authors, Musicians, Scientists, and Soldiers of all times and
all countries.


                           The United States
                            CARD COLLECTOR’S
                                Catalog

A 90 page, 6×9 inch handbook, completely covering the card field,
cigarette, candy, gum, playing, advertising, etc., together with related
items of Albums, Silks, and other inserts. Dealers of all kinds should
have a copy to show markets and values. Pays for itself many times.

                              50c postpaid

                             J. R. BURDICK
               417 So. Crouse Ave.    Syracuse, New York


Indian Relics, Minerals, Miniatures, Beadwork, Coins, Books, Jewelry,
Buttons, Basketry, Rugs, Old Glass, Dolls, Gem Stones, Stamps, Covers,
View Cards, Western Postcard Photos. Catalog 5c.

                           LEMLEY CURIO STORE
                         North Branch, Kansas.


Another instalment of “How To Tell First Editions” in the February issue
of THE COLLECTOR’S GUIDE.




                   _Stephen Foster Sheet Music Wants_


Fletcher Hodges, Jr., Curator of the Foster Hall Collection in the
University of Pittsburgh, Penna., advises us that the following titles
are still required, and for the first satisfactory first edition copy of
each received, the respective prices noted will be paid.

  Beautiful Child of Song                   $100.
  Happy Little Ones Are We                    25.
  I Will Be True To Thee                     100.
  Little Belle Blair                         100.
  Lizzie Dies Tonight                        100.
  Mine Is The Mourning Heart                 100.
  Mother, Thou’rt Faithful To Me             100.
  My Loved One And My Own                    100.
  Onward And Upward                          100.
  Open Thy Lattice, Love Tonight             250.
  Somebody’s Coming To See Me                100.




                         SCHUMAN’S of New York

are Leading Specialists in Historical Medicine and Science, and are
large buyers of desirable material in this field.

                        IMMEDIATE CASH PAYMENTS

                               SCHUMAN’S
                       730 Fifth Avenue, New York


                            _WANTED! WANTED_

                               MECHANICAL
                                 PENNY
                                 BANKS

                            DR. A. E. CORBY
                              (Collector)
                       44 Wall St., New York City


                           GUY DE MAUPASSANT

Will purchase ANY interesting material by or about him. A. Artinian,
Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, N. Y.


                  FIRST EDITIONS—AMERICANA—FINE BOOKS.

                     Bought & sold. Catalogs free.

                               ANTON GUD
                 636 East 13th Street    New York City


Wanted For Cash: U. S. Presidential Bookplates or Booklabels. State name
of President and price desired for plate. Give your name and address.
Bookplate, Care of The Collector’s Guide, P. O. Box 124, Grand Central
Annex, New York.


Some facts about Baedeker’s Travel Books in the February issue of THE
COLLECTOR’S GUIDE.




                          _Suckers’ Progress_


A book jobber recently found on his hands an entire warehouse full of
obsolete histories in sets of 20 volumes each. They simply wouldn’t
sell; nobody wanted to give them away as premiums; their stock was so
inferior that secondhand paper dealers laughed at the idea of purchasing
them. Then inspiration came to the jobber. He expressed the entire
edition to a publisher’s sucker list, accompanied by the following
letter.

  Sir:

  We are forwarding you herewith a set of Professor McFeely’s _History
  of the World From Earliest Times Down to the Inaugural of Chester A.
  Arthur_. There are two bindings available: one in cloth such as we are
  sending you, retailing for $19.25, the other in beautiful hand-tooled
  crushed levant, for $39.98. If you should decide you prefer the
  expensive leather-bound edition you may return the set we are sending
  you and upon remitting the balance you will receive the other
  magnificent volumes.

Each sucker actually received the leather-bound edition—in fact, no
cloth one existed. But every recipient, imagining that he had received
the wrong books by mistake and was gypping the jobber, sent on his
$19.25 and kept the books. In no time the entire edition was sold out.
(Lucius Beebe in New York HERALD TRIBUNE and reprinted by READER’S
DIGEST).


The New York TIMES reports that a new Medical Library building is being
erected at the Yale University of Medicine to receive Dr. Cushing’s
library and collections, including his letters, diaries and manuscripts.
Any of his friends who wish, now or later, to present correspondence,
photographs or other memorabilia for permanent preservation among the
Cushing papers will receive the appreciative thanks of the university.

The late Merle Johnson, in his “American First Editions” called
attention to the fact that there is no formal Bibliography of the
writings of Bret Harte. The collector is referred to the sales catalogue
of the Charles Meeker Kozlay sale, held at the galleries of the American
Art Association some years ago and now on file at the New York Public
Library. It is the only known listing of the variants and minutiae.




                              BOOK-DEALERS
                              Take Notice

                       _We Want Scholarly Books_

1. We Want Elizabethan & Restoration Dramatists—In First and Later
      Editions.

2. We Want Best Edited Editions of Dramatists: MARSTON, PEELE, NASH,
      etc. BULLEN’S Old Plays, etc.

3. The Publications of ENGLISH LITERARY SOCIETIES, such as HUTH, MALONE,
      FULLER, and BIBLIOGRAPHICAL.

                     _We Pay Promptly on Receipt._

                     THE BRICK ROW BOOK SHOP, Inc.
                    55 Fifth Ave.,    New York City


                           WE BUY    WE SELL
                          _Specimen Books of_
                             Printing Types
                                  and
                          Printers’ Ornaments

                        Penmanship Publications
                             Prior to 1880

                             PAUL A. STRUCK
                      415 Lexington Av., New York




                          _The Long, Long Ago_


In “San Francisco’s Literary Frontiers”, by Franklin Walker, “The Annals
of San Francisco” is described as being probably the best book ever
written about that glamorous city. Its 800 pages give not only the
history of California during the Spanish and American occupations, but
also a faithful account of its social history from 1846 to 1854.
Included also are vigorously penned descriptions of special local
happenings, such as the Great Fires, Steamer Days, the lawless ravages
of The “Hounds”, etc, to say nothing of short biographies of outstanding
oldtimers. The “Annals” have long been out of print, but the book was
gotten up so sumptuously that many copies were kept. It can usually be
picked up for from $7.50 to $20.00 depending on the condition and
binding. A folding map should accompany it. A few years ago, the
California Historical Society, San Francisco, compiled, under the
direction of Charles Francis Griffin, a 28 page index, which is a big
time-saver for historians, and literary searchers. It is bound in full
paper boards, and is sold by the Society for $1.25.


The first issue of the Princeton University Library CHRONICLE contains a
checklist of Winslow Homer, famed painter and designer for wood
engravers, whose life span was from 1836 to 1910.




                          RARE OLD JOKE BOOKS
                          (Joe Miller and Up)
                           Send for catalogue
                              WEHMAN BROS.
                              (Since 1889)
                        712 BROADWAY    NEW YORK


                       EARLY AMERICAN SHEET MUSIC

                             Lure and Lore
                                  _by_
                             Harry Dichter

After completing ten years of searching for and locating some of the
finest pieces in this field of Americana, these notes and checklists are
offered so that the collector and dealer may avoid the ordinary pitfalls
that await the novice.

                   INVALUABLE TO DEALER AND COLLECTOR

This is probably the first attempt at giving a working knowledge of the
field of sheet music collecting.

Not a history of American Music but a necessary tool for every Rare and
Out of Print Dealer and even the seasoned collector of this interesting
material.

Definitely names highspots and attempts at valuation (Both the Author
and Publisher realize that prices in such a field can only be
approximate as condition, demand and scarcity are prime factors.)

Included is a Checklist of Early American Music Publishers, their places
and dates of operation.

            Many Full Page Reproductions of Important Items

Cloth bound, Autographed Copies Strictly Limited to the number of orders
received before Feb. 1, 1940. Publication Date: Feb. 10, 1940.

                              Price $3.00

             Specially Priced Edition in Wrappers at $2.00

         Regular Trade Discount to Dealers on 2 Copies or More

                         _Order Your Copy Now_

                             PINWHEEL PRESS
                        PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS
                           142 S. 11th STREET
                           PHILADELPHIA, PA.

            _Order direct from publisher or your bookseller_




                         _Locating Bookplates_


Bookplate collectors who desire to know what collections have been
assembled, where they are, the type of material gathered, how they are
cared for, and their availability for study and consultation, should
procure a copy of “A Census of Bookplate Collections in Public, College
and University Libraries.” It was compiled by Carlyle S. Baer, presiding
genius of the American Society of Bookplate Collectors & Designers, and
Miss Clara Therese Evans, of Columbia University. The cost is $1.00 and
it can be obtained by writing to Mr. Baer at 1763 Euclid St., N.W.,
Washington, D. C.


Robert L. Shurter presents in the July, 1939, issue of the SOUTH
ATLANTIC QUARTERLY, an article on “The Writing of Looking Backward”, in
which the facts regarding the composition, purpose, and subsequent
influences of Edward Bellamy’s novel are set forth.

We understand that a committee of bibliographers headed by Lawrence C.
Wroth, librarian of the John Carter Brown Library, Providence, is making
plans for the compilation and publication of a “Cooperative Catalogue of
Americana, 1700-1800”, and will be based upon material now housed in the
principal libraries of this country. It will contain all eighteenth
century historical material relating to the Western hemisphere, except
newspapers, broadsides, maps, prints, almanacs, legislative and
administrative proceedings and statute laws. A preliminary survey has
disclosed that only about half of the existing material is recorded in
either Sabin or Evans.




                           TRAILING GERONIMO
                         _by_ Anton Mazzanovich

               Over 100 Illustrations of Historical Value

  The First Authentic Story of the Trailing and Capture of this Great
                          Apache Indian Chief

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

This book will make a valuable addition to any American Historical and
Indian Library. It is real Americana.

Size 5¼×7½, 278 Pages, Elegantly Bound in Art Craft, 4-Color
Illustrations of Geronimo

                             _Price_ $3.00

                              WEHMAN BROS.
                      PUBLISHERS and BOOK JOBBERS
                         712 Broadway, New York

_This amazing story has been made into a great motion picture by
Paramount Pictures, Inc._




                         RECENT AUCTION PRICES


        Sometimes the author is given first, sometimes his book,
           etc.—whichever seems most pertinent at the moment.


                           Parke-Bernet, Inc.

AMERICAN BOOK-PRICES CURRENT. 1900-3. 1908-36. Index 1916-22. 34 vols.
      ex-library. $95.

AMERICAN STATESMEN. Ed. by John T. Morse, Jr. 32 vols. Boston, 1898.
      $70.

THE MAN WITH THE HOE. By Edwin Markham. First edition in book form, in
      original envelope. San Francisco, 1899. $22.

JOHN L. STODDARD. Lectures. 12 vols. ¾ morocco. Boston, 1908. $15.

WALT WHITMAN, manuscript, 1 page, about 75 words, in pencil. $42.

THACKERAY, WILLIAM. Vanity Fair. The original 20 parts in 19. London,
      1847-48. $275.

WHITMAN MASSACRE. By Matilda J. Sager Delaney, a survivor. Wrappers,
      autographed. Spokane (1920). $5.

DODGE CITY, THE COWBOY CAPITAL. By Robert M. Wright. (Wichita, Kan.,
      1913). $17.

CYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY. 6 vols. New York, 1891. $6.

THE TERRITORY OF WYOMING. ITS HISTORY, SOIL, CLIMATE, RESOURCES, etc.
      Wrappers. Laramie City, 1874. $27.

HISTORY AND DIRECTORY OF LARAMIE CITY. By J. H. Triggs. Wrappers. Worn.
      Laramie City, 1875. $27.

HISTORY OF CHEYENNE AND NORTHERN WYOMING. By J. H. Triggs. Wrappers.
      Omega, 1876. $42.

THE CHAP BOOK. 8 vols. Chicago, 1894-7. $12.

PUDD’NHEAD WILSON. By Samuel L. Clemens. 1st. Hartford, 1894. $13.

THE COLOPHON. 34 parts. New York, 1930-8. $47.

AMENITIES OF BOOK-COLLECTING. Bds. Name in ink inside front cover. 1st
      ed. Boston, 1918. $17.

CALIFORNIA AND OREGON TRAIL. By Francis Parkman. 1st ed. Defects. New
      York, 1849. $37.

THE YELLOW BOOK. 13 vols. 1st eds. with one exception. Covers
      discolored. London, 1894-7. $15.

FOUR YEARS IN THE ROCKIES. By James B. Marsh. Orig. cloth. Cover
      stained. New Castle, Pa., 1884. $42.

PENCIL SKETCHES OF COLORADO. By A. E. Mathews. 36 views on 23 plates,
      lithographed by J. Bien. Orig. cloth. Slight defects. (New York)
      1866. $140.

THE BANDITTI OF THE PLAINS. By A. C. Mercer. Orig. ed. Slight defects.
      (Cheyenne: Privately printed, 1894). $45.

MISSOURI STATE GAZETEER, SHIPPERS’ GUIDE AND BUSINESS DIRECTORY, for
      1865. Portrait, views and pictorial advertisements. Geo. W. Hawes
      & Co., Indianapolis, 1865. $50.

THE DARK SIDE OF NEW YORK LIFE AND ITS CRIMINAL CLASSES. 26 parts, orig.
      printed wrappers. Some defects. New York, 1873. $22.

THE PLAINS AND THE ROCKIES. By Henry R. Wagner. A Bibliography of
      Original Narratives of Travel and Adventure, 1860-1865. Revised
      and extended by Charles L. Camp. Grabhorn Press, San Francisco,
      1937. $10.

AMERICAN CHILDREN’S BOOK. (Mrs. Pinchard). The Blind Child. Original
      boards. Loose, lightly stained. Philadelphia, 1793. $7.

EBEN HOLDEN. By Irving Bacheller. 1st ed. First issue. Orig. cloth.
      Boston (1900). $27.

CATTLE TRADE. Historic Sketches of the Cattle Trade. By Joseph G. McCoy.
      Covers, spotted and foxed. Kansas City, 1874. $47.... Cattle
      Brands of Members of Wyoming Stock Growers Association. Chicago,
      1882. $22.... Prose and Poetry of the Livestock Industry. By
      Jerome C. Smiley and James W. Freeman. Vol. 1 (all published).
      Denver (1905). $52.

OVERLAND ROUTE TO CALIFORNIA. By (Andrew Child). Crude wrappers;
      title-page missing, lightly stained. (Milwaukee, 1852). $70.

THE INDIAN’S LAST FIGHT. By Dennis Collins. Orig. cloth, privately
      printed. (Girard, Kansas, about 1914). $37.

THE GOLD MINES OF GILPIN COUNTY, COLORADO. By Samuel Cushman and J. P.
      Waterman. Orig. printed wrappers. Central City, 1876. $15.

HANDS UP; or, Twenty Years of Detective Life in the Mountains and on the
      Plains. By General D. J. Cook. Orig. cloth, worn, covers stained.
      1st ed. Presentation copy. Denver, 1882. $35.

ACROSS THE PLAINS IN 1850. By A. A. Enos. Wrappers. Privately printed
      for distribution to friends. Stanton, (n.d.). $25.

BRET HARTE. The Luck of Roaring Camp and Other Sketches. Orig. cloth.
      Backstrip defects. 1st ed. 1st issue. Boston, 1870. $32.

THE STORY OF A COUNTRY TOWN. By E. W. Howe. Some defects. 1st ed.
      Atchison, 1883. $15.

STORIES OF THE OLD SANTA FE TRAIL. By Col. Henry Inman. 1st ed. Orig.
      cloth, slightly rubbed. Kansas City, 1881. $9.

VIGILANTE DAYS AND WAYS. By NATHANIEL P. LANGFORD. 1st ed. 2 vols.,
      orig. cloth. Boston, 1890. $20.

MEMOIRS OF A PIONEER. By George Lathrop. Orig. printed wrappers. Lusk
      Herald, Wyoming, circa 1917. $22.

HIGH SPOTS OF AMERICAN LITERATURE. By Merle Johnson. New York, 1929.
      $15.

THE RIVET IN GRANDFATHER’S NECK. By James Branch Cabell. 1st ed. New
      York. 1915. $16. JURGEN. By the same author. 1st issue, inscribed.
      New York, 1919. $32.

FARM BALLADS. By Will Carleton. Back cover spots. New York, 1875. $6.

THE CELEBRATED JUMPING FROG OF CALAVERAS COUNTY, AND OTHER SKETCHES. By
      Mark Twain. Immaculate copy of the first issue of the first
      edition of the author’s first book. Original blue cloth. New York,
      1867. $610.

TOM SAWYER. By Samuel L. Clemens. 1st issue. Rubbed. Hartford, 1876.
      $475.

MAGGIE. By Johnston Smith (Stephen Crane). Yellow wrappers. Privately
      printed. 1st ed. Small defects and tears. (New York, 1893). $90.

THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE. By Stephen Crane. Orig. cloth, with dust
      jacket. 1st issue of 1st ed. of author’s second novel. Very slight
      end-paper blemishes. New York, 1895. $150.

EMILY DICKINSON. Poems. 1st ed. Covers soiled. Boston, 1890. $52....
      Letters. 2 vols. 1st ed. backstrip discolorations. Boston, 1894.
      $15.... The Single Hound. Bds. 1st ed. Boston, 1914. $55.

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE. The Scarlet Letter. 1st ed., 1st issue.
      Presentation copy by author. One of finest copies in existence.
      Boston, 1850. $2000.

THE COVERED WAGON. By Emerson Hough. 1st ed. with dust jacket.
      Immaculate copy. New York, 1922. $40.


                           G. A. Baker & Co.

NOTES OF A VOYAGE TO CALIFORNIA VIA CAPE HORN. By (S. C.) Upham. 1st ed.
      Philadelphia, 1878. $7.


                   LIMITED EDITIONS CLUB PUBLICATIONS

ANTHONY ADVERSE. By Hervey Allen. 3 vols. Mt. Vernon, 1937. $7.

THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS. By Lewis Carroll. New York, 1935. $16.

THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS. By Fenimore Cooper. Boards. 1932. $8.

UNCLE TOM’S CABIN. By Harriet Beecher Stowe. New York, 1938. $5.

HERVEY ALLEN. Israfel. 2 vols. First edition. New York, 1926. $6.

WILLA CATHER. All firsts. Alexander’s Bridge. Boston, 1912. $26.... Song
      of the Lark. Slight defects. Boston, 1915. $7.... Youth and the
      Bright Medusa. New York, 1920. (one of 25). $18.

THE COLOPHON. Vol. 1, parts 1 to 4. New York, 1930. $21.

EMILY DICKINSON. Further Poems. First edition. Dust wrapper. Boston,
      1929. $10.

WILLIAM FAULKNER. Sanctuary. First edition, boards. Dust wrapper. New
      York, (1931). $10.

ERNEST HEMINGWAY. A Farewell to Arms. 1st. New York, 1929. $11.

KATHERINE MANSFIELD. In a German Pension. 1st. London (1911). $42....
      The Garden Party. 1st issue. Blue lettering on binding. Extra “s”
      on last line of page 103. London (1922). $80.

EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY. All firsts. Renascence. New York, 1917. $55....
      The Lamp and the Bell. New York, 1921. $14.... The Buck in the
      Snow. New York, 1928. $8.

EUGENE O’NEILL. The Hairy Ape. New York, 1929. $5.

EDWIN ARLINGTON ROBINSON. Tristram. 1st. New York, 1927. $15.

THORNTON WILDER. Bridge of San Luis Rey. 1st. New York, 1927. $6.

ELINOR WYLIE. Nets to Catch the Wind. 1st. New York, 1921. $12.

THE COLOPHON, parts 14 to 20. 1933-35. $7.

T. L. DE VINNE. Two autograph letters signed, 3 pages on his ideas of
      good printing. 1912-13. $5.

THE YELLOW BOOK, a London Quarterly. 13 vols., 1894-1907. $10.

SAMUEL L. CLEMENS. Christian Science. New York, 1907. 1st edition. $5.

THE HOLY BIBLE. R. Aitken, Philadelphia, 1781-82. Some defects. $51.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT. The White-Footed Deer., New York, 1844. 1st
      edition. Wrappers. Some defects. $52.

STAMP PERIODICAL. The American Journal of Numismatics. Vol. 1, 1866 to
      Vol. 46, 1912. First 12 vols. bound; balance in wrappers. $55.

FRANK R. STOCKTON. Rudder Grange. 1st ed. New York, 1879. $5.

J. M. BARRIE. Margaret Ogilvy. 1st ed. London, 1896. $5.

THE BOOK COLLECTOR’S GUIDE. By Seymour De Ricci. New York, 1921. $5.

W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM. Of Human Bondage. 2 vols. in box. New York, 1932.
      $7.

THE LITERARY WORLD. Vols. 1 and 2, New York, Feb. 6, 1847 to Feb. 19,
      1848. $6.


                          Charles F. Heartman

ADVENTURES WITH INDIANS AND GAME, or, Twenty Years in the Rocky
      Mountains. By William A. Allen. Chicago, 1903. $4.60.

AMERICAN HUMOR. Polly & Pea Blossom’s Wedding, and Other Tales, by G. B.
      Lamar and others. Philadelphia, 1851. $16.

ARKANSAS BROADSIDE. Hon. Jesse Turner’s Position. Only two copies known.
      Van Buren, Ark., 1861. $8.10.

THE SOUTHERN PLANTATION OVERSEER as revealed in his letters. Original
      board with author’s inscription. Northampton, Mass., 1925. $4.35.

BEECHER-TILTON SCANDAL. Funny side of a serious subject. Published as a
      tabloid newspaper with many illustrations. New York, 1875. $2.80.

SAN FRANCISCO WHIG, Steamer Edition newspaper. Feb. 3, 1853. Torn,
      nothing missing. $1.35.

CONFEDERATE PLAY, The Confederate Vivandiere, or, The Battle of
      Leesburg, a military drama in three acts. Performed at the
      Montgomery (Alabama) Theatre by an amateur company. Probably
      unique. Original printed wrappers. Montgomery, 1862. $37.50.

SOUTHERN LITERARY MESSENGER, Confederate issues, in original printed
      wrappers. Brought $3.25 each, as follows:—May, 1863; June, 1863;
      July, 1863; Sept. 1863; May, 1864.

CONFEDERATE NEWSPAPERS. The Daily Mississippian. Dec. 16, 1861, $1.50;
      Dec. 20, 1861, $2.10; Jan. 27, 1862, $1.60; Mobile Weekly
      Advertiser, (torn) Aug. 3, 1861, $1.25; Ripley Advertiser,
      (Ripley, Miss.), Dec. 11, 1861, $2.85.

THE CONFEDERATE VETERAN. Jan. 1913 to Dec., 1931. 19 vols. (lacking 5
      nos.) Original wrappers. $27.50.

JUVENILE. The Adventures of a Yankee; or the Singular Life of John
      Ledyard. Original glazed boards. Boston, 1831. $12.25.

LINCOLNIANA. The Daily Herald. Newburyport, Mass., Apr. 17, 1865. The
      Washington tragedy, with mourning borders. $1.85.

LOUISIANA. Pickings from the Portfolio of the Reporter of the New
      Orleans Picayune. By T. Corcoran. Original printed wrappers.
      (Philadelphia, 1846). $11.

TEN YEARS IN NEVADA, or Life on the Pacific Coast. By M. M. Matthews.
      Portraits. Original cloth. Buffalo, 1880. $6.10.

MISSISSIPPI HISTORICAL SOCIETY PUBLICATIONS. Vols. 1 to 14 (1 and 2 in
      reprint). New Series, Vols. 1, 2, 4 and 5. Original cloth.
      1900-1925. $37.

A NEW AND COMPLETE SYSTEM OF BOOK-KEEPING, etc. By William Mitchell. Few
      margins repaired. Newly bound. Philadelphia, 1796. $35.

NEGRO AND SLAVERY. A collection of about 100 miscellaneous newspapers
      and periodicals. Various places, 1841 to 1872. $15.

SAN FRANCISCO EVENING BULLETIN. 26 scattering nos., Dec., 1855 to Mar.
      1, 1856. $10.50.

WESTCHESTER SPY. White Plains, N. Y. Vol. 11, May 13, 1840 to Apr. 28,
      1841. 51 issues. A few defects. $21.

CHEROKEE LAND LOTTERY. By Jas. F. Smith. Contains numerical list of the
      names of the fortunate drawers; also engraved map of each
      district, 59 in all. Original sheep. New York, 1838. $13.35.

THEATRICAL MANAGEMENT IN THE WEST AND SOUTH FOR THIRTY YEARS. By S.
      Smith. Original cloth. New York, 1868. $2.35.

SONGSTER. The Mermaid, or Nautical Songster. Old wrappers (very slightly
      worn). New York, 1798. $16.50.

THE NORTHWEST COAST; or, Three Years Residence in Washington Territory.
      By Jas. G. Swan. Original cloth. New York, 1857. $3.60.

140 CIVIL WAR SONG SHEETS, words only. Mostly 6 by 9 inches. Some
      duplicates. Mainly published during the war. $14.

WHIG ALMANAC. For 1843-4-5-5-6-7-8-9-50. In one vol. Binding broken.
      $3.60.

SIXTEEN MONTHS AT THE GOLD DIGGINGS. By Daniel B. Woods. Original cloth.
      New York, 1852. $7.25.

COLORADO. Prospectus of the Casco Consolidated Mining Company of
      Leadville, Colorado. Original printed wrappers. Leadville, 1880.
      $3.25.

CONFEDERACY. Headquarters Trans-Mississippi Dept. General orders Feb. 8
      to Nov. 18, 1864. 53 pieces. Some stained and slightly mildewed.
      $106.

NEWSPAPERS. Madison (Wis.) Express. 15 scattering nos. 1845-6-7. $4.50.

RICHMOND AND LOUISVILLE MEDICAL JOURNAL. Vols. 8, 9 and 11. 1869 to
      1871. 3 vols. Bindings broken and some leaves loose. $2.75.


                  CURRIER & IVES AND OTHER LITHOGRAPHS

                       Plaza Art Galleries, Inc.

                             Abbreviations

  C. L.—Colored lithograph
  Fine—Fine condition
  Good—Good condition
  Fair—Fair condition
  C. & I.—Currier and Ives
  N. C.—Nathaniel Currier
  L. F.—Large folio
  M. F.—Medium folio
  S. F.—Small folio

BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, THE STATESMAN AND PHILOSOPHER. By N. C. 1847. M. F.
      Fine condition. Framed. $15.

ZACHARY TAYLOR, PEOPLE’S CANDIDATE FOR THE 12TH PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
      STATES. By N. C. 1848. S. F. Good. Framed. Unlisted. $10.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN, SIXTEENTH PRESIDENT, ASSASSINATED April 14th., 1865. C.
      & I. Undated. S. F. Framed. $11.

ANDREW JACKSON: The Union Shall Be Preserved. C. & I., M. F. Unlisted.

GEN’L LAFAYETTE’S DEPARTURE FROM MOUNT VERNON, 1784. By E. Farrell.
      Undated. L. F. Old maple frame. $15.

WASHINGTON’S RETURN TO MOUNT VERNON, CHRISTMAS EVE, 1783. L. F. Old
      maple frame. $21.

TO THE CADETS OF THE WEST POINT MILITARY ACADEMY. Pair of aquatints by
      George Catlin. Engraved by J. Hill, 1828. M. F. Top and side
      margins trimmed to printed surface. Framed. $65.

THE EXPRESS TRAIN. C. & I. 1870. S. F. Good condition (stained). Framed.
      $32.

THE MOTHER’S BLESSING. C. & I. Undated. M. F. Framed. $8.

GOOD OLD DOGGIE. C. & I. Undated. M. F. $3.

MUSIC SHEETS: (a) The Response, A Serenade. (b) Gov. Wright’s Grand
      March. (c) Rockaway, or on Long Island’s Sea-Girt Shore. Three
      colored lithographs, $3.

FRUITS OF THE SEASON. C. & I. 1872. S. F. Framed. $3.

STRAWBERRIES. C. & I. 1863. S. F. Framed. $5.

THE WHALE FISHERY—“LAYING ON” N. C. 1852. S. F. Fair condition. Framed.
      $19.

M’DONOUGH’S VICTORY ON LAKE CHAMPLAIN. N. C. 1846. S. F. Framed. $25.

CLIPPER SHIP “FLYING CLOUD”. N. C. 1852. L. F. Later impression. $16.

THE MISSISSIPPI IN TIME OF PEACE. C. & I. 1865. L. F. Framed. $70.

THE MISSISSIPPI IN TIME OF WAR. C. & I. 1865. L. F. Framed. $50.

CENTRAL PARK, WINTER—THE SKATING CARNIVAL. C. & I. S. F. Framed. $62.50.

THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. C. & I. Undated. S. F. $8.

MIDNIGHT RACE ON THE MISSISSIPPI. C. & I. 1875. S. F. $12.

FROZEN UP. C. & I. 1872. S. F. Framed. $47.50.

PRAIRIE FIRES OF THE GREAT WEST. C. & I. 1871. S. F. $21.

GOLD MINING IN CALIFORNIA. C. & I. 1871. Framed. $22.50.

VIEW OF THE GREAT CONFLAGRATION AT NEW YORK, JULY 19th, 1845. FROM THE
      BOWLING GREEN. N. C. 1845. S. F. Framed. $21.

AMERICAN HOMESTEAD—WINTER. AMERICAN HOMESTEAD—SPRING. AMERICAN
      HOMESTEAD—SUMMER. AMERICAN HOMESTEAD—AUTUMN. Four by C. & I.,
      dated respectively 1868, 1868, 1868, 1869. All are S. F. and
      framed. $95.

MINNEHAHA FALLS, MINNESOTA. C. & I. Undated. M. F. Framed. $15.

THE VILLAGE BLACKSMITH. C. & I. Undated. M. F. Framed. $15.

THE OLD OAKEN BUCKET. C. & I. 1864. L. F. $20.

VIEW OF THE HUDSON. C. & I. Undated. L. F. Framed. $32.50.

FOREST SCENE ON THE LEHIGH C. & I. Undated. L. F. Framed. $17.50.

THE FARMER’S HOME—HARVEST. C. & I. 1864. L. F. $30.

VIEW OF LONG ISLAND, N. Y. C. & I. 1857. L. F. $45.

AMERICAN FARM SCENES, No. 4. N. C. L. F. Framed. The most important of
      the famous set. $290.

WILD DUCK SHOOTING. C. & I. 1870. S. F. Framed. $16.

WATER RAIL SHOOTING. C. & I. 1870. S. F. Framed. $12.

ENGLISH SNIPE. N. C. Undated. S. F. Framed. $13.

THE HOME OF THE DEER. C. & I. Undated. S. F. Framed. $6.

GREAT HORSES IN A GREAT RACE. SALVATORE AND TENNY AT SHEEPSHEAD BAY. C.
      & I. 1891. L. F. Framed. $6.

HOME FROM THE BROOK. THE LUCKY FISHERMAN. C. & I. 1867. L. F. Framed.
      $18.

SHOOTING ON THE PRAIRIE. C. & I. Undated. S. F. Framed. $15.

THE LIFE OF A HUNTER, CATCHING A TARTAR. C & I. 1861. L. F. Framed. $90.

AMERICAN HUNTING SCENES. “AN EARLY START”. C. & I. 1863. L.F. $125.

HUSKING. C. & I. 1861. L. F. $145.




                                 A SNAP

The famous magazine ANTIQUES, 10 issues, all different. Fine condition.
$2.

                              WEHMAN BROS.
                        712 BROADWAY    NEW YORK




                           BOOK AUCTION FIRMS


  G. A. BAKER & CO., 3 W. 46th St., New York.
  CITY BOOK AUCTION, 120 Fourth Ave., New York.
  SAMUEL T. FREEMAN & CO., 1808 Chestnut St., Philadelphia.
  CHARLES F. HEARTMAN, The Book Farm, Hattiesburg, Miss.
  J. C. MORGENTHAU & CO., INC., 1 W. 47th St., New York.
  NEW YORK BOOK AND ART AUCTION CO., 111 W. 57th St., New York.
  PARKE-BERNET GALLERIES, INC., 30 E. 57th St., New York.
  PLAZA ART GALLERIES, INC., 9 E. 59th St., New York.
  ALBERT SAIFER, 142 S. 11th St., Philadelphia, Pa.

They all issue catalogues which are sent to prospective bidders on
request, without charge. Parke-Bernet Galleries make a small season
charge for catalogues, which is rebated when purchases reach a specified
minimum.


                            _Dis Am Sumpin’_

As a Christmas greeting, Charles Heartman sent out from his Book Farm,
down in Hattiesburg, Miss., a splendidly-printed pamphlet, entitled
“Bibliography of the Writings and Speeches of Gabriel Wells, L.H.D.” As
less than 200 copies were issued, it will no doubt become a much
sought-after item.


                             _About “Cats”_

You can’t possibly get in touch with all the rare book, autograph and
print dealers that issue catalogues. Which, then, shall you select? Were
the question put to us, we would say, “Chose those who have indicated
that they really want your patronage by advertising for it.” Every firm
using the business columns of THE COLLECTOR’S GUIDE is a top-notcher in
his line—not a mossback in the lot. They get out frequent catalogues and
lists and will be glad to respond to your requests for copies thereof.
Furthermore, it is our careful endeavor to only admit dependable firms
to our columns, thus affording you an extra feeling of security when you
patronize them.




                     Your Books and Their Bindings

    [Illustration: {uncaptioned}]

An illustrated booklet, describing fine and plain hand bindings, is
yours for the asking. Beautifully Illustrated, it shows 37 gold-tooled
designs on book backs; also de luxe editions. Our prices are moderate.

                          EGGELING BOOKBINDERY
                      31 EAST 10th ST.    NEW YORK




Do You Like Antiques? If you would like to know More about their origin,
Read

                           AMERICAN COLLECTOR

Illustrated, authoritative articles vividly and interestingly written.
Introductory offer: Six months for only $1.00. Mail your remittance to

  432 Fourth Avenue,
  New York, N. Y.


                               DESIDERATA

Historical Bindings, Illuminated Manuscripts, Book of Hours, French
Eighteenth Century, Early French Classics, General Americana. Books,
Autographs, Portraits, etc., relative to Washington, Franklin, Hamilton,
Lafayette, etc. Historical and Decorative views, Naval Engagements,
Napoleoniana.

                           E. F. BONAVENTURE
                    745 Fifth Ave.    New York City


                      _Please report at all times_
                  _SPORTING BOOKS—AMERICAN & ENGLISH_
                       Good condition essential.
                             ERNEST R. GEE
                   35 East 49th St.    New York City




                        _You’ll Enjoy This One_


“Twenty-Three Books, and the Stories Behind Them” is the title of John
T. Winterich’s latest volume, and conveys in its title but meagerly the
feast in store for those who wish to get a new slant on a number of the
world’s most famous books and the literary geniuses who wrote them. Not
only has Mr. Winterich an almost unique research aptitude, but also the
magnetic quality of being able to marshal his facts in a sprightly
manner. Aside from this, the book has additionally, a fund of definite
information for collectors, respecting the rarity and speculative
possibilities of the many classics of literature that it deals with. It
is a handsomely bound, fully indexed volume of 241 pages and is
published by J. B. Lippincott & Co., at $2.50.




                         _Just What Was Needed_


The United States Card Collectors’ Catalog will come as a boon to
gatherers of various sorts of cards, including tobacco, cigarette,
candy, gum, etc. Attention is also given to associated items of silk,
leather, and celluloid buttons, to say nothing of special sections
devoted to playing cards, post cards, name cards and other non-insert
types, tobacco albums, etc. “A pip,” “An admirable piece of research,”
“A remarkable feat” are a few expressions of opinion from those who
possess a copy. Over three years of preparation were required to compile
this 90-page volume. It sells for 50c, and is published by J. R.
Burdick, 417 South Crouse Ave., Syracuse, N. Y.




Hearn (Lafcadio). First Editions and Values. A Checklist for Collectors.
By Wm. Targ. 12mo, boards, Chicago, 1935. Deluxe edition, limited to 50
copies, printed on Japanese vellum and signed by the compiler. $2.50.

Targ’s American First Editions and Their Prices. 12mo, cloth. Chicago,
1930. Limited to 500 copies. $3.00.

                           FRANK L. DOUGHERTY
                5322 N. Ludlam Ave.    Chicago, Illinois




                          Prophets and Profits


Some volumes, for which the demand was indeed slender several
generations ago, are today the real prizes of literature. Take for
example the earlier pamphlets and books of Poe, which today are
virtually beyond the means of the average collector. But this
circumstance need not stifle collecting enthusiasm. There are other
volumes, which, while no longer cheap in terms of dollars and cents,
should nevertheless double or treble in value, or perhaps even better
than that, as time goes on. Of course it would be foolish to promise
this as a certainty, and we shall therefore content ourselves with
pointing out some “first edition nuggets” that seem to have an excellent
chance of “coming into the money” at some future period. But before
doing so, let us whisper in your ear, the desirability—we might almost
say the necessity—of only acquiring “firsts” in fine condition. Yes, we
know they’re hard to get, and also that they cost more, but in our
opinion, they’re well worth the difference. Auction records have
demonstrated this time and time again. And now, let us “amble beyond our
preamble,” and point out a few, present-day good buys.

Were we going into this branch of literary speculation, we should
endeavor to acquire the first edition, first issue of Walt Whitman’s
“Leaves of Grass,” and which was published in Brooklyn, N. Y., in 1855.
No need to specify here all the necessary “points,” because, unless you
are a 100% bibliophile, you will probably do better acquiring this
treasure through some trustworthy and sophisticated rare book dealer. In
his worthy volume, “The Romance of Great Books and Their Authors,” John
T. Winterich quotes an assertion made by A. Edward Newton to the effect
that the first edition of the “Leaves of Grass” will reach a higher
figure than any other important book published in the nineteenth
century. When this declaration was made in 1924, asserts Mr. Winterich,
“Leaves of Grass” was selling in the market for $200 or less. Three
years later a copy was auctioned for $800, and in the interval since,
the price has risen, at auction and rare booksellers’ catalogues, to as
high as $3,000, with no indication that a summit of value has been
reached. The Chaucer Head Bookshop, of New York, recently offered a fine
copy without foxing for $1,000.

Another book with a definite speculative future is the first issue of
the first edition of Mark Twain’s first book, “The Celebrated Jumping
Frog of Calaveras County, and Other Sketches”, with the original blue
cloth binding, and all the “points”. It was published in New York in
1867, and at the Effrem Zimbalist sale, held at the Parke-Bernet
Galleries on Nov. 15, an immaculate copy brought $610. Beadle, the daddy
of lurid American literature on a large scale, had previously published
in No. 3 of his “Dime Book of Fun” an abridged version of the “Frog”.
And if you should happen to run across a copy in good condition, there
should be no difficulty in collecting at least $200 therefore.

Or if pocket-book limitations do not justify “eating quite so high on
the hog”, we commend the issues of HARPER’S MAGAZINE from January to
August, 1894 inclusive. These contain the first printing of George Du
Maurier’s “Trilby”. It was later published in book form, but a picture
and a paragraph, which J. McNeil Whistler claimed lampooned him, were
omitted from the latter, although they had appeared in the magazine,
which explains why it is more sought after by collectors than the book.

Bound volumes of the Du Maurier HARPER’S without the covers are not
particularly scarce and hardly to be considered from the standpoint of a
speculative future. Therefore, endeavor to secure the unbound monthly
parts in good condition, and with the original wrappers. At the William
Harris Arnold sale in 1924, they brought $70.

                          (_To be continued._)




                    ESSENTIAL FOR SHEET MUSIC LOVERS
                       ANNALS OF MUSIC IN AMERICA
                           By Henry C. Lahee

The book traces the development of music in America in chronological
order. Divided into periods with a brief review of each. The work is
systematically indexed.

  First mention of various musical instruments.
  First performance of significant orchestral, choral, and operatic
          works.
  First concerts and musical performances given in various sections of
          the country.
  Opening of the earliest theatres, opera houses and concert halls.
  Establishment of the first schools and conservatories of music.
  American debuts of noted singers, pianists, violinists, and
          conductors.

         12mo, cloth, 1922. Sent postpaid upon receipt of $2.00

                      JAMES C. HOWGATE, Bookseller
                      190 State St., Albany, N. Y.




                          _An Honest Heritage_


Thomas J. Condie, Jr., credited by Will Snow with being the earliest
known publisher of an American amateur periodical, came naturally by his
talents. According to Mott’s “History of American Magazines,” his father
Thomas Condie conducted at the tail end of the 18th century, the
PHILADELPHIA MONTHLY, which in 1798 had almost reached the thousand mark
in circulation. Incidentally on page 101 of Goodspeed’s very interesting
house-organ, THE MONTH, (December) appears an aquatint of Girard’s Bank
which is held at $35. The first article in this issue speaks of Condie,
Jr. having gotten out his JUVENILE PORTFOLIO AND LITERARY MISCELLANY at
22 Carter’s Alley, directly opposite and the acquatint apparently shows
the very building.




                        _How To Tell A Reprint_


It had been our original intention to devote a page in each issue on how
to detect reprints of popular historic newspapers. But so many items of
more general interest are clamoring for admittance to our columns, that
we are referring all inquiries to the Library of Congress, which has
gotten out 17 Information Circulars on the subject.




                     RHODE PRINTING-PUBLISHING CO.
   Where Accuracy, Legibility and Neatness Are Predominating Factors
                    220 West 42nd St., NEW YORK CITY
                            WIsconsin 7-7727

 Printers of Books and Booksellers Catalogs, Magazines, Trade Journals,
               Broadsides In Black Ink or Process Colors.
                        _Day and Night Service_




                                  The
                           COLLECTOR’S GUIDE


       A Monthly Periodical Devoted to First Editions, Americana,
 Autographs, Old Newspapers and Magazines, Sheet Music, Playbills, Dime
  Novels, Current Auction Prices, etc. $2 Per Year. Single Copies 25c.
Published by James Madison, P. O. Box 124, Grand Central Annex, New York.
                      Advertising rates on page 8.


                       No. 17    January    1940




We purchase for cash large or Small Collections. Especially Wanted:
Books, Pamphlets. Files of Newspapers. Magazines Relating to American
History. Library Sets, First. Special, Illustrated Editions. Books on
Art, Literature, Music, Opera Scores, Theatre, History, Travel, Sports,
Nature, Philosophy, Science, Mathematics, Anthropology, Occult,
Religion. Early Science, Medical, Trade, Industry, Labor. Manuscripts.

                      We Call Anywhere & Pay Cash.
                     Books Removed at Our Expense.

                     DAUBER & PINE BOOKSHOPS, INC.
                        66 Fifth Ave., New York.
                    Phones: ALgonquin 4-7880, 7881.


_We carry a large stock of Americana, First Editions, Rare Medical Books
and Old Maps. May we have your wants or offerings?_

                           ARGOSY BOOK STORES
                       114 E. 59th St., N. Y. C.


                               AUTOGRAPHS
                        HISTORICAL and LITERARY
                         _HIGHEST PRICES PAID_

                        CARNEGIE BOOK SHOP, INC.
      105 East 59th Street    WIckersham 2-4861-2   New York City


                            MECHANICAL BANKS

Send postal for new 1940 list of banks wanted. Also want silver or glass
banks.

                        F. W. FERGUSON—Collector
                    280 Fourth Ave.    New York City


AMERICANA Bought—Americana Sold Americana Sold—Americana Bought
Americana Bought—Americana Sold Americana Sold—Catalogues

CHARLES P. EVERITT, 107 East 59th Street, N. Y. ELdorado 5-6581


                             Old Sea Books
                           _BOUGHT and SOLD_

                        _Consult the specialist_

                            Alfred W. Paine
                 113 East 55th St.,    NEW YORK, N. Y.


                        Gelber, Lilienthal, Inc.
                          _Old and Rare Books_
                             First Editions
                  Press Items, Californiana Catalogues
                336 Sutter Street    San Francisco, Cal.


                      AN IMPORTANT CIVIL WAR BOOK

THE LONG ARM OF LEE or The History of the Artillery of the Army of
Northern Virginia. With a brief Account of the Confederate Bureau of
Ordnance, by Jennings Cropper Wise, formerly commandant of Virginia
Military Institute.

Lynchburg 1915. 2 vols. many photographic illus. 8vo. 998 pp. boxed.
NEW. $5.00.

A notable feature of this set is its three indexes: General, Battery,
and Battalion.

MILITARY ENGINEER. Dec. 1939. “He who does not read this book does not
know the Civil War.”

                          Send for Catalog CG
                          BARNES & NOBLE, Inc.
             FIFTH AVENUE AT 18th STREET    New York, N. Y.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLECTOR'S GUIDE, NO. 17, JANUARY 1940 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


