The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Eatonville anthology
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Eatonville anthology

Author: Zora Neale Hurston

Release date: January 23, 2025 [eBook #75183]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Negro University Press, 1926

Credits: Steve Mattern


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EATONVILLE ANTHOLOGY ***





                       THE EATONVILLE ANTHOLOGY

                         By ZORA NEALE HURSTON


                             The Messenger
                  The World's Greatest Negro Monthly
                             Volume VIII
                  September, October, November, 1926




                                   I
                         +The Pleading Woman+

Mrs. Tony Roberts is the pleading woman. She just loves to ask for
things. Her husband gives her all he can rake and scrape, which is
considerably more than most wives get for their housekeeping, but she
goes from door to door begging for things.

She starts at the store. “Mist’ Clarke,” she sing-songs in a high
keening voice, “gimme lil’ piece uh meat tuh boil a pot uh greens wid.
Lawd knows me an’ mah chillen is SO hongry! Hits uh SHAME! Tony don’t
fee-ee-eee-ed me!”

Mr. Clarke knows that she has money and that her larder is well
stocked, for Tony Roberts is the best provider on his list. But her
keening annoys him and he arises heavily. The pleader at this shows all
the joy of a starving man being seated at a feast.

“Thass right Mist’ Clarke. De Lawd loveth de cheerful giver. Gimme jes’
a lil’ piece ’bout dis big (indicating the width of her hand) an’ de
Lawd’ll bless yuh.”

She follows this angel-on-earth to his meat tub and superintends the
cutting, crying out in pain when he refuses to move the knife over just
a teeny bit mo’.

Finally, meat in hand, she departs, remarking on the meanness of some
people who give a piece of salt meat only two-fingers wide when they
were plainly asked for a hand-wide piece. Clarke puts it down to Tony’s
account and resumes his reading.

With the slab of salt pork as a foundation, she visits various homes
until she has collected all she wants for the day. At the Piersons, for
instance: “Sister Pierson, plee-ee-ease gimme uh han’ful uh collard
greens fuh me an’ mah po’ chillen! ’Deed, me an’ mah chillen is SO
hongry. Tony doan’ fee-ee-eed me!”

Mrs. Pierson picks a bunch of greens for her, but she springs away
from them as if they were poison. “Lawd a mussy, Mis’ Pierson, you
ain’t gonna gimme dat lil’ eye-full uh greens fuh me an’ mah chillen,
is you? Don’t be so graspin’; Gawd won’t bless yuh. Gimme uh han’full
mo’. Lawd, some folks is got everything, an’ theys jes’ as gripin’ an
stingy!”

Mrs. Pierson raises the ante, and the pleading woman moves on to the
next place, and on and on. The next day, it commences all over.


                                  II
                           +Turpentine Love+

Jim Merchant is always in good humor--even with his wife. He says he
fell in love with her at first sight. That was some years ago. She has
had all her teeth pulled out, but they still get along splendidly.

He says the first time he called on her he found out that she was
subject to fits. This didn’t cool his love, however. She had several in
his presence.

One Sunday, while he was there, she had one, and her mother tried to
give her a dose of turpentine to stop it. Accidently, she spilled it
in her eye and it cured her. She never had another fit, so they got
married and have kept each other in good humor ever since.


                                  III

Becky Moore has eleven children of assorted colors and sizes. She has
never been married, but that is not her fault. She has never stopped
any of the fathers of her children from proposing, so if she has no
father for her children it’s not her fault. The men round about are
entirely to blame.

The other mothers of the town are afraid that it is catching. They
won’t let their children play with hers.


                                  IV
                                +Tippy+

Sykes Jones’ family all shoot craps. The most interesting member of the
family--also fond of bones, but of another kind--is Tippy, the Jones’
dog.

He is so thin, that it amazes one that he lives at all. He sneaks into
village kitchens if the housewives are careless about the doors and
steals meats, even off the stoves. He also sucks eggs.

For these offenses he has been sentenced to death dozens of times, and
the sentences executed upon him, only they didn’t work. He has been fed
bluestone, strychnine, nux vomica, even an entire Peruna bottle beaten
up. It didn’t fatten him, but it didn’t kill him. So Eatonville has
resigned itself to the plague of Tippy, reflecting that it has erred in
certain matters and is being chastened.

In spite of all the attempts upon his life, Tippy is still willing to
be friendly with anyone who will let him.


                                   V
                    +The Way of a Man with a Train+

Old Man Anderson lived seven or eight miles out in the country from
Eatonville. Over by Lake Apopka. He raised feed-corn and cassava and
went to market with it two or three times a year. He bought all of his
victuals wholesale so he wouldn’t have to come to town for several
months more.

He was different from us citybred folks. He had never seen a train.
Everybody laughed at him for even the smallest child in Eatonville had
either been to Maitland or Orlando and watched a train go by. On Sunday
afternoons all of the young people of the village would go over to
Maitland, a mile away, to see Number 35 whizz southward on its way to
Tampa and wave at the passengers. So we looked down on him a little.
Even we children felt superior in the presence of a person so lacking
in worldly knowledge.

The grown-ups kept telling him he ought to go see a train. He always
said he didn’t have time to wait so long. Only two trains a day passed
through Maitland. But patronage and ridicule finally had its effect
and Old Man Anderson drove in one morning early. Number 78 went north
to Jacksonville at 10:20. He drove his light wagon over in the woods
beside the railroad below Maitland, and sat down to wait. He began to
fear that his horse would get frightened and run away with the wagon.
So he took him out and led him deeper into the grove and tied him
securely. Then he returned to his wagon and waited some more. Then he
remembered that some of the train-wise villagers had said the engine
belched fire and smoke. He had better move his wagon out of danger. It
might catch afire. He climbed down from the seat and placed himself
between the shafts to draw it away. Just then 78 came thundering over
the trestle spouting smoke, and suddenly began blowing for Maitland.
Old Man Anderson became so frightened he ran away with the wagon
through the woods and tore it up worse than the horse ever could have
done. He doesn’t know yet what a train looks like, and says he doesn’t
care.


                                  VI
                             +Coon Taylor+

Coon Taylor never did any real stealing. Of course, if he saw a chicken
or a watermelon or muskmelon or anything like that that he wanted he’d
take it. The people used to get mad but they never could catch him. He
took so many melons from Joe Clarke that he set up in the melon patch
one night with his shotgun loaded with rock salt. He was going to fix
Coon. But he was tired. It is hard work being a mayor, postmaster,
storekeeper and everything. He dropped asleep sitting on a stump in
the middle of the patch. So he didn’t see Coon when he came. Coon
didn’t see him either, that is, not at first. He knew the stump was
there, however. He had opened many of Clarke’s juicy Florida Favorite
on it. He selected his fruit, walked over to the stump and burst the
melon on it. That is, he thought it was the stump until it fell over
with a yell. Then he knew it was no stump and departed hastily from
those parts. He had cleared the fence when Clarke came to, as it were.
So the charge of rock-salt was wasted on the desert air.

During the sugar-cane season, he found he couldn’t resist Clarke’s soft
green cane, but Clarke did not go to sleep this time. So after he had
cut six or eight stalks by the moonlight, Clarke rose up out of the
cane strippings with his shotgun and made Coon sit right down and chew
up the last one of them on the spot. And the next day he made Coon
leave his town for three months.


                                  VII
                           +Village Fiction+

Joe Lindsay is said by Lum Boger to be the largest manufacturer of
prevarications in Eatonville; Brazzle (late owner of the world’s
leanest and meanest mule) contends that his business is the largest in
the state and his wife holds that he is the biggest liar in the world.

_Exhibit A_--He claims that while he was in Orlando one day he saw
a doctor cut open a woman, remove everything--liver, lights and heart
included--clean each of them separately; the doctor then washed out the
empty woman, dried her out neatly with a towel and replaced the organs
so expertly that she was up and about her work in a couple of weeks.


                                 VIII

Sewell is a man who lives all to himself. He moves a great deal. So
often, that ’Lige Moseley says his chickens are so used to moving that
every time he comes out into his backyard the chickens lie down and
cross their legs, ready to be tied up again.

He is baldheaded; but he says he doesn’t mind that, because he wants as
little as possible between him and God.


                                  IX

Mrs. Clarke is Joe Clarke’s wife. She is a soft-looking, middle-aged
woman, whose bust and stomach are always holding a get-together.

She waits on the store sometimes and cries every time he yells at her
which he does every time she makes a mistake, which is quite often. She
calls her husband “Jody.” They say he used to beat her in the store
when he was a young man, but he is not so impatient now. He can wait
until he goes home.

She shouts in Church every Sunday and shakes the hand of fellowship
with everybody in the Church with her eyes closed, but somehow always
misses her husband.


                                   X

Mrs. McDuffy goes to Church every Sunday and always shouts and tells
her “determination.” Her husband always sits in the back row and beats
her as soon as they get home. He says there’s no sense in her shouting,
as big a devil as she is. She just does it to slur him. Elijah Moseley
asked her why she didn’t stop shouting, seeing she always got a beating
about it. She says she can’t “squinch the sperrit.” Then Elijah asked
Mr. McDuffy to stop beating her, seeing that she was going to shout
anyway. He answered that she just did it for spite and that his fist
was just as hard as her head. He could last just as long as she. So the
village let the matter rest.


                                  XI
                           +Double-Shuffle+

Back in the good old days before the World War, things were very simple
in Eatonville. People didn’t fox-trot. When the town wanted to put on
its Sunday clothes and wash behind the ears, it put on a “breakdown.”
The daring younger set would two-step and waltz, but the good church
members and the elders stuck to the grand march. By rural canons
dancing is wicked, but one is not held to have danced until the feet
have been crossed. Feet don’t get crossed when one grand marches.

At elaborate affairs the organ from the Methodist church was moved
up to the hall and Lizzimore, the blind man presided. When informal
gatherings were held, he merely played his guitar assisted by any
volunteer with mouth organs or accordions.

Among white people the march is as mild as if it had been passed on
by Volstead. But it still has a kick in Eatonville. Everybody happy,
shining eyes, gleaming teeth. Feet dragged ’shhlap, shhlap! to beat
out the time. No orchestra needed. Round and round! Back again,
parse-me-la! shlap! shlap! Strut! Strut! Seaboard! Shlap! Shlap! Tiddy
bumm! Mr. Clarke in the lead with Mrs. Mosely.

It’s too much for some of the young folks. Double shuffling commences.
Buck and wing. Lizzimore about to break his guitar. Accordion doing
contortions. People fall back against the walls, and let the soloist
have it, shouting as they clap the old, old double shuffle songs.

  ’Me an’ mah honey got two mo’ days
  Two mo’ days tuh do de buck’

Sweating bodies, laughing mouths, grotesque faces, feet drumming
fiercely. Deacons clapping as hard as the rest.

  “Great big nigger, black as tar
  Trying tuh git tuh hebben on uh ’lectric car.”

  “Some love cabbage, some love kale
  But I love a gal wid a short skirt tail.”

  Long tall angel--steppin’ down,
  Long white robe an’ starry crown.

  ’Ah would not marry uh black gal (bumm bumm!)
  Tell yuh de reason why
  Every time she comb her hair
  She make de goo-goo eye.

  Would not marry a yaller gal (bumm bumm!)
  Tell yuh de reason why
  Her neck so long an’ stringy
  Ahm ’fraid she’d never die.

  Would not marry uh preacher
  Tell yuh de reason why
  Every time he comes tuh town
  He makes de chicken fly.

When the buck dance was over, the boys would give the floor to the
girls and they would parse-me-la with a slye eye out of the corner
to see if anybody was looking who might “have them up in church”
on conference night. Then there would be more dancing. Then Mr.
Clarke would call for everybody’s best attention and announce that
_’freshments was served! Every gent’man would please take his lady by
the arm and scorch her right up to de table fur a treat!_

Then the men would stick their arms out with a flourish and ask their
ladies: “You lak chicken? Well, then, take a wing.” And the ladies
would take the proffered “wings” and parade up to the long table and be
served. Of course most of them had brought baskets in which were heaps
of jointed and fried chicken, two or three kinds of pies, cakes, potato
pone and chicken purlo. The hall would separate into happy groups about
the baskets until time for more dancing.

But the boys and girls got scattered about during the war, and now they
dance the fox-trot by a brand new piano. They do waltz and two-step
still, but no one now considers it good form to lock his chin over his
partner’s shoulder and stick out behind. One night just for fun and
to humor the old folks, they danced, that is, they grand marched, but
everyone picked up their feet. _Bah!!_


                                  XII
                        +The Head of the Nail+

Daisy Taylor was the town vamp. Not that she was pretty. But sirens
were all but non-existent in the town. Perhaps she was forced to it by
circumstances. She was quite dark, with little brushy patches of hair
squatting over her head. These were held down by shingle-nails often.
No one knows whether she did this for artistic effect or for lack of
hair-pins, but there they were shining in the little patches of hair
when she got all dressed for the afternoon and came up to Clarke’s
store to see if there was any mail for her.

It was seldom that anyone wrote to Daisy, but she knew that the men of
the town would be assembled there by five o’clock, and some one could
usually be induced to buy her some soda water or peanuts.

Daisy flirted with married men. There were only two single men in town.
Lum Boger, who was engaged to the assistant school-teacher, and Hiram
Lester, who had been off to school at Tuskegee and wouldn’t look at a
person like Daisy. In addition to other drawbacks, she was pigeon-toed
and her petticoat was always showing so perhaps he was justified. There
was nothing else to do except flirt with married men.

This went on for a long time. First one wife then another complained of
her, or drove her from the preserves by threat.

But the affair with Crooms was the most prolonged and serious. He was
even known to have bought her a pair of shoes.

Mrs. Laura Crooms was a meek little woman who took all of her troubles
crying, and talked a great deal of leaving things in the hands of God.

The affair came to a head one night in orange picking time. Crooms was
over at Oneido picking oranges. Many fruit pickers move from one town
to the other during the season.

The _town_ was collected at the store-postoffice as is customary
on Saturday nights. The _town_ has had its bath and with its
week’s pay in pocket fares forth to be merry. The men tell stories and
treat the ladies to soda-water, peanuts and peppermint candy.

Daisy was trying to get treats, but the porch was cold to her that
night.

“Ah don’t keer if you don’t treat me. What’s a dirty lil nickel?” She
flung this at Walter Thomas. “The everloving Mister Crooms will gimme
anything atall Ah wants.”

“You better shet up yo’ mouf talking ’bout Albert Crooms. Heah his wife
comes right now.”

Daisy went akimbo. “Who? Me! Ah don’t keer whut Laura Crooms think. If
she ain’t a heavy hip-ted Mama enough to keep him, she don’t need to
come crying to me.”

She stood making goo-goo eyes as Mrs. Crooms walked upon the porch.
Daisy laughed loud, made several references to Albert Crooms, and when
she saw the mail-bag come in from Maitland she said, “Ah better go in
an’ see if Ah ain’t got a letter from Oneido.”

The more Daisy played the game of getting Mrs. Crooms’ goat, the
better she liked it. She ran in and out of the store laughing until
she could scarcely stand. Some of the people present began to talk to
Mrs. Crooms--to egg her on to halt Daisy’s boasting, but she was for
leaving it all in the hands of God. Walter Thomas kept on after Mrs.
Crooms until she stiffened and resolved to fight. Daisy was inside
when she came to this resolve and never dreamed anything of the kind
could happen. She had gotten hold of an envelope and came laughing and
shouting, “Oh, Ah can’t stand to see Oneido lose!”

There was a box of ax-handles on display on the porch, propped up
against the door jamb. As Daisy stepped upon the porch, Mrs. Crooms
leaned the heavy end of one of those handles heavily upon her head. She
staggered from the porch to the ground and the timid Laura, fearful of
a counter-attack, struck again and Daisy toppled into the town ditch.
There was not enough water in there to do more than muss her up. Every
time she tried to rise, down would come that ax-handle again. Laura
was fighting a scared fight. With Daisy thoroughly licked, she retired
to the store porch and left her fallen enemy in the ditch. None of the
men helped Daisy--even to get out of the ditch. But Elijah Moseley, who
was some distance down the street when the trouble began arrived as the
victor was withdrawing. He rushed up and picked Daisy out of the mud
and began feeling her head.

“Is she hurt much?” Joe Clarke asked from the doorway.

“I don’t know,” Elijah answered, “I was just looking to see if Laura had
been lucky enough to hit one of those nails on the head and drive it
in.”

Before a week was up, Daisy moved to Orlando. There in a wider sphere,
perhaps, her talents as a vamp were appreciated.


                                 XIII
                         +Pants and Cal’line+

Sister Cal’line Potts was a silent woman. Did all of her laughing down
inside, but did the thing that kept the town in an uproar of laughter.
It was the general opinion of the village that Cal’line would do
anything she had a mind to. And she had a mind to do several things.

Mitchell Potts, her husband, had a weakness for women. No one ever
believed that she was jealous. She did things to the women, surely. But
most any townsman would have said that she did them because she liked
the novel situation and the queer things she could bring out of it.

Once he took up with Delphine--called Mis’ Pheeny by the town. She
lived on the outskirts on the edge of the piney woods. The town winked
and talked. People don’t make secrets of such things in villages.
Cal’line went about her business with her thin black lips pursed tight
as ever, and her shiny black eyes unchanged.

“Dat devil of a Cal’line’s got somethin’ up her sleeve!” The town
smiled in anticipation.

“Delphine is too big a cigar for her to smoke. She ain’t crazy,” said
some as the weeks went on and nothing happened. Even Pheeny herself
would give an extra flirt to her over-starched petticoats as she
rustled into church past her of Sundays.

Mitch Potts said furthermore, that he was tired of Cal’line’s
foolishness. She had to stay where he put her. His African soup-bone
(arm) was too strong to let a woman run over him. ’Nough was ’nough.
And he did some fancy cussing, and he was the fanciest cusser in the
county.

So the town waited and the longer it waited, the odds changed slowly
from the wife to the husband.

One Saturday, Mitch knocked off work at two o’clock and went over
to Maitland. He came back with a rectangular box under his arm and
kept straight on out to the barn and put it away. He ducked around
the corner of the house quickly, but even so, his wife glimpsed the
package. Very much like a shoe-box. So!

He put on the kettle and took a bath. She stood in her bare feet at
the ironing board and kept on ironing. He dressed. It was about five
o’clock but still very light. He fiddled around outside. She kept on
with her ironing. As soon as the sun got red, he sauntered out to the
barn, got the parcel and walked away down the road, past the store
and out into the piney woods. As soon as he left the house. Cal’line
slipped on her shoes without taking time to don stockings, put on one
of her husband’s old Stetsons, worn and floppy, slung the axe over her
shoulder and followed in his wake. He was hailed cheerily as he passed
the sitters on the store porch and answered smiling sheepishly and
passed on. Two minutes later passed his wife, silently, unsmilingly,
and set the porch to giggling and betting.

An hour passed perhaps. It was dark. Clarke had long ago lighted the
swinging kerosene lamp inside.


                                  XIV

Once ’way back yonder before the stars fell all the animals used to
talk just like people. In them days dogs and rabbits was the best of
friends--even tho both of them was stuck on the same gal--which was
Miss Nancy Coon. She had the sweetest smile and the prettiest striped
and bushy tail to be found anywhere.

They both run their legs nigh off trying to win her for
themselves--fetching nice ripe persimmons and such. But she never give
one or the other no satisfaction.

Finally one night Mr. Dog popped the question right out. “Miss Coon,”
he says, “Ma’am, also Ma’am which would you ruther be--a lark flyin’ or
a dove a settin’?”

Course Miss Nancy she blushed and laughed a little and hid her face
behind her bushy tail for a spell. Then she said sorter shy like, “I
does love yo’ sweet voice, brother dawg--but--but I ain’t jes’ exactly
set in my mind yit.”

Her and Mr. Dog set on a spell, when up comes hopping Mr. Rabbit wid
his tail fresh washed and his whiskers shining. He got right down to
business and asked Miss Coon to marry him, too.

“Oh, Miss Nancy,” he says, “Ma’am, also Ma’am, if you’d see me settin’
straddle of a mud-cat leadin’ a minnow, what would you think? Ma’am
also Ma’am?” Which is a out and out proposal as everybody knows.

“Youse awful nice, Brother Rabbit and a beautiful dancer, but you
cannot sing like Brother Dog. Both you uns come back next week to gimme
time for to decide.”

They both left arm-in-arm. Finally Mr. Rabbit says to Mr. Dog. “Taint
no use in me going back--she ain’t gwinter have me. So I mought as well
give up. She loves singing, and I ain’t got nothing but a squeak.”

“Oh, don’t talk that a’ way,” says Mr. Dog, tho’ he is glad Mr. Rabbit
can’t sing none.

“Thass all right, Brer Dog. But if I had a sweet voice like you got,
I’d have it worked on and make it sweeter.”

“How! How! How!” Mr. Dog cried, jumping up and down. “Lemme fix it for
you, like I do for Sister Lark and Sister Mocking-bird.”

“When? Where?” asked Mr. Dog, all excited. He was figuring that if he
could sing just a little better Miss Coon would be bound to have him.

“Just you meet me t’morrer in de huckleberry patch,” says the rabbit
and off they both goes to bed.

The dog is there on time next day and after a while the rabbit comes
loping up.

“Mawnin’, Brer Dawg,” he says kinder chippy like. “Ready to git yo’
voice sweetened?”

“Sholy, sholy, Brer Rabbit. Let’s we all hurry about it. I wants tuh
serenade Miss Nancy from de piney woods tuh night.”

“Well, den, open yo’ mouf and poke out yo’ tongue,” says the rabbit.

No sooner did Mr. Dog poke out his tongue than Mr. Rabbit split it with
a knife and ran for all he was worth to a hollow stump and hid hisself.

The dog has been mad at the rabbit ever since.

Anybody who don’t believe it happened, just look at the dog’s tongue
and he can see for himself where the rabbit slit it right up the middle.

Stepped on a tin, mah story ends.




                          Transcriber’s Notes

New original cover art included with this eBook is granted to the
public domain.

Perceived punctuation errors have been silently corrected.

The section heading XIV has been added.

Otherwise spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EATONVILLE ANTHOLOGY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


