The Project Gutenberg eBook of Common poisonous plants of New England
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Common poisonous plants of New England

Author: Jr. Heber W. Youngken
        Joseph S. Karas

Photographer: Dean Youngken

Release date: August 13, 2023 [eBook #71397]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington DC: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1964

Credits: Lisa Corcoran, Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMON POISONOUS PLANTS OF NEW ENGLAND ***





Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Equal signs “=” before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.




[Illustration]

                         COMMON
                    POISONOUS PLANTS
                           OF
                       NEW ENGLAND

    U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE
                  Public Health Service

This material was prepared by Heber W. Youngken, Jr., Ph. D., Dean of
the College of Pharmacy, University of Rhode Island, Kingston; and
Joseph S. Karas, M.D., Director of the Poison Control Center at Rhode
Island Hospital, Providence, and is published by the Rhode Island
Health Department in cooperation with the U.S. Public Health Service,
Division of Accident Prevention. The photographs were provided by Dean
Youngken.

          RHODE ISLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
    Division of Health Education and Information
                         and
           THE UNIVERSITY OF RHODE ISLAND

                 In Cooperation With
        U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION,
                     AND WELFARE

                Public Health Service
           Division of Accident Prevention
               Washington, D.C. 20201

                Public Health Service
                Publication No. 1220
                     April 1964

    For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
           U.S. Government Printing Office
               Washington, D.C., 20402

                   Price 35 cents




COMMON POISONOUS PLANTS OF NEW ENGLAND


                              Page
    Introduction                ii
    Amanita mushroom             1
    Baneberry                    2
    Bittersweet                  3
    Bloodroot                    4
    Castor bean                  5
    Christmas rose               6
    Daphne                       7
    Deadly nightshade            8
    Foxglove                     9
    Green hellebore             10
    Indian hemp                 11
    Jimson weed                 12
    Larkspur                    13
    Lily-of-the-valley          14
    Monkshood                   15
    Poison-hemlock              16
    Poison-ivy                  17
    Pokeweed                    18
    Water hemlock               19
    Yew                         20
    Poison Control Centers      21
    Plant Index                 23




INTRODUCTION


Prompted by the many telephone calls and inquiries received at the
Rhode Island Poison Control and Information Centers regarding plants,
flowers, and berries, the State Department of Health has developed
the information contained in this booklet. It will aid families in
planning safe gardens, give fuller knowledge of wild plants, and, in
the case of an accidental ingestion, provide assistance in identifying
the plant. Since verbal descriptions are frequently inadequate, and
nonprofessional determination of species often uncertain, there has
been a need for a more expedient means of identifying plants and their
toxicity.

Because the toxicity of these plants will vary with the size of the
child, the season, and the quantity and part of the plant eaten, it is
necessary that a physician determine the necessary treatment for each
case.

    =THIS BOOKLET ENCOURAGES THE EMPTYING OF THE
      STOMACH OF A VICTIM BY VOMITING AS A GENERAL
      MEASURE IN PREVENTING SERIOUS INJURY.

      VOMITING SHOULD NOT BE INDUCED IF THE VICTIM
      IS UNCONSCIOUS OR CONVULSING.=

Some basic information is included for physicians who might be unaware
of the toxic principles and their effects in these particular plants.
Although the seriousness of each accident must be judged individually,
it is necessary that the plant be accurately identified and that
sufficient information on its toxicity be readily available. Many
other poisonous plants could have been included in this booklet, but,
the purpose was to discuss those found most commonly, although not
exclusively, in the New England States.

The names and telephone numbers of the Poison Control Centers in the
New England area are included for the convenience of your physician.
(See page 21.)

    Cover picture: European bittersweet
            _Solanum dulcamara_
               (see page 3)




AMANITA MUSHROOM


[Illustration: Amanita, fly agaric

_Amanita muscaria--AGARICACEAE_]

=Description=: One of the most poisonous of the mushrooms (toadstools).
Found mostly in woody areas, along roadsides, and waste places,
especially at the base of pine and similar trees. Unlike many edible
mushrooms, this poisonous amanita has a fleshy bulb-like base and
yellow stalk (stipe) with scaly growths and a cap or top (pileus).
Often a white ring (annulus) of soft ragged tissue may be observed on
the stalk under its cap. All amanita mushrooms should, in general, be
considered poisonous. The top, which may be 3 to 6 inches wide, varies
in color from bright orange to red with white to gray warty growths on
it. Under the cap are numerous very white gills which distinguish this
mushroom from most edible types. The latter usually have pink to purple
gills. These mushrooms form in groups, or are scattered.

Other poisonous mushrooms found in New England are the Death Cup,
_Amanita phalloides_; jack-o’-lantern, _Clitocybe illudens_; Shaggy
mane, _Coprinus comatus_; and the _Boletus_ and _Russula_ species.
There are many others. Perhaps the best precaution is to avoid eating
any mushroom not certified by an expert to be edible.

=Poisonous Parts=: All portions are poisonous. The chief toxic
principle is an alkaloid, =muscarine=. Amanita poisoning is
characterized by intense sweating, salivation, wheezing, irregular
breathing and heart beat. If not treated promptly, it =can be fatal=
within an hour depending upon quantities consumed.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat for =muscarine= alkaloid poisoning or
excessive muscarinic stimulation of the parasympathetic nervous system,
also dehydration. Atropine and other similar drugs counteract the
effects of =muscarine=.




BANEBERRY


[Illustration: Baneberry, snakeberry

_Actaea rubra and Actaea alba--RANUNCULACEAE_]

=Description=: The red and white baneberries are perennial herbs found
in woodlands and occasionally as showy plants in gardens. Leaves are
large on many branches and resemble those of the wildcurrant. The small
flowers are white in spring. Plants generally grow about 1 to 2 feet in
height. The attractive parts are the red or white berries which develop
during summer and early autumn. They are in clusters on terminal flower
stalks, each on a conspicuous short fleshy pedicel. Children have been
poisoned by eating the berries.

=Poisonous Parts=: The root stock, sap, and berries. These produce
marked irritation of the stomach and intestines causing nausea and
violent purgation. If absorbed, the acrid principles can affect the
heart, increase the pulse rate, and cause dizziness. Fatalities have
been reported.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat gastric inflammation and circulatory failure.




BITTERSWEET


[Illustration: European bittersweet, blue nightshade, woody nightshade

_Solanum dulcamara--SOLANACEAE_]

=Description=: A woody climbing or reclining herb with slender stems
and dark green pointed leaves which may be purplish-green when young.
Clusters of white or purplish-white flowers borne on a 5-pointed,
wheel-shaped base (calyx). During summer and early fall, fruits become
attractive berries, bright red to scarlet, and are scattered in
clusters. They remain when leaves fall.

This weed is found in numerous areas, such as on dumps, along fence
walls, and generally in moist, rich soil conditions. It is a common
weed in many gardens, near dwellings or in fields, and is related to
the black and deadly nightshades.

NOTE. The black nightshade, American bittersweet or poison berry
(_Solarium nigrum-SOLANACEAE_) closely resembles the European
bittersweet, excepting the berries which are purple or black. It
contains the same poisonous principles.

=Poisonous Parts=: Chiefly the leaves and unripe fruits. The red
berries (black berries of the black nightshade) can be poisonous if
several are eaten. The plant contains =solanine=, =dulcamarin=, and
similar principles which are related to the alkaloids of the deadly
nightshade. Poisoning is characterized by burning in the throat,
nausea, dizziness, dilation of eye pupils, convulsions, and general
muscular weakness.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians treat for
alkaloids, as in atropine poisoning.




BLOODROOT


[Illustration: Bloodroot

_Sanguinaria canadensis--PAPAVERACEAE_]

=Description=: Perennial, low-growing herbs which appear early in
spring in shady, moist wooded areas. The many-petaled, white flower
frequently develops first on a stalk wrapped with a single large-lobed
leaf. The large underground stem (rhizome) and smaller roots of the
bloodroot contain an orange to red juice from which the plant gets its
name. This is poisonous.

=Poisonous Parts=: The underground stems, roots, and their
red contents. These contain several toxic alkaloids, chiefly
=sanguinarine=, which irritate the mucous membranes of the mouth,
throat, and stomach causing intense burning, nausea, and vomiting. If
absorbed, the alkaloids can affect the nervous system, depress the
heart, cause coma, and produce temporary paralysis.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit, and then give
warm milk. Physicians perform gastric lavage and treat irritated
gastro-intestinal tract. In the event that much of the root material
has been ingested and absorbed, measures should be taken to prevent
circulatory collapse.




CASTOR BEAN


[Illustration: Castor bean, castor oil plant, palma Christi

_Ricinus communis--EUPHORBIACEAE_]

=Description=: There are many varieties of the castor bean plant
growing in gardens and greenhouses. The plant is cultivated
commercially in southern climates for the castor oil produced by the
seeds. It grows to 8 feet or more in height with large showy palm like,
dark green leaves on long stalks.

Flowers are not very attractive but the clusters of soft spiny fruits
which form in late summer and early fall, split open to yield very
attractively marked shiny seeds. These possess variegated white to
brown and black striations and are shaped somewhat like the tick
insect. Because of the attractive appearance, they become playthings
for children.

=Poisonous Parts=: The beans or seeds contain the toxic substances
=ricin= and =ricinine=. =Ricin= is exceedingly poisonous due to its
irritant action which causes nausea, vomiting, intestinal cramps,
stupor, and sometimes convulsions and circulatory collapse several
hours after seeds are ingested. =Ricin= may produce hemolysis.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and maintain fluid and electrolyte balance and employ
symptomatic measures.




CHRISTMAS ROSE


[Illustration: Christmas rose, black hellebore

_Helleborus niger--RANUNCULACEAE_]

=Description=: In warmer climates, the large blossoms of this plant
appear in midwinter, hence, the common name Christmas rose. However,
these develop much earlier in fall or later in spring in New England
and other northern areas.

The plant is a perennial evergreen herb with a black underground stem
and roots. Each year a single palmately divided leaf and flower stalk
form, the latter with one or two large purplish-white flowers, each
with five petals and a yellow center whorl of flower parts. Found in
gardens usually as a cultivated plant.

=Poisonous Parts=: An intensely irritating glycoside principle,
=helleborein=, has been found in the leaves and roots. This probably
accounts for much of the skin inflammation caused on contact with
bruised parts or the juice of this plant. Other poisonous glycosides
and alkaloids which affect the heart (similar to the effects of
digitalis) and nervous system (as from aconite) are also present. If
ingested, the plant may cause vomiting, tingling and numbing sensations
in the mouth, and violent purgation.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Wash the skin at once with soap and water
if the juice of the plant is in contact with it. Have patient vomit if
any part has been eaten. Physicians treat for dermatitis and vesication
if a contact poisoning. When there is evidence of much ingestion treat
for =digitalis= or =aconitine= poisoning, depending upon symptoms.




DAPHNE


[Illustration: Daphne, spurge olive

_Daphne mezereum--THYMELAEACEAE_]

=Description=: A low, woody plant found in many gardens. The daphne
bears small rose-purple blossoms in clusters along its branches in
early spring before the leaves develop. During the summer, several
bright red berries appear, each with a single seed. Some horticultural
varieties produce white to yellow flowers and yellow to orange berries.

=Poisonous Parts=: The bark, (this separates easily from the stems)
leaves, and berries are poisonous. Children are especially attracted
to the berries and fatalities among some who have eaten them have been
reported.

Poisoning is characterized by a burning sensation in the mouth and
irritation of the stomach and intestines which causes severe cramps.
Toxic principles include a bitter glycoside, =daphnin=, and an acid
resinous mixture. If not removed reasonably soon, these can produce
kidney inflammation since these principles can be absorbed.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians
perform gastric lavage and treat for a probable irritation of the
gastro-intestinal tract if parts of the plant have been in the stomach
for more than an hour.




DEADLY NIGHTSHADE


[Illustration: Deadly nightshade, black cherry

_Atropa belladonna--SOLANACEAE_]

=Description=: A perennial bushy herb, 3 to 4 feet in height, branching
stems with dark green pointed leaves, lavender-to-purple, bell-shaped
flowers, and black cherry-like fruits. (Not related to cherry trees.)

Plants rarely grown in gardens, usually weeds found in scattered areas.
Children are especially attracted to the fruits.

=Poisonous Parts=: Roots, leaves, and seeds which contain alkaloids
(=atropine=, =hyoscyamine=, =scopolamine=, etc.) similar to those
of the jimsonweed (see page 12). Poisoning causes drying of
the mouth, dilation of eye pupils, a very rapid heartbeat, and
central-nervous-system depression. Poison can be absorbed by handling
leaves, as well as by eating fruits. Severely poisonous!

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit immediately if eaten.
Exposed skin should be washed with soapy water. Physicians treat for
=atropine= poisoning.

NOTE: Other nightshades causing poisoning include the blue and black
nightshades which are also known as bittersweets (_Solanum dulcamara_,
and _Solanum nigrum_ respectively). (See page 3.)




FOXGLOVE


[Illustration: Foxglove, digitalis

_Digitalis purpurea--SCROPHULARIACEAE_]

=Description=: The foxglove is found wild in woodlands, along shady
roadsides, and often is cultivated in gardens. During its first year
of growth it forms clusters of leaves in a rosette pattern, but no
flowers. The flowers develop on long erect stems early in summer during
the second year. They are numerous showy white-lavender, or purple
bell-shaped flowers which bloom for several weeks. The fruits are dry
capsules with many tiny seeds.

=Poisonous Parts=: The leaves and seeds. These contain the digitalis
glycosides, chiefly =digitoxin=, which is a powerful heart stimulant.
Poisoning is characterized by nausea, vomiting, and dizziness and can
be experienced several hours after ingesting the plant parts. The
plant is severely poisonous and can cause heart failure because of its
powerful action on the heart muscles.

=Antidotes=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat for =digitoxin= and digitalis glycoside
poisoning.




GREEN HELLEBORE


[Illustration: Green hellebore, false hellebore, Indian poke

_Veratrum viride--LILIACEAE_]

=Description=: This hellebore is found in swampy places, moist meadows,
or along the edges of streams. It develops in early spring quite like
the skunk cabbage, but then grows during summer on a stout stalk up to
6 to 8 feet in height. Its clasping broad leaves with parallel vein
markings are conspicuous. Many small greenish-white flowers form on a
branching top.

The size of the plant attracts people, and children find the broad
leaves and green tops a curiosity. Powdered roots and a mixture of the
alkaloids are found among the contents of some insecticides.

=Poisonous Parts=: Poisonous principles are alkaloids which are
in largest amounts in the roots. Leaves and seeds contain smaller
quantities and can be harmful. Poisoning is characterized by
salivation, abdominal pain, and attempts to vomit. Large quantities
produce a cold and clammy skin and depressed circulation due to effects
of =veratrum= alkaloids on the heart muscles and on respiration. Death
may result.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit if the victim has
not become unconscious and appears calm. If shock has developed, use
standard first aid measures. Physicians treat for =veratrum= alkaloid
poisoning.




INDIAN HEMP


[Illustration: Indian hemp, cannabis, marihuana, marijuana

_Cannabis sativa--MORACEAE_]

=Description=: This tall annual weed is usually eradicated by local
authorities as soon as it is found because of its narcotic properties.
Occasionally, however, it turns up on dumps, along railroad tracks,
or other places. Fruits or “seeds” of the _Cannabis_ for commercial
purposes, have been pre-treated to render them non-viable and of use
in bird seed mixtures. At times, some are not rendered sufficiently
sterile and these, in the home refuse, get to dump areas where they
germinate. Plants can reach more than 6 feet in height.

Leaves are slender and divided into five to seven long, narrow, pointed
leaflets each with a saw-tooth margin. They are rough to the touch,
giving one the feeling of sand paper. Smaller flower bracts are quite
resinous and sticky. Flowers and fruits are rather inconspicuous and
scattered along upper portions of the stem. Male and female flowers are
borne on separate plants.

=Poisonous Parts=: The leaves, flowering parts, and resinous secretions
contain the _Cannabis_ (=cannabinol=) narcotic principles. Publicity
over the illegal use of marihuana in its various forms, i.e.,
cigarettes, extracts, pills, etc., make it a curiosity among some
people. It causes cerebral stimulation and excessive amounts produce
hallucinations, delirium, and eventually mental depression. It is a
plant which can cause drug addiction.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians treat for
cerebral depression and other aspects of marihuana poisoning.




JIMSON WEED


[Illustration: Jimson weed, thornapple. Jamestown weed

_Datura stramonium and Datura tatula--SOLANACEAE_]

=Description=: An annual herb, 3 to 4 feet in height, branching stems
with trumpet-shaped white flowers or thorny fruits formed in forks
of the branches. Leaves pointed and with irregular margins. _Datura
tatula_ has purple stems. Both have spiny or prickly fruits which
turn brown when ripe and spill out several small brownish-black,
kidney-shaped seeds. These are also poisonous.

=Poisonous Parts=: Roots, leaves, and seeds which contain alkaloids
(=atropine=, =hyoscyamine=, =scopolamine=, etc.) similar to those
of the deadly nightshade. (See page 8.) Poisoning causes drying
of the mouth, dilation of eye pupils, a very rapid heartbeat, and
central-nervous-system depression. Poisoning can be experienced merely
by handling the leaves. Children sometimes ingest the poisonous seeds
or rub the eyes after touching the leaves and are then poisoned.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Hands should be
washed with soap and water if in contact with the plant. Physicians
treat for =atropine= poisoning.

NOTE: There are other species and varieties of _Datura_ which contain
similar poisonous principles although in lesser amounts. These are
sometimes grown in gardens and greenhouses as ornamentals and are
frequently called angel’s trumpet. They include _Datura innoxia_,
_Datura metel_, _D. metaloides_, _D. arborea_, _D. sanguinia_, etc.
Most have large trumpet-like, white or pinkish-white flowers and some
reach small tree height. Observe same precautions as for jimson weed.




LARKSPUR


[Illustration: Larkspur, delphinium, lark’s claw, knight’s spur

_Delphinium ajacis--RANUNCULACEAE_]

=Description=: The cultivated larkspurs found in New England are
annuals or perennials found in many gardens and produce showy blossoms
with many colors (usually white and violet-purple) growing on erect
flower stalks. Leaves are divided into parts and have the general
outline of a bird’s foot. The small seeds which form in dry follicles
are usually pointed and very irregular in shape. The plant varies in
height from 2 to 4 feet.

=Poisonous Parts=: Leaves and seeds contain toxic alkaloids which when
ingested may affect the nervous system. Tingling sensations of the
mouth may at first be experienced followed by excitation and severe
depression. Animals poisoned by wild larkspurs growing on western
ranges stagger and appear to develop symptoms of tetany. Powdered
larkspur seed is also found in some commercial lice remedies.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat for alkaloid (=ajacine=) poisoning and central
nervous system excitation using short-acting barbiturates because of
subsequent depression.




LILY-OF-THE-VALLEY


[Illustration: Lily-of-the-valley

_Convallaria majalis--LILIACEAE_]

=Description=: A perennial, low-growing herb found in many gardens.
Its attractive small, white, nodding, bell-shaped flowers are fragrant
and used in bouquets. They blossom in spring and summer. Several of
these are found on one side of a slender flowering stalk. Leaves have
parallel vein markings. The fruits appear in late summer and early fall
and are attractive red to orange-red fleshy berries.

=Poisonous Parts=: Roots, leaves, and fruits contain harmful
principles, particularly the glycoside =convallatoxin= which stimulates
the heart muscles similarly to the poisonous principles of the
=foxglove=, =digitalis=. Dizziness and vomiting may occur in 1 to 2
hours if large quantities are eaten.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians should
look for symptoms of digitalis poisoning.




MONKSHOOD


[Illustration: Monkshood, aconite, friar’s cap, Wolfsbane

_Aconitum napellus--RANUNCULACEAE_]

=Description=: There are numerous garden varieties of the monkshood
and it is widely cultivated. It is a perennial herb reaching a height
of about 3 to 4 feet with many divided leaves (like a crow’s foot).
Several violet-blue flowers form on a flowering stalk somewhat like the
delphinium or larkspur, but they are more frequently branched. Each
flower resembles the cap or hood of a medieval monk, hence its common
name. The seeds are tiny and form in dry capsules called follicles.

=Poisonous Parts=: Roots and seeds are most poisonous although the
leaves may be harmful if eaten. The plant contains several poisonous
alkaloids, chiefly =aconitine=, which affects the vital vagus nerve
from the brain causing a slowing of the heart. Other effects of
poisoning include tingling and numbing sensations of the lips and
tongue, irregular pulse, dimness of vision, and respiratory failure.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. The victim should be kept warm, because
of the possibility of circulatory collapse, and placed in a horizontal
position with the feet level with the head. Physicians treat for
=aconitine= alkaloid poisoning. Gastric lavage is preferred to the use
of vomiting agents. Circulatory stimulants may be necessary.




POISON HEMLOCK


[Illustration: Poison-hemlock, poison-parsley

_Conium maculatum--UMBELLIFERAE_]

=Description=: A biennial weed with leaves resembling those of parsley,
dark green, finely divided, with shiny under surfaces. The plant is
found in gardens, fields, and along roadsides, and reaches up to
5 feet, or more, in height. Roots resemble those of the parsnip.
When crushed, both fresh leaves and roots yield a juice with a
characteristic odor of the parsnip. Occasional purplish spots are found
on the hollow stems.

The very small white flowers and grayish-green fruits are borne on
umbrella-like stalks. The tiny fruits upon close examination have
flattened inner surfaces. They also look somewhat like fruits of the
anise, _Pimpinella anisum_.

=Poisonous Parts=: The leaves and fruits during flowering contain an
intensely poisonous principle, =coniine=, and other related alkaloids.
Older roots are also poisonous. Hemlock poisoning first causes a
burning sensation in the mouth and throat followed by muscular
weakness, stupor, and paralysis of the arms and chest. Poisonous
principles act on the spinal cord and brain causing respiratory failure
and death.

The poisonous hemlock juice was employed by ancient Greeks as a means
of capital punishment. Socrates and other celebrities are said to have
met death by this means. Accidental poisoning has occurred in modern
time by mistaking the conium for parsley, parsnip, or anise plants.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage as soon as possible. Treat for alkaloid poisoning and
maintain respiration.




POISON-IVY


[Illustration: Poison-ivy, poison-oak

_Rhus Toxicodendron--ANACARDIACEAE_]

=Description=: Probably no other plant has caused as much suffering and
distress as has the poison-ivy. Poison-ivy, with its characteristic
three-leaf appearance and prominent veins is a woody vine, climbing by
aerial rootlets, or taking a tree-like appearance. Poison-oak is more
of a low, branching shrub. Each leaflet is shaped somewhat like an oak
leaf. Both are found abundantly in woodlands, along fences, walks,
and roadsides. During the fall their showy red and yellow leaves are
frequently mistaken for those of the harmless trees of the woods.

The flowers are yellowish green to white in color and formed in
clusters attached to the stems, or in the stem forks. Fruits are smooth
globular structures, sometimes remaining on the branches until spring.

=Poisonous Parts=: All parts of the plant are poisonous, even the tiny
plant hairs and the smoke from burning the leaves in the fall. This
plant produces a severe dermatitis upon contact causing inflammation,
blistering, and vesicles. As the skin breaks, a liquid exudes and scabs
or crusts form.

The poisonous principle is a reddish-brown, oil-resin containing
=urushiol=. This can produce irritant effects within 24 hours upon
contact with the skin.

=Antidotes=: Numerous remedies are available in pharmacies for
poison-ivy. After contact, or suspected contact, hands, face, and
affected parts should be first washed freely with soapy water using
laundry soap of the alkali kind; lather abundantly. Soaps containing
oil or greasy components should not be used. The poison is soluble in
them and will spread over the skin. In severe or persistent cases of
dermatitis, consult your physician.

Physicians treat itching, severe inflammation, and pain when dermatitis
becomes evident.




POKEWEED


[Illustration: Pokeweed, pigeonberry, American nightshade, ink berries,
scoke

_Phytolacca americana, P. decundra--PHYTOLACCAEAE_]

=Description=: A perennial weed, growing up to about 4 feet, with a
large fleshy root system. Stems are rather thick and leaves have a
light green appearance with prominent ribs (veins) and somewhat curled
edges.

Flowers are greenish-white and borne on a spike in the upper part of
the plant. As the many berries form in clusters in late summer and
early autumn, they are at first green then reddish-purple, later purple
to black, and contain a red juice which has also given the plant the
name red-ink plant. Birds frequently feed on them. The plant is found
in many areas.

=Poisonous Parts=: All parts are poisonous, particularly roots, shoots,
and unripe berries. As the berries ripen, their poisonous properties
lessen but, nevertheless, if many are eaten, they too can be harmful.
Toxic materials include a resinous material and a water-soluble
=saponin=. No alkaloid has as yet been found in pokeweed.

Poisoning generally is slow (1 to 2 hours) after ingesting the plant
but then becomes violent for a long time. Following a period of nausea
and vomiting, drowsiness and impaired vision results. Large amounts can
cause purgation and narcosis followed by coma and death.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat for circulatory and respiratory depression.




WATER HEMLOCK


[Illustration: Water hemlock, cowbane, beaver poison

_Cicuta maculata--UMBELLIFERAE_]

=Description=: A perennial herb reaching to 5 feet, or more, in height
and found in swampy or moist areas. At least eight species of _Cicuta_
are known to be poisonous.

As in the Conium hemlock, the roots of _Circuta_ resemble those of the
parsnip but in addition, frequently possess many tuberous rootlets
which resemble small sweet potatoes. When cut open, these yield a
yellowish aromatic oil. Stems are shiny, hollow, and often have purple
spots. Leaf bases clasp around the stem and the leaves are coarsely
divided into smaller leaflets.

Flowers are white and the small fruits are formed on umbrella-like
stalks. Each fruit possesses several prominent corky ribs.

=Poisonous Parts=: Mostly the roots. However, above ground parts are
also very poisonous and should be avoided. The similarity of roots to
parsnip and sweet potato has led to accidental poisoning in children
and adults. The poison principle is a resin-like substance called
=cicutoxin= and a small quantity of this can cause death.

Poisoning is characterized by severe stomach pain, great mental
excitation and frenzy, vomiting, and frothing at the mouth. The
frothing can be at times bloody. Breathing becomes irregular followed
by convulsions and death in a short time.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
stomach lavage before the contents of the plant are absorbed, treat
for =pierotoxin= poisoning since =cicutoxin= is related to it. This
includes a judicious use of barbiturates and morphine.




YEW


[Illustration: Yew, groundhemlock

_Taxus canadensis, Taxus baccata--TAXACEAE_]

=Description=: The yew, also known as English, Irish, and American yew,
is an evergreen tree or shrub often used as a hedge and found growing
in many gardens or as a decorative plant around homes. Its fruits are
bright red fleshy “berries” borne on the twigs and they frequently
attract children. A large hole sometimes appearing in their ends gives
an appearance of a deep red cup.

=Poisonous Parts=: All parts of the yew are poisonous. Fortunately the
red fruits are the least harmful, although if large quantities are
consumed these too can cause harm. Poisoning may result in nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, circulatory failure, and difficulty
in breathing. The poisonous principle includes =taxine=, an alkaloid
which depresses the heart function.

=Antidote=: Call your doctor. Have patient vomit. Physicians perform
gastric lavage and treat for circulatory failure and alkaloid
poisoning.




POISON CONTROL CENTERS IN NEW ENGLAND


    ===============================================================
      City                Address                   Telephone
    ===============================================================

                        CONNECTICUT

    Bridgeport     Bridgeport Hospital,             EDison 4-0131.
                     267 Grant Street.
                   St. Vincent’s Hospital,          FOrest 6-3601.
                     2820 Main Street.
    Danbury        Danbury Hospital,                744-2300.
                     95 Locust Avenue.
    Hartford       St. Francis Hospital,            249-8281.
                     114 Woodland Street.
                   State Department of Health,[1]   527-6341, ext. 456.
                      State Office Building.
    Middletown     Middlesex Memorial Hospital,     DIamond 7-2531.
                     28 Crescent Street.
    New Britain    New Britain General Hospital,    BAldwin 3-2761.
                     92 Grand Street.
    New Haven      Hospital of St. Raphael,         SPruce 7-6581.
                     1450 Chapel Street.
    Norwalk        Norwalk Hospital,                838-3611, ext. 294.
                     24 Stevens Street.
    Stamford       Stamford Hospital,               327-1234.
                     190 West Broad Street.
    Waterbury      St. Mary’s Hospital,             756-8351.
                     56 Franklin Street.

                          MAINE

    Togus          Veterans Administration          MAyfair 3-8411.
                     Center[2]

                        MASSACHUSETTS

    Boston         Children’s Medical Center,[3]    BEacon 2-2120.
                     300 Longwood Avenue.
    Fall River     Union Hospital, 300 Hanover      OSborne 9-6405 or
                     Street.                          OSborne 4-5789.
    New Bedford    St. Luke’s Hospital,             WYman 6-6711,
                     101 Page Street.                 ext. 275.
    Springfield    Mercy Hospital,                  STate 8-7321.
                     233 Carew Street.
                   Springfield Hospital,            STate 8-4581.
                     759 Chestnut Street.
                   Wesson Memorial Hospital,        STate 5-1241.
                     140 High Street.
    Worcester      Worcester City Hospital,         SWift 9-7094
                     71 Jacques Street.              (Center);
                                                    PLeasant 6-1551
                                                     (Hospital).

                        NEW HAMPSHIRE

    Hanover        Mary Hitchcock Memorial          643-4000.
                     Hospital,[4]
                      2 Maynard Street.

                        RHODE ISLAND

    Kingston       College of Pharmacy,[5]          Day phone: Through
                     University of Rhode Island       Narragansett
                                                      789-9311 X 763,
                                                                 775.
                                                    Night phone:
                                                      789-6237
                                                      783-7152.
    Pawtucket      Memorial Hospital,               PAwtucket 2-6000.
                     Prospect Street.
    Providence     Rhode Island Hospital,           DExter 1-4174.
                     593 Eddy Street.


[1] Informational services only.

[2] Informational services only.

[3] Informational services only.

[4] Informational services only.

[5] Informational services only.




PLANT INDEX


         Page

    _Aconitum napellus_, 15
    _Actaea rubra_, _A. alba_, 2
    _Amanita muscaria_, 1
    _Amanita phalloides_, 1
    Angel’s trumpet, 12
    _Atropa belladonna_, 8

    Baneberry, 2
    Beaver poison, 19
    Bittersweet, 3
    Black cherry, 8
    Bloodroot, 4
    _Boletus_, 1

    _Cannabis sativa_, 11
    Castor bean, 5
    Castor-oil-plant, 5
    Christmas rose, 6
    _Cicuta maculata_, 19
    _Clitocybe illudens_, 1
    _Conium maculatum_, 16
    _Convallaria majalis_, 14
    _Coprinus comatus_, 1
    Cowbane, 19

    _Daphne mezereum_, 7
    _Datura stramonium_, _D. tatula_, 12
    Death cup, mushroom, 1
    _Delphinium ajacis_, 13
    _Digitalis purpurea_, 9

    Fly agaric, 1
    Foxglove, 9
    Friar’s cap, 15

    Hellebore, black, 6
    Hellebore, false or green, 10
    _Helleborus niger_, 6
    Hemlock, ground, 20
    Hemlock, poison, 16
    Hemlock, water, 19

    Indian hemp, 11
    Indian poke, 10
    Ink berries, 18

    Jack-o’-lantern, mushroom, 1
    Jamestown weed, 12
    Jimson weed, 12

    Knight’s spur, 13

    Lark’s claw, 13
    Larkspur, 13
    Lily-of-the-valley, 14

    Marihuana, Marijuana, 11
    Monkshood, 15
    Mushroom, 1

    Nightshade, American, 18
    Nightshade, black, blue, woody, 3
    Nightshade, deadly, 8

    Palma christi, 5
    _Phytolacca americana_, _P. decandra_, 18
    Pigeonberry, 18
    Poisonberry, 3
    Poison-ivy or oak, 17
    Poison-parsley, 16
    Pokeweed, 18

    Red-ink plant, 18
    _Rhus toxicodendron_, 17
    _Ricinus communis_, 5
    _Russula_, 1

    _Sanguinaria canadensis_, 4
    Scoke, 18
    Shaggy mane, mushroom, 1
    Snakeberry, 2
    _Solanum dulcamara_, _S. nigrum_, 3
    Spurge olive, 7

    _Taxus baccata_, _T. canadensis_, 20
    Thornapple, 12

    _Veratrum viride_, 10

    Water hemlock, 19
    Wolfsbane, 15

    Yew, 20




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMON POISONOUS PLANTS OF NEW ENGLAND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


