The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pistis Sophia
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pistis Sophia

Translator: G. Horner

Author of introduction, etc.: Francis Legge

Release date: June 10, 2025 [eBook #76266]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1924

Credits: David King and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net. (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTIS SOPHIA ***


                             Pistis Sophia




                             PISTIS SOPHIA

         LITERALLY TRANSLATED FROM THE COPTIC BY GEORGE HORNER

                        WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
                            F. LEGGE, F.S.A.

                                 LONDON

                         SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
                          CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE

                NEW YORK AND TORONTO: THE MACMILLAN CO.

                       _Printed in Great Britain_

                                  1924




                                PREFACE


The history of Gnosticism, which may be defined as the belief that man’s
place in the next world is determined by the knowledge of it that he
acquires in this, goes back probably to the very dawn of our
civilisation; but its importance for most of us is mainly centred round
the first three centuries of our Era. Not even Christianity, as
Amélineau quotes from Pascal, was able at once to make an angel out of a
beast; and no sooner did it emerge from its first home in Judæa into the
broader light of the Roman Empire than there sprang up within it many
more or less secret schools which sought to combine the truths of the
new religion with some of the most pernicious superstitions of the old.
Until lately, however, our knowledge of the teaching of these
post-Christian Gnostics has been limited to the statements of their
opponents. Before the close of the second century, Irenaeus and
Tertullian had written against them; and, some two hundred years later,
Epiphanius, then Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, repeated their
accusations in his huge _Panarion_, with some doubtful additions of his
own in a form which at least has the merit of restoring for us a great
part of the lost Greek text of Irenaeus. These writers were avowed
heresy-hunters, keenly alive to the danger to Christianity in the
doctrines which they exposed, and therefore necessarily inclined to
believe the worst that could be said against them. But granting the
Fathers’ entire good faith in the matter—and that of Irenaeus and
Tertullian at least is undoubted—there was one cogent reason why their
account of Gnostic teaching had to be received with suspicion. The
leaders of the Gnostics did not teach openly but in secret and by a
method of initiation and allegory which was directly copied from the
Mysteries then current in the Pagan world; and such of their writings as
fell into the hands of the Catholics were therefore not likely to give
any clear view of their doctrine without prolonged study and comparison.
Hence the heresiologists, while dwelling upon minor points which seemed
strange and absurd to those who had not the key to their meaning,
exaggerated the differences between the different teachers and ignored
for the most part the many features of their teaching which they had in
common. In the words of one who certainly had no leaning towards the
error which the Fathers belabour: “... they took minor and unimportant
details and magnified them, and treated them as the essentials of a
system or systems.... The essential principles were largely the same
throughout, the difference was chiefly in regard to details. It is this
conduct on the part of the Fathers that gives us such a distorted and
often ridiculous view of Gnosticism.”[1]

It is true that Clement of Alexandria and his friend Origen, writing in
the birthplace of post-Christian Gnosticism, afford us a more tolerant
and philosophical idea of Gnostical teaching, and have even preserved
for us some precious extracts from the writings of the school of
Valentinus, the great leader—who at one time nearly attained to the
Primacy of the Catholic Church; but save for this, it was not until the
middle of the nineteenth century that we had any chance of studying
Gnosticism from the works of its adherents. The discovery in 1840 of an
almost complete copy of Hippolytus’ _Philosophumena_ gave us for the
first time sufficient excerpts from those writings to enable us to judge
of their style and form; and the publication in 1851 of Schwartze’s text
of the _Pistis Sophia_ first made it known to the world of scholars that
there were in the Museums of London and Oxford Coptic MSS. undoubtedly
written by Gnostics for Gnostics. It is the longer and more important of
these which forms the subject of the following pages.

The value of our text for the study of the early days of Christianity
can hardly be overrated. If I am right in my conclusions, the main part
of the documents which it contains are actually from the school of
Valentinus, the heresiarch just mentioned who flourished in the reign of
Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, and one of them was certainly written before
the Fourth Gospel was known to the Christian communities of the East.
Hence it is to be placed among the earliest Christian writings, and
follows immediately in point of date on the Synoptics and other writings
of the Apostolic Age. Both this and the other documents in the MS. show
also how these heretical schools used to wring and twist Scripture for
their purpose, how closely their teaching was linked with the Egyptian
and other religions of the pre-Christian world, and how surely, in spite
of some good and even noble elements, it was bound to end as they did in
what the late Professor Tylor styled with justice “one of the most
pernicious delusions which ever vexed mankind, the belief in magic.” As
I am dealing with this at more length in the Introduction, I will say
nothing further about it here; but I may point out that the outlandish
names and words in the later documents of our text have not yet been
fully elucidated, and that it is probable that many of its episodes are
intended to bear an allegorical interpretation. The use of words in a
double sense is also one of the many means adopted by the writers in
order to conceal their meaning from the profane, and this should be
constantly borne in mind by the reader.

F. L.

Footnote 1:

  A. C. McGiffert, _Prolegomena to Church History of Eusebius in Schaff
  and Wace_. Select Library of Nicene and post-Nicene Fathers. I. p.
  179, n. 17.

The literal translation follows the order of the words as far as
possible, and with common verbs very seldom uses the passive form for
which the Coptic employs the third person plural, and occasionally
requires the preposition denoting the agent. There are two words for
“and,” one meaning addition and the other being the common preposition
“with.” As a general rule the meaning “with” is kept, and very rarely in
the translation “together” precedes “with” to show that it is not “and.”
“And,” “with” are often used meaning only “and.” Greek ἀλλά and δέ have
not been distinguished, and all Greek words can be found printed within
brackets in Dr. Schmidt’s German translation (Leipzig, 1905). The
indefinitive or frequentative tense has been translated by “wont to,”
with expression of “wont” repeated when the Coptic repeats this
expression. The preposition “in” is often translated “from” when the
sense requires the change.

Another translation made by Mr. Legge from my literal translation was
carefully annotated by him, and many difficulties of terms and
expression were explained. After the death of Mr. Legge it was decided
by the Committee of S.P.C.K. to refrain from publishing this great
addition to the work, and to print as much of Mr. Legge’s Introduction
as would supply explanations required.

G. H.


                             ABBREVIATIONS


(M.) = margin.

(MS.) = the manuscript.

The numbers in square brackets give the pages of the manuscript.




                                CONTENTS


PREFACE ... iii

INTRODUCTION ... vii

1. The MS. and its History ... vii

2. The Documents in the MS. ... xiv

3. The Purpose and Composition of the MS. xxviii

4. The Authorship and Date of the Documents ... xxxviii

THE FIRST DOCUMENT ... 1

THE SECOND DOCUMENT ... 63

THE THIRD DOCUMENT ... 127

THE FOURTH DOCUMENT ... 180

THE FIFTH DOCUMENT ... 193

INDEX OF PSALMS AND ODES ... 201

GENERAL INDEX ... 203




                              INTRODUCTION


                   1. THE MANUSCRIPT AND ITS HISTORY


The Manuscript known as the _Pistis Sophia_ and now in the British
Museum was bought by the authorities in 1785 for the sum of ten guineas
at the sale of the library of the antiquary, Dr. Anthony Askew. How it
came into Dr. Askew’s possession is not accurately known. It is written
throughout in Coptic of the dialect of the Sahid or Upper Egypt, and is
on vellum in an excellent state of preservation. In appearance it
singularly resembles a modern book, being written on small quarto leaves
measuring 8⅜ inches by 6½, in double columns on both sides of the skins.
It contains 174 leaves in all, and the pages are numbered consecutively
in Coptic[2] letters, at first on one side of the page only, but later
on both sides. We are therefore able to establish that there are no
leaves missing from the body of the MS. since its pagination, until we
come to the 337th page (p. 379 of Schwartze’s printed text),[3] after
which four leaves are wanting, the next page in the volume being
numbered 344. On the 114th page (p. 125 of Schwartze), the scribe had
left the last two-thirds of the page blank, and this was filled at some
later time by the cryptogram given on p. 62, _infra_, in a different
hand and in blacker ink than the foregoing part of the MS. The original
writing is resumed on p. 115, but above the point at which the other
pages begin is written:

[Illustration: Coptic Script.]

“The Second Tome of the Pistis Sophia,” from which the whole MS. has
taken the title by which it is known. At the foot of the first column of
the front or _recto_ of p. 233 (p. 252 of Schwartze), there is also
written after a line of ornament,

[Illustration: Coptic Script.]

“A part of the Books of the Saviour,” and the same words (omitting one
word) occur at the foot of the first column of the back or _verso_ of p.
317 (p. 357 of Schwartze). On the last leaf in the book has been left a
blank, which some later writer has used for a sentence about the
Apostles going to the four quarters of the world to preach the Gospel,
which has no apparent connection with our text.[4] Two lines at the
foot, now become so faint as to be illegible, may have contained the
names of the scribes or owners of the MS.

Apart from this incidental use of the parchment on which it is written,
all who have studied the MS. are of opinion that it is the work of more
than one scribe. Uncial letters are used throughout, and for the first
score or so of pages are so carefully and elegantly formed as to compare
not unfavourably with those of the calligraphically perfect _Codex
Alexandrinus_, also on exhibition in the British Museum. According to
Mr. Crum, whose acquaintance with nearly every Coptic MS. yet brought to
light is unrivalled, the second hand begins at the twenty-second page,
after which the writing not only becomes more careless and the letters
less well formed, but the method of correction for misspelt or omitted
words alters. This second hand continues, according to the same
authority, up to p. 210, when the first hand resumes and continues up to
p. 386, but Mr. Crum says nothing as to the writing of the few remaining
pages. Dr. Carl Schmidt of Berlin, whose work in connection with the MS.
will be noticed at length later, agrees in the main with this, and would
apparently put the termination of the second scribe’s task at p. 195 of
the manuscript, and he says that the first scribe here resumes and
continues to the end. A note, however, taken by the present writer on
his first inspection of the MS. thirty years ago, records that while the
writing of the Second Document, which begins at p. 125, on the whole
resembles the writing of the preceding pages, yet a change takes place
on the _verso_ of p. 210 which indicates yet a third hand, and this is
confirmed by his later scrutiny for the purpose of this edition.[5] Save
for this, there is no serious doubt as to the number of hands which have
worked on the MS.; and Mr. Crum, in confirming Dr. Schmidt’s view that
the alternative work of the scribes shows that the whole of the MS. must
have been written at one time, adds that the corrections of the work of
the second scribe seem to be in the hand-writing of the first.[6] This
is of importance when we come to consider the purpose with which the MS.
was made.

The date at which the MS. was written is the subject of a much greater
difference of opinion. Woide, who was the first to call attention to it,
thought that this was at latest the fourth century, the Abbé Hyvernat
the seventh,[7] Amélineau—whose work upon it will presently be
noticed—the ninth or tenth, and Dr. Schmidt the fifth. All these
conclusions were apparently arrived at on paleographic grounds and I do
not feel myself qualified to discuss them; but the dates of the
different documents from which the MS. was copied will be dealt with
later. Nearly all those who have studied it are of opinion that these
documents were originally written in Greek, and that our MS. is
therefore only a translation.[8]

After its purchase by the Museum, the MS. remained unnoticed until
Woide, then minister at the German Chapel at St. James’ Palace and
subsequently the editor of the _Codex Alexandrinus_, called attention to
it in Cramer’s Beiträge for 1778. Later, he appears to have copied out
the whole MS., to which he refers in his _Appendix to the Alexandrian
Codex_ in 1799. The extracts that he there gave from it were sufficient
to enable the Danish Bishop Münter to publish in 1812 the five “Odes of
Solomon” quoted in it, of which no other copy was known until Dr. Rendel
Harris’ recent discovery of them in a Syriac MS. The learned
Academician, Dulaurier, when on a visit to England, in 1838, also made a
copy of our MS., and proposed to publish it with a French translation,
but died before doing so; and the MS. would probably have remained
unknown even to scholars but for the pains of Maurice George Schwartze,
a young German, who was sent over here in 1848 by the generosity of the
King of Prussia, to study such of our MSS. as seemed to him valuable.
Schwartze completed a fairly accurate copy of the text, and also
translated it into Latin retaining untranslated the Greek words which
occur on every page; but he too died before the result of his labours
could be printed, and the task of editing and correcting his translation
fell upon his friend Petermann, who published both Schwartze’s Coptic
text and his Latin (and Greek) translation in 1853. Unfortunately,
Petermann, though a competent Coptic scholar for his time, did not feel
called upon to contribute anything more than textual criticism to his
predecessor’s work.[9] Schwartze’s text was therefore published without
introduction or notes other than corrections of mistranslated words and
suggestions for alternative readings; and this prevented the book from
obtaining such general notice as was given to the _Philosophumena_ of
Hippolytus which appeared at nearly the same time. Bunsen, who had begun
the controversy between Catholic and Protestant scholars which sprang up
round Hippolytus’ work,[10] poured contempt upon the _Pistis Sophia_ as
“a most worthless offshoot of the Marcosian heresy,” and, although
Köstlin contributed a long discussion of the work to a Tübingen
theological annual in 1854,[11] it remained practically unknown to
English readers for more than thirty years.[12]

At length in 1887, Lipsius published a detailed study of it in Smith and
Wace’s _Dictionary of Christian Biography_, in which full use was made
of Köstlin’s analysis, and he agreed with that writer in assigning to it
an Ophite origin, although he also drew attention to certain
peculiarities which appeared to him Manichæan. In the same year there
also appeared the second edition of C. W. King’s _Gnostics and their
Remains_, which gave for the first time to English readers translations
of a great part of the work. The late Mr. King, then Senior Fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge, had hitherto been known chiefly as a
collector of ancient gems on which he had published many useful volumes,
and he proposed, like his predecessors, to publish a full translation of
the _Pistis Sophia_. At his death such a translation was found among his
papers; but the failure of his eyesight, which had taken place even
before the issue of the second edition of his _Gnostics_, had left it in
such a condition that his executors decided against giving it to the
public. It was confessedly made from Schwartze’s Græco-Latin version
only; but Mr. King did much to attract public notice to the _Pistis
Sophia_ by the excellent and dignified English in which his extracts
from it were clothed, and the erudition which he brought to bear upon
points like the less-known religions of the Roman Empire and the
barbarous names and words left entirely unexplained in Schwartze’s
version. He also asserted in his Preface, with much show of reason, that
it was the statements made by him in his first edition that led Madame
Blavatsky, whom he describes as “the Sibyl of Esoteric Buddhism,” to
include the relics of Gnosticism among the foundations of what he refers
to as “her new religion.”

Before this hint was taken, the MS. again received attention from a
scholar in many respects well fitted to deal with it. M. Amélineau, who
had for many years devoted himself to the study of Coptic religious
texts, and had also a very considerable working knowledge of Egyptology,
published in the same year of 1887, in the _Annales du Musée Guimet_ an
“Essai sur le Gnosticisme Egyptien,” in which he dealt at great length
with the _Pistis Sophia_, and compared it for the first time to the
_Papyrus Bruce_ of the Bodleian Library at Oxford which had hitherto
defied interpretation. Both these works he assigned to the school of
Valentinus, the heresiarch whom the Ante-Nicene Fathers considered the
most dangerous enemy of the Catholic Church, and he followed this up in
1891 by publishing in the _Notices et Extraits_ of the Académie des
Inscriptions, the text and translation into French of the Oxford
Papyrus. These two publications were both made at the expense of the
French Government and were therefore produced in a style worthy of the
subject, and with all the notes, references, and illustrations that they
seemed to demand. But the _Pistis Sophia_ remained untouched by M.
Amélineau save for the excerpts from it to be found in his _Essai_,
until in 1895 he astonished the learned world by publishing in a series
called “_Les Classiques de l’Occulte_,” a low-priced translation into
French of the whole _Pistis Sophia_ with a comparatively brief
introduction devoted almost entirely to the vindication of the opinion
formerly advanced by him as to its authorship. M. Amélineau will be
remembered by many as the first explorer of the Protodynastic Tombs at
Abydos which entirely revolutionised all our ideas of early Egyptian
history; and it was probably only the difficulties under which he
laboured all his life which prevented him from publishing the results of
this—his first and only excavation—in a manner which would have gained
him the full credit of his really epoch-making discovery.[13] It was
doubtless the same difficulties which compelled him to produce his
translation of the _Pistis Sophia_ in the form in which he did; and
although he states in his Introduction that he inspected the MS. at the
British Museum during a visit to London shortly before his translation
appeared, it is plain that this translation was made from Schwartze’s
text only, that the work was executed throughout in so hasty a fashion
as to leave nearly all the faults of Schwartze’s version uncorrected,
and that it passes by most of the difficulties presented by the MS.
without attempt at solution. It was in consequence very severely
criticised first by Dr. Schmidt, and then by Dr. Andersson, the editor
of the Swedish Egyptological periodical, _Sphinx_, and most of these
criticisms appear unfortunately to be well founded.

Such as it was, however, it gave rise to the only complete English
translation of our MS. which has yet appeared in print. Mr. G. R. S.
Mead, then secretary of the Theosophical Society, the year after the
appearance of Amélineau’s French translation, published with the
Theosophical Publishing Company an English translation of the _Pistis
Sophia_, which on its title-page is expressed to be made from
“Schwartze’s Latin Version ... checked by Amélineau’s French Version.”
Mr. Mead laid no claims to proficiency in Coptic, and had already
published more than half his work in a Theosophical magazine before
Amélineau’s version saw the light. His attitude towards the original may
be guessed by the statement in his Preface that the comprehensive
treatment of Gnosticism “requires not only a writer who at least
believes in the possibilities of magic, but also a mystic or at least a
person who is in sympathy with mysticism,” and by the fact that he had
already attempted to explain the Cabalistic Cryptogram on p. 125 by
Sanskrit words. He further states in his Introduction that he proposes
to publish a commentary on the whole book, his Introduction dealing only
with the date and authorship; but up to the present this has not
appeared. It is also evident that in his translation from Schwartze’s
Latin version he has omitted in more than one instance to notice
Petermann’s emendations, which in some cases completely change the
meaning of the passage; and altogether it may be said that the most
valuable part of his work is the short bibliography appended, in which
he gives fairly long extracts from the authors whom he quotes.

The way was therefore still left open for a translation of the _Pistis
Sophia_ by competent hands, and the appearance of Dr. Schmidt’s work in
1905 at first sight gave hopes that this was at last accomplished. The
book, which bears the somewhat clumsy title of _Koptisch-Gnostischen
Schriften, Ersten Buch_ only, is one of the excellent series of
translations of Christian writers of the first three centuries published
by the Church Fathers Committee of the Royal Prussian Academy of
Science, and contains a full German translation of both the _Pistis
Sophia_ and the _Bruce Papyrus_. Dr. Schmidt is a scholar whose
competence in the Coptic language is probably only surpassed by that of
Mr. Crum, he has all his’ countrymen’s taste for philology and grammar,
and his acquaintance with the Christian literature of the early
centuries of our Era is profound. It is not therefore to be wondered at
that his translation of our text is from the etymological point of view
as nearly perfect as our present knowledge of Coptic—still limited by
the paucity of MSS. other than Biblical—allows it to be, and that very
little complaint can be made against it on the score of verbal accuracy.
The addition to it of a translation of the _Bruce Papyrus_ is also most
convenient for purposes of reference; but perhaps by reason of this, Dr.
Schmidt’s notes on his translation of the British Museum MS. are
confined to Scripture references and verbal matters only, while in his
Introduction he only gives seventeen pages to consideration of its
history, writing, language, composition, source, and date. This cursory
treatment is doubtless in part due to his having in the text and
translation of the _Bruce Papyrus_, published by him in 1892 in Harnack
and Gebhardt’s well-known series of “_Texte und Untersuchungen_,”
already given his views on these matters, most of which he reiterates in
the Introduction last mentioned. These views may be briefly stated as
follows:

    1. The _Pistis Sophia_ is not Valentinian, but comes from an obscure
    sect of what he calls Barbelo-Gnostics, known as Severiani.

    2. Its title should not be _Pistis Sophia_ but Τεύχη τοῦ Σωτῆρος.

    3. While admitting that the whole work is a
    “_Miszellenhandschrift_,” he thinks that the Fourth Document is the
    oldest in the collection and, as it were, the root of the other
    three, which in their turn form a connected whole.

Dr. Schmidt’s fellow-countrymen Drs. Lichtenhau and Preuschen have
already attacked some of these positions in the _Zeitschrift für
wissenschaftliche Theologie_[14] and elsewhere, and after mature
consideration, the present writer feels himself compelled to dissent
from all three. The reasons for doing so will be best given when we come
to consider the composition and authorship of the MS. Before leaving
this branch of the subject, however, it may be said that beside the work
of Köstlin, Lipsius, and Dr. Schmidt, the _Pistis Sophia_ has been
treated of at some length in Father Giraud’s _Ophitus_ (1884), and in a
special work by Prof. Harnack in the _Texte und Untersuchungen_ above
mentioned (1891). More recently, it has also been dealt with by M.
Eugène de Faye in his _Introduction à l’Etude du Gnosticisme_ (1903) and
his _Gnostiques et Gnosticisme_ (1913), by Dr. James Moffat in his
article under its name in Hastings’ _Encyclopædia of Religion and
Ethics_, and by the present writer in his _Forerunners and Rivals of
Christianity_ (1915).[15] The late Sir Gaston Maspero and Prof. Lieblein
(of Christiania) have also stated their conviction that it could only
have been written by persons intimately acquainted with the old Egyptian
religion, on which point none could speak with greater authority than
they.[16]


                      2. THE DOCUMENTS IN THE MS.


As has been said above, Dr. Schmidt speaks of our text as a miscellany,
and the phrase by no means overstates the case. It contains indeed no
less than six documents, only the two first of which are directly
connected or can be taken as necessarily intended to be read
consecutively. The second of these breaks off in the middle of a
conversation, the third has neither beginning nor end. The opening
sentence of the fourth implies that it is the continuation of a
conversation which cannot be certainly identified with any that has gone
before, and the same document concludes with a sentence which does not
seem likely to be the end of the extract. The fifth begins with what is
clearly a fresh narrative without reference to anything that has
preceded it and must have ended in the _lacuna_ caused by the missing
pages, while the sixth, whose beginning has been lost in the same
_lacuna_, ends in the middle of a phrase. Of these six documents, the
third only covers one and a half pages of the MS. and is manifestly a
fragment of some document which has somehow strayed over into this
place; but as it appears directly after the words: “A Part of the Books
of the Saviour,” I hesitate to say that it never formed part of any of
the other documents in the text, and I shall therefore speak of it
hereafter as “The Interpolated Fragment” merely. Only the two first of
the six, also, can claim to be included under the title of the _Pistis
Sophia_, but they are by far the largest and take up between them more
than half the volume. This arrangement follows strictly the rule of
stichometry observed by writers of the period, which prescribes that the
longest document shall come first. Thus in this translation:—

                  Document       Begin page   End page
                  1st                    63        126
                  2nd                    63        126
                  Interpolated          127        128
                  3rd                   128        179
                  4th                   180        192
                  5th                   193        199

Taking these in this order, we will summarise them as briefly as
possible.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The FIRST DOCUMENT, then, tells how Jesus spent twelve years after the
Resurrection teaching His disciples the mysteries of the heavenly
“places,”[17] but that their instruction did not extend beyond this
visible, or more accurately, this sensible, universe which corresponds,
it would seem, to the Third Chorema or Space of the “First Mystery” or
God Manifest, of Whom Jesus is the Incarnation. This Chorema is under
the governance of a Power called the First Law, under whom are eleven
others called the Five Marks, the Great Light, and the Five Parastatai
or Helpers; and all these twelve came from still higher states of being
from which, we are told later, they voluntarily descended to take part
in the scheme of salvation. When the First Document opens, however,
Jesus has only told His disciples of the existence of those Powers, but
has not revealed to them their origin, function, or arrangement; and all
the action in this Document passes in the lower part of this Chorema
which is called the Kerasmos or Confusion, because in it Light is
mingled with Matter. The highest part of the Kerasmos is the Treasure
house where the Light as it is won from Matter is stored up; and then
come a great number of inferior Places inhabited by Powers concerned
with the administration of our universe’s more material parts,
especially the heavenly bodies or sun, moon, and stars. Below these
again is our earth with its firmament or “Height,” and outside this
Chaos or the dark and unformed mass of Matter which has received no
Light.[18]

While Jesus is sitting with His disciples on the Mount of Olives, the
Document goes on to say, there descends upon Him a “Great Power of
Light,” which is in fact the “vesture” or Heavenly Nature which He had
left in the Limit or Lower Boundary of the upper worlds on His descent
to earth in “the shape of Gabriel.” This vesture enables Him to rise to
the Boundary and there assume two other vestures which are necessary for
the continuation of the journey to the two transcendental “Spaces” which
are higher than this. In this first vesture, also, He finds five
mysterious words written which are here interpreted as an address from
the higher powers hailing Him as the First Mystery, and the catalogue of
names which follows enables us to form a fairly correct idea of the
arrangement of this Chorema as well as of the higher ones which are
known as the “Spaces” of the First Mystery and of the “Ineffable” or
Supreme Unmanifested God respectively.[19]

On assuming this vesture, Jesus flies into the Height, but returns the
next day clad in three vestures of dazzling light, and tells His
disciples how He provided for the births of Himself and them by casting
into their respective mothers Powers from the higher parts of the
Kerasmos instead of the material souls which they would otherwise have
received from the Rulers of the stars. In like manner also, He tells how
He caused the soul of Elijah to become incarnate in the body of John the
Baptist. He then goes on to describe His journey upward through the
First Sphere directly above the firmament, the Second Sphere called
Destiny, and the Twelve Æons,[20] which appear to be the signs of the
Zodiac. The Kings or Tyrants of these last rebel against Him, and He
punishes them by taking away part of their power and altering their
course, so that mankind will no longer be able to foretell the future by
means of the astrology and magic taught them by the sinning angels.
Leaving their Place, He ascends to the thirteenth Æon, and finds below
it Pistis Sophia, the heroine of the book. She is, it appears, one of
the twenty-four Unseen or Invisible Ones put forth in pairs by the head
of the Left Hand or most material part of the Kerasmos, and had left her
spouse and her work to pursue a light which she saw below her and which
she thought would enable her to mount to the Treasure-house. This light,
however, was a snare sent into Chaos by one of the material Powers
immediately above her; and on her advancing to seize it, she was set
upon by several material Powers that her persecutor had put forth and
deprived of her own light, so that she could not return to her own Place
in the thirteenth Æon.

In this plight, she sings hymns of penitence to the “Light of Lights” or
Light of the Treasure-house, and these are all recited at full length by
Jesus to His disciples, who identify them at His instance with passages
from the Canonical Psalms, and from those “Odes of Solomon” which are
mentioned above. These Penitences are twelve in number, and in the
course of their recital and the conversation that takes place on them,
we learn something more about the arrangement of the different worlds
and the process of the redemption of Light from Matter which it is
apparently the object of the book to describe. Finally, after this tenth
“Penitence,” Jesus, who has throughout her affliction procured for
Pistis Sophia certain alleviations in her misery, calls into existence
several new Powers who go into Chaos to her assistance and form a crown
of light to her head, so that her tormentors dare not come near to her.

With this the Document ends, and it is manifest from the appearance of
the MS. that the scribes who wrote it, at this point thought that they
had come to the end of their task and did not then expect to carry it
further.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The SECOND DOCUMENT begins with the caption “The Second Tome of Pistis
Sophia” in a handwriting which Mr. Crum has no hesitation in declaring
to be the same as that of the first seventy pages of the Document.
Whereas the First Document ends, however, with Jesus’ approval of Mary
Magdalene’s interpretation of the quotation from the Psalms about Mercy
and Truth kissing each other, the Second Document opens with another
interpretation of the same text offered by John. Coupled with the
caption given above, this seems sufficient to show that the Second
Document was intended to be taken for a continuation of the First,
although this by no means proves that they were written at the same time
or by the same author. The Document goes on to elaborate the story of
the rescue of Pistis Sophia, and tells with great detail how Gabriel and
Michael being summoned for that purpose go to her assistance. This
provokes a fresh display of anger on the part of the “Self-willed God”
who is Pistis Sophia’s chief persecutor, and the powers of Chaos make a
fresh assault upon her. On this, Jesus orders Gabriel and Michael to
bear her on their hands out of Chaos, while He Himself descends thither,
smites her tormentors, and renders them powerless to follow her. He then
leads her into the “Place below the thirteenth Æon” where He finds her
on His ascension from the Mount of Olives, and warns her that she will
again be tormented when the Gate of the Treasure-house is set open. This
apparently happens just before Jesus’ ascension in the vesture of light,
and He then routs her enemies for the last time and restores her to her
original Place in the thirteenth Æon, where she sings a final song of
praise to Him for the wonders which He has wrought for her “in the world
of men.”

This ends the episode of Pistis Sophia, who is not again mentioned until
we come to the Fourth Document. The author now turns to what was
probably the main reason for attempting the continuation of the First
Document, which is the questioning of Mary Magdalene and the other
disciples upon the order and use of the Heavenly Places, and the
Saviour’s replies thereto.[21] Beginning with the answer to Mary’s
question as to the nature of the twenty-four Unseen Ones of whom Pistis
Sophia was one, the Saviour promises Himself to lead the disciples
through all the Upper worlds right up to that of the Ineffable One
Himself, each successive world and even Place being, it is said, so
greatly superior in size and in light to the lower ones, that they will
appear like grains of dust when viewed from it. He also tells them that
the beatitudes in store for them will be progressive, beginning with the
Millenium which will ensue when the number of perfect souls is
accomplished, the Kerasmos purified and “caught up,” and the Twelve
Disciples established with Jesus as joint Kings reigning over the
blessed in the Last Parastates or Helper—a name given to the world which
is placed in our universe immediately over the Treasure-house. Here they
will apparently receive further instruction and be given “mysteries”
which will enable them to mount to the upper universes before, it is
expressly said, the “Projections” or emanations of the Treasure-house
who are concerned with the administration of the scheme of salvation.
The details of this scheme are extremely complicated, the Saviour
several times promising to explain further in a subsequent revelation
constantly referred to as “the Distribution of the Universe.”

But its final aim is indicated without ambiguity. Jesus, who as we have
seen was hailed in the First Document as the First Mystery in the
address of the Spirits written on the vesture of light sent to Him on
the Mount of Olives, is throughout this part of the Second Document
always spoken of by that title; and we are told that those who receive
the highest mystery of all, called the “Mystery of the Ineffable One,”
will be absorbed into His being. “That Man is I, and I am that Man,” are
the words in which this announcement is made, and the full meaning of
the phrase can be appreciated by other sentences in the narrative which
go to show that this First Mystery is the first Being to come forth from
the Ineffable One, and is regarded as a “Twin Mystery” or Father and
Son, the first-named or “First Mystery looking inwards” being alone
capable of remaining in contemplation of the greatness of the Ineffable
One, while the Son or “First Mystery looking outwards” is sent to earth
in the Person of Jesus Himself.[22]

The way to obtain this elevation in the scale of being is, perhaps, left
purposely obscure, but it can apparently be gained by certain
initiations or mysteries, which like the Mysteries of Eleusis will give
the initiate the knowledge of the universe, how it came to be, and how
it will end. These also are progressive and culminate in the “One Word
of the Ineffable One,” the effect of which is so tremendous that if it
be spoken over the dying, or for the dead, whether partly initiate or
wholly uninitiate, it will expedite his passage to the heaven to which
his initiation entitles him, or, in the case of one wholly uninitiate,
will ensure his reincarnation in a “righteous” body, which will “find
the God of Truth and the exalted mysteries, and will inherit them and
the Light for ever and ever.”[23] The way to this and to the Mysteries
in general is “the renunciation of the whole world and all the matter
therein.”

Beside this, however, there are lesser mysteries which will admit the
faithful recipient to heaven and privileges less exalted indeed than
that last described, but will yet confer on him great beatitude after
death. These, known collectively as the “Mysteries of the third Space,”
involve a “Defence” a “Password” and a “Symbol” which have to be handed
in by the dead in his flight upward so as to procure him uninterrupted
passage to the heaven of which he has received the mystery. Of these, it
is said that the disciples have no need, because nothing of the sort is
required by the recipients of the higher mysteries, but Jesus adds that
they are to be found in “the two great Books of Jeu” which “Enoch wrote
when I spake with him out of the Tree of Knowledge and the Tree of Life
in the Paradise of Adam.”[24] In spite of these assurances, Andrew
provokes the Saviour by asking how “men of this world” can be expected
to adventure after death upon the long and dangerous journey among all
the Great Powers of the Treasurehouse and their subordinates, and the
Saviour reminds him in reply that they and He are all of the same
origin, being made from “the same mass and the same matter and the same
substance” and are all “out of the same Confusion.”[25] On this, the
other disciples successfully implore Jesus to pardon Andrew, and this
Document ends in the middle of a sentence in which He declares that He
has been sent for the remission of sins.

Before leaving this Document, it must be noted that in it there appear
long rhetorical statements in a form which has no parallel in the other
documents of our text. They repeat the same phrase with the variation of
two or three words at each repetition, the object being apparently to
give the hearer an idea which he could not otherwise obtain—except,
perhaps, by a picture or diagram[26] of the different hierarchies of
Powers or arrangement of Places which the speaker is describing. Thus in
one place, Jesus, after speaking of the “Mystery of the Ineffable One,”
goes on to declare that “that Mystery knoweth why the Darkness came to
be and why the Light,” and then after going through a string of similar
antitheses in which the Treasurehouse is contrasted with Chaos, murder
with the quickening of souls, Death with Life and all sorts of natural
phenomena with one another, continues with “That Mystery knoweth why the
Triple Powers came to be and why the Unseen Ones,” and so on through an
incredible number of Spirits and Powers until He at last reaches the
First Emanation of the Ineffable One which is in fact Himself. This is
amplified when He says later that “That Mystery knoweth” why these
higher Powers “despoiled” themselves (or stripped themselves of their
exalted natures), when a great part of the Places and Powers of the
highest worlds are enumerated all over again. Not long after this, He
has occasion to speak of the man who receives this same Mystery of the
Ineffable One, when He says that “He is a man in the world, but he
excelleth all the Angels and is more excellent than them all,” and then
repeats the same phrase with regard to Archangels, Unseen Ones, Triple
Powers, and all the Projections of the Treasurehouse and its
dependencies for the third time.[27] This kind of rhapsody does not seem
to be cast into any rhythmical form, yet seems to be intended for
repetition by word of mouth rather than by writing. The only likeness
that I can find to this practice is in one of the Chapters of the _Book
of the Dead_, where all the different parts of the Hall of Two Truths
demand to be told their names, or those in the _Book of Gates_ where the
parts of the Bark of Ra make the like demand. It therefore seems to be a
purely Egyptian feature and may be connected with the fact that the
early Egyptian Church, like the colleges formed for the worship of gods
like Amen in earlier times, had “prophets,” who seem to have occupied a
position in the Church next after the bishop.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The INTERPOLATED FRAGMENT which occupies most of the first leaf of the
Third Document is entirely taken up with the relation of the Ineffable
one to His “members”; but is too short and disconnected to give us much
information on the subject. It is put into the mouth of Jesus and it
makes allusion to other revelations which Jesus is said to have
previously made or “written,” or which He promises. The style is not
unlike that of the First Document, so that I do not see why it may not
be an extract from the same book if, as may be probable, Jesus continued
in it the account of His upward journey after leaving Pistis Sophia in
the thirteenth Æon.[28]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The THIRD DOCUMENT may perhaps be called without fear of contradiction
“Part of the Books of the Saviour,” because it bears that title both at
its head and at its foot. It begins by an exhortation to the disciples
to preach “to the whole world” a series of ἀποτάγματα or renunciations
of sin which may be connected with Jesus’ speech to Andrew at the end of
the Second Document. It should be noted, however, that while in the
Second Document mankind is to be entreated to renounce the world and its
matter so that they may “go unto the Light,” the author of this Document
presses them to abjure sin lest they suffer the torments of hell. These
torments are also dealt with in considerable detail, and we can gather
from the description that there are four Places of Punishment called
respectively Amente, Chaos, the Middle Way, and the Outer Darkness.[29]
This seems to be a sort of amalgam of different traditional beliefs, for
while Amente appears in the _Book of the Dead_, Chaos in the First
Document does not seem to be thought of as necessarily a Place of
Punishment, and we have seen Pistis Sophia speaking of it in the Second
Document as “the world of men.” So, too, the location of these different
hells shows some confusion of thought. Amente is probably in the West or
beyond the earth as it is in the _Book of the Dead_, Chaos is either the
earth itself or beneath it, while the Middle Way is, like the Place of
Punishment in the Enochian literature, in the firmament or “below the
Sphere.” As for the Outer Darkness, its name shows it to be a relic of
Pagan Egypt where it was held that beyond the confines of the earth, the
air became so thick as to be actually tangible and concrete. Among the
tormentors in these various hells we find Ariel, Pistis Sophia’s
persecutor Ialdabaoth, one “Iakhthanabas the Merciless” and the Dragon
of Outer Darkness who is depicted as a great serpent coiled round the
world having his tail in his mouth and containing places of torment
within him where ice and cold come to supplement the tortures of fire
and smoke.

A great part of the Document is likewise taken up by the questions of
Mary Magdalene and the other disciples, among whom John is the most
insistent, as to the sinners to whom they shall give their mysteries and
the effect which they will have on them. We who hear in this Document of
a mystery or secret whereby the dead can be raised, the sick healed, and
other wonders performed, although Jesus tells His disciples that this
mystery belongs to the Archons or wicked Rulers of the Stars and is not
to be used save for the purpose of establishing the faith throughout the
world.[30] We also have much in this Document as to the soul or
incorporeal part of man which the disciples are told consists of the
Power, the Soul proper, the Spirit Counterfeit, and the Fate. Of these,
the Power is the most worthy and causes the man to seek after the
mysteries, and the soul is really the Life or Breath and is made either
out of the _ejecta_ of the Rulers or from the dregs or grosser parts of
the Light which is at certain periods squeezed out of them by certain
powers appointed for that purpose. The Spirit Counterfeit, on the other
hand, is the envelope or mask of the soul which constantly leads it to
commit sin and bears witness after death to its having done so, while
the Fate is the death to which the man is predestined, and which he can
never escape while uninitiate.[31] Incidentally, too, we hear a good
deal in this Document as to the Gnostic belief in the transmigration of
souls, reincarnation being obligatory on such souls as have not found
the more sublime mysteries.[32] Several formulas are also given whereby
the soul can cut itself loose from the Spirit Counterfeit and the Fate,
and we are told that even an uninitiated person can escape from the
torments of the Dragon of Outer Darkness if one of the names of the
reptile be said by or for him. Throughout this Document the tortures of
the different hells and the beast-shaped demons who administer them are
much dwelt upon. Finally, Jesus tells His disciples that He came to
earth to bring these mysteries, and that had He not done so neither
Patriarchs nor Prophets would have entered into the Light.[33]

                  *       *       *       *       *

The opening sentence of the FOURTH DOCUMENT shows plainly that it comes
from a book written independently of the preceding ones and not as their
continuation. It ignores completely the tradition held in the time of
the Antonines by orthodox and heretic alike, that Jesus spent many years
on earth after the Resurrection,[34] and announces that after He “rose
from among the dead the third day,” His disciples gathered round Him
reminding Him that they had left the whole world to follow Him.[35] Then
begins a scene that reminds one irresistibly of the magical practices
rife during the first three centuries of our Era, some details of which
have come down to us in the _Philosophumena_ and in the different Magic
Papyri to be found in the Museums of Paris, London, Leyden, and Berlin.
Jesus, standing by an altar by the side of the sea “Ocean,” makes
invocation to His Father in words which are not gibberish, as at first
sight they appear to be, but a jumble of Hebrew, Egyptian, and perhaps
Persian words copied and re-copied by scribes ignorant of these
languages until they are all but unrecognisable. He calls upon the name
of the Father of the Treasurehouse of Light, whereupon the heavens open
revealing the “true shapes” of the sun and moon, and Jesus and His
disciples are uplifted to “the Middle Way which is below the Sphere.”
Here the arrangement of the stars is explained to them and they learn
that the rebellious Rulers who persisted in copulation were bound to the
Sphere to the number of 1800 for each sign of the Zodiac, under the rule
of 360 of that number, who are themselves under the sway of the five
Planets, Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter. Yet the author of
this Document must have known, although he varies, the tradition of the
First Document, for Jesus tells His hearers that these planets were
strengthened by the infusion into Saturn of a Power from the Great
Unseen God who projected Pistis Sophia, into Mars of a similar Power
from one of the three Triple-powered Gods, into Mercury of one from
another of the Triple Powers, and into Venus of one from “Pistis Sophia
the daughter of Barbelo”[36]; while one from the “Little Sabaoth the
Good,” a Power of higher rank than these last, who in the story of
Pistis Sophia proper is described as supplying the Power which takes the
place of Jesus’ own earthly soul, is cast into the planet Jupiter and is
given rule over all the others. All these planets are given barbarous
names in addition to their Greek ones, as are the Great Unseen God and
the two Triple Powers, these last names appearing also in the Magic
Papyri, while the names of both planets and Powers appear to have a real
meaning.

Jesus then shows to His disciples the five torture-chambers of the
Middle Way, each of them presided over by an “Authority,” who with his
(or her) assistants has been chosen from among the rebellious Rulers.
Each of these Authorities sees to the punishment of particular sins,
which sins his or her ministers have “entered into man” and caused him
to commit. Three of these presiding demons are females, one of them
being the triple-faced Hecate still famous in the Middle Ages and
Renaissance, and among them we find the merciless Iakhthanabas already
mentioned in the Third Document, and the Egyptian God Typhon. The
different terms of punishment from 150 years downwards which sinful
souls will suffer in these tortures of the Middle Way are all given, and
it is expressly said that these places of torment will be dissolved when
the two beneficent planets, Venus and Jupiter, come into certain
positions in the Zodiac.[37] These Places are, it would seem, actually
shown to the disciples, Jesus thereby in part fulfilling the promise
made in the First Document to lead them through all the heavenly Places.
He then restores the heavens to their normal condition, and returns with
the disciples to the “Mountain of Galilee,” where he celebrates for them
a sacrament with “fire and water, wine and blood.” The distribution of
bread also forms part of this sacrament, and it is accompanied by a
“sign” which we know from other sources was the conversion of one of the
cups of wine into the water of baptism.[38] This “mystery” or sacrament
is said to have the effect of remitting all the sins of the disciples,
and they are told to perform the same ceremony for all those who will
listen to their preaching. They remind Him that there are other Baptisms
of Fire and the Holy Spirit of Light respectively, and He tells them
that these are more excellent than any Mystery save only those of the
Seven Sounds and of the Great Name of God, which if spoken to any demon
will destroy him with all his tortures. He is apparently about to
perform these for the benefit of the disciples when the Document
abruptly ends with the gap left by the tearing-away of the four pages
already noticed.

It must be noted that nearly all the first part of this Document is full
of invocations or prayers couched in the apparent gibberish before
mentioned, that “Mary”—whether the Mother of Jesus or the Magdalene is
not stated—asks one question only, that the planet Venus is called
“Bubastis,” Egyptian, Greek, and Hebrew magic and astrology being
present in nearly every line, while there is some little trace of
Persian influence as well. It is also closely connected with one of the
documents of the _Bruce Papyrus_, where the peculiar sacrament here
celebrated by Jesus is described on similar lines and is followed by the
celebration of the other already mentioned; while in another Document of
the same Papyrus the name of Pistis Sophia is given in connection with a
place of repentance. The story of the Samaritan woman and of the spear
thrust at the Crucifixion is also mentioned in this Fourth Document,
these being the first unmistakable quotations from the Fourth Gospel to
be found in our text.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The FIFTH DOCUMENT is, as has been said above, the shortest of all, and
has lost its title in the gap of four leaves in the British Museum MS.
It is entirely concerned with the punishments assigned to different
sins; and as sedition, lust, and robbery with violence appear in the
Fourth Document as sins punishable in the Middle Way, but are not
mentioned in the present fragment, we may presume that they were dealt
with in the part lacking, and probably occupied at least three of the
missing pages. But the Baptism of Fire and the Holy Spirit which Jesus
is going to celebrate when the _lacuna_ occurs, if treated at the same
length as in the _Bruce Papyrus_, can hardly have taken up less than the
other five missing pages, and it is therefore plain that nothing in
addition to these punishments can have occupied the missing beginning of
this Document. After this the Fifth Document begins with a broken
sentence containing the punishment of the man who curses, and then goes
on to describe the punishment of the evil speaker, the murderer, the
habitual thief, the proud man, the blasphemer, the sodomite, and the
celebrant of the filthy parody of the Eucharist known as the Black
Mass.[39] In one or other of those cases, the four hells of Amente,
Chaos, the Middle Way, and the Outer Darkness are introduced, the
punishments in them being successive, and we read again here the names
of Ariel and Ialdabaoth who are mentioned in the Third Document, as
those of torturers in Amente and Chaos respectively. So, too, we hear
again of the cup of forgetfulness which in the Third Document is
administered to the soul after it has been shown the punishments in
order that it may profit nothing on reincarnation by its knowledge of
their terrors. But here the punishments are so different from those
formerly described that we see at once we are dealing with a different
author. The sum total of the periods of punishment for cursing which are
administered in all the different hells does not amount to more than
four years as against the 133 assigned to it in the Fourth Document; and
the penalty for slander is here given as no more than 30 years as
against the same period of 133. The Receiver of Sabaoth Adamas, leader
of the rebellious Rulers, now administers the cup of oblivion instead of
as in the Third Document, the “Rulers of the head of the Æons,” and he
is given the name of Ialuham, while the Receivers of Ariel, who are here
mentioned for the first time in our text, are named Abiuth and Kharmon.
The case of the uninitiated but righteous dead is also dealt with in
answer to a question from John, but in a different manner from its
treatment in the Third Document, as here the soul on coming out of the
body is met by the Receivers of Bainkhookh or the planet Mercury, while
the cup which takes away the baleful effect of the cup of oblivion is
administered by a Receiver of the planet Jupiter[40]. It is also to be
noted that in this Document for the first time the division of mankind
into “righteous” and “wicked” bodies, which find or do not find, as the
case may be, the mysteries of light, is made to depend entirely on the
periodic disposition of the stars. When, it is said, the two beneficent
planets Jupiter and Venus come before the Virgin of Light and the two
maleficent Saturn and Mars behind her in the revolution of the Sphere,
all the souls sent into the world will be good, and when the position is
reversed, all will be wicked.[41] Here, too, for the first time, we are
told that the form of the body on reincarnation depends on the sins
committed by the soul in its last life,—that the soul of the proud man
will be put into a body dumb and deformed, the soul of the thief into
one lame and maimed and blind—and so on.

It will therefore be seen that this Document is sufficiently connected
with some of the preceding ones to warrant the supposition that it comes
from the same school or sect, although it is noteworthy that neither in
our Fourth nor our Fifth Document are the Ineffable One or the First
Mystery ever referred to. The chief point in common between this Fifth
Document and the _Bruce Papyrus_ is the mention of the Black Mass which
appears in both Documents. A feature peculiar to this Document alone is
the open reference to the Pagan Gods as fiends; and besides Typhon and
Hecate, who have in truth a more or less malevolent character in the
later Egyptian and Greek mythology, Adonis, one of the forms under which
Osiris was worshipped at Alexandria, is made to take the soul of the
thief to Amente, while “the high goddess” of Homer, Persephone, the
much-loved daughter of the Eleusinian Demeter, figures as one of the
tormentors in Chaos. The sentence about the journeys of the Apostles
written on the blank leaf bound in with the rest of the volume has no
perceptible connection with our text and may possibly be the work of
some one who, suddenly coming across it in some other document and
wishing to preserve it, seized upon this leaf as the only piece of
parchment available.

                  *       *       *       *       *

To sum up then: the MS. contains five principal documents together with
a fragment which may or may not once have formed part of one of them.
All are imperfect and are extracts from longer and possibly more
coherent writings. Two of them—the _Pistis Sophia_ proper, and our
Fourth Document—can be clearly distinguished as written by different
authors, and the same can be said with nearly as much certainty with
regard to the Third and Fifth. Yet the book from which the tale of
Pistis Sophia was extracted must have been old enough to have gone
through more than one recension, as is shown by the number of
alternative readings duly noted in the MS. There are also in the details
of the same story, blunders or contradictions which go to show that the
translator or scribe had more than one MS. to work from; and these may
have differed as much as do, for instance, the two versions of the
(Coptic) _Book of the Resurrection_ attributed to St. Bartholomew and
published by M. Lacau and Sir Ernest Wallis Budge from the MSS. in the
_Bibliothèque Nationale_ and the British Museum respectively. This is
the view taken by the German commentators on our text; but they are by
no means in accord upon it, and it therefore does not seem necessary to
do more here than refer to it.


                 3. PURPOSE AND COMPOSITION OF THE MS.


Why now was this miscellany made? Not certainly for edification or the
use of the sect or school[42] whose doctrines it sets forth. Every
Coptic inscription on tombstone or wall and nearly every Coptic
religious text has at its head the words [Coptic], with God, generally
accompanied by the so-called Coptic or Orbed Cross, itself an adaptation
of the _ankh_ or symbol of life in Pagan Egypt. That this was the
practice with heretics as well as orthodox Christians is shown by the
_Bruce Papyrus_, which actually bears as its frontispiece such words and
such a cross with the letters Α and Ω and which seems to be a
reproduction of the Constantinian Labarum.[43] If, too, we put side by
side the passages in our MS. and the _Bruce Papyrus_ which are
practically identical—as is the case with the three sacraments or
baptisms mentioned in the Fourth Document of our text—we find that the
“seals” or diagrams, passwords, and names given in the Oxford MS. have
all been omitted from the London book. No one who is familiar with the
beliefs current in Pagan Egypt can mistake the reason of this omission,
which is obviously to avoid the risk of their being used in magic.[44] A
like precaution was taken with many chapters of the _Book of the Dead_
and becomes more insistent with every successive recension. It is absent
from the Pyramid texts, doubtless because when these were once carved on
the inside of a royal burying-place and the entrance closed, there was
little risk of these being seen by unauthorised persons. The same reason
doubtless operated in the same way with the wooden coffins of the
eleventh dynasty on which the next recension was inscribed. But with the
Theban recension of the New Empire, the case was changed. “Let no one
outside know it. It is a mystery which is not known to the common
people,” says the hundred and sixty-first chapter after directions to
engrave it on the coffin of the dead. “Reveal it not to anyone, may he
be thy father or thy son except thyself. It is a real mystery.”[45] So,
too, with the Saite recension. “This book is most secret,” says the
hundred and sixty-second chapter, which M. Pierret thinks was intended
to be the last. “Let it not be seen by any man, for it is forbidden to
know it. Let it be hidden. It is called the mistress of the hidden
abode. This is the end.”[46] That similar ideas persisted into Christian
times may be guessed from the Homily _de Magis_ ascribed to St. Ephraim
in which the Homilist tells his hearers that in his day (circa A.D. 450)
even the clergy resorted to magicians for these mysterious writings.
“Instead of the blessings of the Saints,” he says, “they carry about the
incantations of the magicians, and instead of the Holy Cross, they carry
the books of devils ... and a child who knows nothing at all, carries
about devil’s names and comes to church.”[47]

It was evidently, therefore, for the information of orthodox persons
that our MS. was made, but not for that of the orthodox public
generally, whether clerical or lay. Had it been so, it would have been
weighted with a running commentary casting scorn upon its erroneous
doctrines, or by so-called refutations like those which encumber the
pages of heresiologists such as Irenæus, Hippolytus, and Epiphanius. Had
it been written by an ecclesiastic, moreover, it would certainly have
borne some preface, or colophon, as does the _Philosophumena_, claiming
merit for, and giving the date of the completion of the work.[48] Yet
there is nothing in the present text to show that it was written by an
ecclesiastic of any kind, while it follows from what has been said above
that it was begun by a scribe who took unusual pains to ensure an
accurate copy, and that when he handed over for a time the continuation
of his work to a subordinate, he yet went over and corrected the
latter’s work with as much care as he bestowed upon his own. All this
suggests that it was made for official or judicial use; and the most
reasonable guess is that it was the draft or copy of a legal document
made for the enlightenment of some conciliar, episcopal, or even secular
tribunal concerned in the suppression of heresy, such as the Inquisitors
of the Faith set up by Theodosius. This would solve the problem which
has so vexed the minds of commentators like Prof. Harnack and Dr.
Schmidt as to the occurrence of the colophon “Part of the Books of the
Saviour” at the foot of the Second and Third Documents. It is natural
enough that the second or subaltern scribe, continuing the work of which
only the first part was once thought sufficient, should preface the
continuation by the title “The Second Tome of Pistis Sophia”; but that
as he completed the copying of each subsequent extract stichometrically
arranged, should add the words: “Part of the Books of the Saviour” to
indicate the collection of MSS., probably seized in a raid by the
Imperial authorities on some heretic’s library, from which they were all
taken.

If this be admitted, it certainly alters materially the view which
recent German scholars, following, perhaps, after their manner, the
first German commentator Köstlin, have formed of the whole text, and in
which we might be inclined to acquiesce if we considered it a mere
Encyclopædia or, as Epiphanius calls his own collection, a
“bread-basket,” in which heterogeneous scraps of doctrine were thrown
together anyhow. If, on the other hand, it was made for the use of a
tribunal, it would be in the order of things concerned with the tenets
of one school or sect alone, and this we find on investigation to be the
case. Although the episode of Pistis Sophia comes to a stop about
halfway, she is, as has been said, mentioned in the Fourth Document as
well as in the First and Second, and even in the Third there are phrases
which show that its author has the same general conception of the
constitution of the universe, of the Person and Mission of Jesus, and of
the means of salvation as the writers of the earlier parts. Yet it is
equally plain that no two of the documents are by the same hand. While
the First Document makes the Power which Jesus received from Barbelo
“the body which He wore in the Height,”[49] and His soul another power
received from one of the great leaders of “the Height,”[50] the Second
Document attributes the Incarnation to a lesser power of “the Middle”
who casts what came from the same leader into “the matter of Barbelo,”
which thereupon becomes the earthly and not the heavenly body of the
Saviour.[51] In like manner, while the First Document puts into the
mouth of Mary the Mother a story not traceable to any other source about
the Holy Spirit coming down from the First Mystery in the exact likeness
of Jesus’ earthly body, and says that after kissing each other, they
become one,[52] the Second Document makes St. John say that the First
Mystery himself came down upon Jesus in the form of a dove, but in a
“vesture of light” received from Barbelo.[53] So, again, the First
Document especially declares that “the disciples” (not the Apostles)
were endowed by Jesus at His coming with twelve powers from the
Treasure-house of Light instead of the souls which they would otherwise
have received from the Rulers,[54] while the Second makes Jesus tell
them that their souls instead of coming straight from the Treasure-house
have suffered much from transmigration into different bodies.[55] So,
too, the Sphere of Destiny, which in the First Document is described as
“the Second Sphere”[56] (or the one which is reached from the earth next
after passing through the First Sphere, below which is the visible
firmament), is in the Third Document transformed into a Place called
“Great Destiny,”[57] which is in the Place of the head of the Æons [or
Zodiac] which Place they call “the Place of the Kingdom of Adamas,” the
Ruler of the twelve Æons or signs, and in the Fourth Document is made
equivalent to the Sphere or visible firmament only.[58] And so again
“the cause of sin,” which in the Third Document is laid upon the
shoulders of “the Five Rulers of Great Destiny,”[59] is in the Fourth
assigned to certain demons from the Middle Way who enter into man.[60]
These discrepancies are too great to be accounted for as merely clerical
errors or mistakes in translation, and we can therefore only attribute
them to the different documents being the work of different authors.[61]

This being the case, we must, to get a true perspective of the work,
seek for the earliest document in it, and then endeavour to arrange the
others in their relative order of date; and I have no hesitation in
deciding that in this, the scribes followed the usual practice in legal
matters and that the earliest document is that which comes first in the
MS. Not only has it a regular preface, an advantage which it shares with
the Fourth, but it is the one of the four principal documents which
alone gives an orderly and coherent account of the heavenly hierarchy
and its “Places,”[62] and therefore affords the reader a sort of key to
the system of its successors. Hence it must be considered as the mother
document, so to speak, from which all the rest are derived, or to which
they refer; and it will be found on examination that while all these
contain what may be called supplemental information as to the different
universes or worlds and their inhabitants, there is none which deals so
exhaustively with the speculations that during the early centuries of
our Era occupied the attention of orthodox and heretic alike, that is to
say, the Constitution of the Godhead and the relation of the Saviour to
the Supreme Being. It is also probable that anyone making extracts for
judicial use from the books of a sect would begin with the most
informative; and while Pistis Sophia is here described so fully as to
leave no doubt in one’s mind that the author knows that he is here
introducing her to his readers for the first time, the references to her
in the other documents are so brief as to show that their writers knew
that their readers had already heard about her. But the most conclusive
proof at present of the anteriority of the First Document as compared
with the others, is that it does not quote from the Fourth Gospel. The
opening words of St. John would have been extremely useful to the author
in expressing the relations between his Ineffable One and the First
Mystery, and are in fact so used later both in the _Excerpta Theodoti_
and the _Bruce Papyrus_.[63] Ptolemy and Heracleon,[64] the leaders of
the sect to which, as will be shown later, our text can with the
greatest likelihood be attributed, both knew of this Gospel and discuss
its words and especially its opening at length. Yet the author of our
First Document not only makes no use of this, but he gives no quotation
among the many from the New Testament to be found in this Document that
can by any possibility be assigned to the Fourth Gospel, save those
which may equally well be taken from the Synoptics. The one apparent
exception to this statement is neither conclusive in itself, nor strong
enough to found any argument upon it.[65] In the later part of the
Second Document, however, the words of St. John: “Where I am, there
shall my servants be,” may possibly be thought to underlie the sentence
in our text: “Wherefore I said unto you aforetime: Where I shall be,
there will be with Me my Twelve servants,”[66] the word διάκονος being
used in both cases; and in the Fourth Document there appear unmistakably
the conversation of Jesus with the Samaritan woman,[67] and the spear
thrust in His side at the Crucifixion,[68] neither of which incidents
are recorded in the Synoptics. The conclusion, therefore, seems
irresistible that while the author of the First Document did not know of
St. John’s Gospel, the writer of part of the Second may have done so,
and the writer of the Fourth was fully acquainted with it.

Yet the literary critic, especially he who is acquainted with the
literature of the early Christian centuries, will hardly require further
proof of the relative dates of our four chief Documents than that
afforded by a comparison of their contents. In the First, apart from a
sketch of—to use a comprehensive word—the uranography of the sect, and
the speculations about the Divine Nature before referred to, the author
devotes nearly all his space to the episode of Pistis Sophia, which may
fairly be looked upon as an allegory pointing out to man the penalty of
transgressing the Divine Law, and the necessity of repentance. Thus, in
one of the “Penitences” addressed to the highest Power that she knew,
Pistis Sophia confesses that she has offended “the Law of the Light” and
attributes her deliverance from Chaos to her consequent repentance.[69]
There is more than one hint in the text that both the fall and the
repentance take place within what is called “the world of humanity,” and
we can without any overstraining of the allegory consider Pistis Sophia
as representing the heathen world before the light of Christianity
raised it from the degradation into which it had fallen by its material
luxury, and restored it to something like what was supposed to be its
primeval innocence.[70] Hence we have a fairly close parallel to stories
like that of Christian in the _Pilgrim’s Progress_, who leaves the city
of Mansoul to strive upward to the Heavenly City; and allowing for the
difference of time and place, there is no reason why we should consider
the Coptic version as the more ignoble allegory of the two. It should
also be noticed that in this Document, the terrors of hell are hardly
touched upon, and the “afflictions” of Sophia are spoken of throughout
as confined to the loss of “light” and her consequent impotence to
return without Divine aid to the Place which she had wilfully abandoned.
Lastly magic and astrology are expressly if briefly condemned as
unlawful knowledge brought to men by the sinning angels.

From this fairly lofty standard of thought, the remaining Documents show
one long and successive degradation. The author of the Second Document,
after making a somewhat clumsy effort to conclude the history of Pistis
Sophia, does not, as we might expect him to do, continue the account of
Jesus’ upward journey, but dismisses it to plunge into a series of
inquiries as to the exact nature of the heavenly hierarchies and the
amount of “Light” which each of them enjoys; and the answers of the
Saviour not only describe these at great length, but indicate, though
obscurely, the various steps by which man can approach divinity. But the
benefits there promised are to be confined evidently to a small and
privileged class chosen out of the main body of Christians. The use of
these means, moreover, is a good deal more magical than religious—that
is to say, they apparently act by compulsion rather than by propitiation
of the celestial powers—and was perhaps bound up with the different
“arrays” of stars in a fashion which shows a distinct leaning towards
the astrology of the time.[71] The rebel Rulers of the stars are here
made for the first time the instruments in the punishment of sinful
souls,[72] and the terrors of hell are held out as a menace which may
induce mankind to accept initiation into the mysteries offered. In all
this, we cannot but see the reversion to Pagan practices, to the
dualistic theory of the universe, and to the tendency to appeal to
ignoble motives into which post-Christian gnosticism sank in its
decadence, and which finds, perhaps, its fullest expression in
Manichaeism.

The Interpolated Fragment is, it is true, markedly free from these
objections. The gaze of the author of this is indeed turned upwards
instead of downwards, and we find him indulging in unrestrained
speculation as to the “members” of the Supreme Being which are still
unmanifested but existed before even the First Mystery, and have
apparently remained without emanation.[73] The fragment is too short for
us to guess of what practical use these pretended revelations are
supposed to be; but Jesus is represented as saying with regard to the
“Members,” that “He is the Treasure-house of them all.” Something of the
kind is hinted at in the long catalogue of transcendental powers given
in the Second Document; and it is therefore possible that this Fragment
may once have formed part of some continuation of the account of Jesus’
journey upwards which was in course of narration when broken off to
recount the episode of Pistis Sophia.

The Third Document, however, resumes the descent of the slope of
degradation with increased speed. As with the Egyptian funerary texts
which succeeded and in some measure supplanted the _Book of the
Dead_,[74] the punishments after death and the way to escape them form
the principal theme of this Document. As for magic, the gifts of healing
and working of miracles, here explained as the raising of the dead and
the casting out of devils, which the Epistle to the Corinthians puts
among the Charismata or gifts of the Spirit,[75] are here said to belong
to the Rulers or wicked Archons, and to be only lawfully exercised by
the disciples for the purpose of spreading the faith throughout the
world.[76] So, too, the information as to the fourfold division of man’s
incorporeal part: Power, Soul, Spirit Counterfeit, and Fate, is all
taken from the popular beliefs of Pagan Egypt; and the formulas enabling
the initiate to “loose the bonds” which bind the soul to the worst of
these, are as clearly to be referred to the belief in the power of names
and in the compulsion of the spirit-world which Iamblichus tells us was
the main peculiarity of Egyptian magic.[77] The divisions of the place
of punishment into four hells of graduated intensity and the final doom
of annihilation for the worst sinners are also taken from the same
literature.[78] So far does this go, that even the uninitiated dead when
in the worst of all the hells can escape from his torments and enjoy a
qualified beatitude, if he then repeats certain names which he has
learned during his life.[79] It is quite true that we hear in this
Document about the Love of God and the initiates doing things worthy of
the mysteries and praying prayers in certain forms; but its general
tendency remains almost entirely magical.

With the Fourth Document, we seem to have reached the bottom of the
slope. The disciples here know nothing—it will be remembered that the
scene is supposed to take place directly after the Resurrection—of the
higher worlds and their mysteries, or even of the parts of this Chorema
or Space which are above the Treasure-house; and their flight upward
with Jesus has for its object merely the exhibition of the terrors of
one of the Places of Punishment. So, too, the information which they
obtain both by sight and by word of mouth as to the disposition and
names of the stars and planets can hardly have been of use to them
except for the purpose of magic and astrology. Of the joys prepared for
the faithful and of the glories of the Divine Presence described in the
_Book of Enoch_ and other Apocrypha, they are told nothing. The
sacraments that Jesus celebrates for them are, it would seem, to be
given to them in return for leaving all and following Him;[80] but are
entirely magical in character, and nothing is said of any abandonment of
sinful practices or of any repentance being necessary for their
efficacy. The sign that He asks for from His Father,[81] here called
merely the Father of the Treasure-house, although not here specifically
described, is, as we know from the parallel passage in the _Bruce
Papyrus_, the conversion of the wine in one of the wine-cups into the
“water of baptism,”[82] in a way which strongly reminds us of the
juggling sacraments attributed by Irenæus and the other heresiologists
to the magician Marcus. The formal remission of sins which precedes this
sacrament is accomplished by the invocation of many powers with
incomprehensible names, and, if we read the passage correctly, only
extends to sins of the flesh.[83] They are told to “hide this mystery
and give it to none” save those who observe His commandments in words
which almost repeat those of the _Book of the Dead_.[84] Yet even these
sacraments would appear not to be needed by those who know the Great
Name, the utterance of which will put to flight all demons, dissolve
their houses of torment, and subjugate the highest material powers of
the universe.[85] Nothing is wanting to show that the sect which put
forth this Document had slipped back into the preoccupation with the
terrors of hell which is the prevailing feature of the Egyptian religion
of the last native dynasties,[86] and that the belief in magic and
astrology into which Hellenic Paganism had sunk during the third and
fourth centuries had taken the place of the loftier if vain speculations
of the earlier Documents of our text. So much is this the case that the
Ineffable One and the First Mystery of the first three Documents are not
even mentioned here, and the only link connecting this with the story of
Pistis Sophia is the casual mention of her name as supplying a “Power”
for the planet Venus.[87]

With the Fifth Document a still lower level is reached. Hell and its
torments form the only subject of this book, which as has been said
above, is probably nearly complete, only a few pages of the conclusion
being beyond recall. More proper-names of fiends are given here than in
any of the preceding documents; and as has been said, these now include
many of the Pagan gods such as the Egyptian Typhon, the Syrian Adonis,
and the Greek Persephone and Hecate. These may possibly have been
included among the subordinate “gods” several times referred to in the
First Document, but the fact that their names are here openly given,
seems to point to a time when the Pagans were in a minority in the
Eastern world. The increasing influence of the belief in astrology with
which even the Neo-Platonists of Alexandria did not disdain to meddle,
is also shown by the answer already mentioned of Jesus to an inquiry of
Mary Magdalene wherein He tells her that the allotment of souls to
“righteous” and “wicked” bodies respectively is periodic and depends
wholly on the disposition of the stars.

The bearing that all this has on the absolute as distinct from the
relative dating of the five Documents will be dealt with presently.


              4. THE AUTHORSHIP AND DATE OF THE DOCUMENTS


We now have to consider by whom and at what date the Documents making up
our text were composed. That they were written in Egypt and for Egyptian
readers there can be no doubt, nor is it seriously disputed by any
commentator who has dealt with them. The use of the Egyptian calendar
evidenced by the placing of the opening scene of the story of Pistis
Sophia in the Egyptian month Tybi, the employment of psalms and hymns as
a means of expounding doctrine, and the peculiar form of rhetoric which
I have called rhapsody, all point to the First and Second Documents
being written by an Egyptian for Egyptians, while to an Egyptologist the
likeness of the long array of Powers here enumerated to the three
successive Enneads or “Companies of Gods” known to Pharaonic Egypt is
too close for us to seek further for its source. Yet the writer shows an
acquaintance with the Platonic philosophy and also with those Synoptic
Gospels which were admittedly written in Greek, which we should not
expect from an inhabitant of the Sahid or Upper Egypt, and this is
unlikely in the earliest period of Christianity to have been possible
outside Alexandria. In this university of the Western world, as it has
been justly called, philosophy was so universal during the first and
second centuries that, not only did the Catholic Church have to set up
about the year 200 the school for the teaching of its officers of whom
Clement of Alexandria was afterwards the head, but Philo, a leader of
the Alexandrian synagogue a hundred years earlier had found himself
obliged to discover Plato’s teaching in the Hebrew Scriptures in a way
that is almost an exact parallel to that used by the author of our First
Document. We have therefore, if we wish to find an author for that
Document, to look for an Alexandrian teacher of Christianity who,
although a heretic, did not take up the uncompromising opposition to the
Catholic Church that Marcion and others did, and who taught before St.
John’s Gospel was generally known. I have said elsewhere that there is
no one who fulfils all those qualifications so well as Valentinus, the
heresiarch who taught in the reigns of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, or
from about A.D. 135 to 160.[88]

Of Valentinus’ own teaching we know very little directly because the
Fathers who denounced him as the heresiarch who had attracted the
largest number of followers, have yet given us the doctrines of his
successors rather than of himself. Thus, Irenæus, who wrote at least a
generation after Valentinus, records the teaching of Valentinus’
immediate successor, Ptolemy; Hippolytus, half a century after Irenæus,
the teaching probably of Axionicus,[89] while Tertullian and Epiphanius
merely copy the statements of the two earlier heresiologists, and Origen
quotes from the writings of Ptolemy’s contemporary Heracleon. Only
Clement of Alexandria, Valentinus’ fellow countryman, who must have been
born about the time when Valentinus was endeavouring to convert the
Church of Rome to his views, quotes directly from Valentinus’ own words;
and from these, it appears that Valentinus’ theology differed little in
outward appearance from that of the Catholic Church of his time.[90]
That this must have been so is indeed manifest when we read in
Tertullian that Valentinus came to Rome expecting to be made bishop,[91]
as one might now say, Pope, because of his genius and eloquence.
Hippolytus, who probably drew his account from Axionicus, says that he
declared the Supreme God to be “all Love” who created subsequent things
that He might have something to love.[92] According to his opponents,
Valentinus also taught that the Supreme God’s first and greatest
creation was Nous or Mind, called also Monogenes or the Only One, or the
Father, who was “like and equal to Himself,”[93] and from whom came
Logos or the Word, from whom came Anthropos or Man. Yet none of these
three last-named Powers produced offspring without female assistance,
being, according to one account, themselves both male and female, or,
according to another, having spouses called respectively Aletheia or
Truth, Zoe or Life, and Ecclesia or the Church. It was even said that
the Supreme God or Abyss, who was the source of all being, had in like
manner a spouse named Sige “Silence,” or Charis “Grace,” although the
Fathers admit that the followers of Valentinus, whose tenets they
denounce, held various opinions as to this. They are, however, agreed
that from these three syzygies or pairs, making with the Supreme God a
Hebdomad or Ogdoad as the case may be, come forth at separate removes a
Decad and a Dodecad or two groups of five and six syzygies respectively;
and that this collection of Divine beings made up the Pleroma or Fulness
of the Godhead. The same writers agree that all Valentinians also taught
that the lowest member of the Pleroma fell away from the Godhead from
ambition or some similar cause, strayed outside the Pleroma and
necessitated the creation of another Divine syzygy called Christ and the
Holy Spirit to restore her to her place, and of a solitary Power called
Horos or Stauros the “Limit” or the “Cross” to preserve the Pleroma from
further contact with the Kenoma or the Void outside it. Before returning
to the Pleroma, moreover, Sophia had given birth without male assistance
to a being expressly compared to the “earth without form and void” of
Genesis, which the last Divine Syzygy of Christ and the Holy Spirit
before returning to the Godhead fashioned into an Æon as perfect as
those within it.[94] On finding herself alone, however, this Sophia
Without, as she was called, suffered several “passions” or
emotions:—fear, grief, perplexity, and supplication—and she prayed to
the Syzygy which had given her form for deliverance from them. In answer
to her prayers, yet another Divine Emanation came forth from the
Godhead. This was “Jesus, the Great High Priest,” to whose formation
every one of its members had contributed whatever was best and brightest
in the nature of each. Jesus in His emanation went immediately to the
consolation of Sophia Without, stripped her of her passions and remained
with her as her spouse in what is called the Heavenly Jerusalem to reign
with her over all that is without the Godhead. As for her passions,
since they could not be destroyed, they were made, say the Valentinians
quoted by Hippolytus, into different substances or essences—her fear
into the essence of the soul, her grief into that of matter, and her
perplexity into that of demons, while of her supplication He made “a
path for repentance.” The essence of the soul, which is called by
several names suggesting the God of Moses, became the Architect of the
Cosmos or ordered world, and rules, without being aware of the existence
of the Powers superior to himself, in the Heavenly Jerusalem or Ogdoad,
over the Seven Heavens. The more material Cosmos or ordered world of
matter is, according to the same writer, ruled by a Power called
Diabolos, perhaps the Accuser or Adversary, and the Chaos, which is
below all, by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.[95]

It may, of course, be thought that by putting forth ideas so much
opposed to our modern ideas of Christianity, Valentinus was
irreconcilably cutting himself off from the Catholic Church. But is it
certain that the Fathers, who report the doctrine of his successors,
really understood Valentinus in this respect? The idea of allegory in an
Oriental mind is not exactly the same as in our own, and with the
Egyptian especially, it is always difficult to tell whether he is not
taking what we see at once to be metaphor as the narration of actual
fact. Thus, the rise of the Nile is, as every ancient Egyptian very well
knew, caused by the sudden influx of water coming down after the
seasonal rains from the Abyssinian highlands. Yet the way in which he
chose to describe it was that the goddess Isis let drop a tear into the
river which went on swelling in volume until it reached the sea. Nor is
the reverse process unknown. In the Coptic text known as the _Book of
Resurrection_, Judas Iscariot when in Amente has his mouth filled with
thirty snakes “so that they might devour him,” and if this statement
stood by itself, we might believe that it was actual snakes which were
meant. But the writer (supposed to be St. Bartholomew the Apostle) goes
on to say that the name of the first snake is “Remoteness from God,” of
the seventh “Haughtiness of Heart,” of the twelfth “Hypocrisy,” of the
eighteenth “Treachery” and so on.[96] Irenæus and Tertullian are agreed
that certain Valentinians explained the names of their Supreme Ogdoad as
a mere figure of speech showing the steps by which the Divine Nature
became appreciable by man. When, they said, God _thought_ of producing
offspring He acquired the name of Father; and because His offspring was
_true_, the name of Truth; and because he wished to appear in human
form, he was called Man; and because He assembled His attributes in His
mind and _chose_ from them those best fitted for His purpose, they were
called the _Church_.[97] I have shown elsewhere that all the names of
the male and female members of the Decad and Dodecad attributed to
Valentinus can in like manner be read so as to make a connected
sentence;[98] and the way in which the Fathers deceived themselves in
such matters has lately been shown by the brilliant discovery of an
American scholar that thirty words of apparent gibberish which
Epiphanius gives as the names of the thirty Æons of Valentinus’ Pleroma,
are really the fragments of a Valentinian hymn describing how the
Celestial Light came to be in every Place and restored tranquillity to
the worlds.[99] There is therefore considerable reason to think that the
statements of Irenæus and the other heresiologists on Valentinus’
division of the Godhead need not be taken as literally and exactly
accurate; and it is noticeable that while the number of beings within
the Pleroma is sometimes represented by them as thirty, it is sometimes
twenty-eight and sometimes thirty-three. The same discrepancies are
marked in the old Egyptian religion from which, if I am right,
Valentinus drew his phraseology. All that we can say, therefore, with
certainty as to Valentinus’ views regarding the Godhead is that he
believed it manifested itself in three successive stages of emanation.
The most convincing proof that this was the fundamental point of his
teaching can perhaps be found in the manner in which Hippolytus, at the
end of his account of it, drags in the second epistle of Plato about the
Good Source of All and its secondary and tertiary developments as
evidence of Valentinus’ Platonizing.[100]

The other great and distinguishing feature of Valentinus’ teaching was
the story of Sophia. This is found in no other heresy but the Ophite,
where it takes a form so much grosser and coarser than that of
Valentinus as to betray its connection with the myths current in Western
Asia long before our Era; and I have before suggested that it was
probably from Ophite sources that Valentinus constructed his story. In
doing so, he refined it, and instead of making Sophia’s fall from the
Godhead a mere accident, he portrayed it as the result of disobedience
and emulation, while her eventual return thereto was the result of her
repentance. That the Demiurge or Architect of the Universe was brought
into being by her, and that Matter is his creation, while the Divine
spark in man comes from Sophia Without, who in her turn depends upon the
Sophia within the Pleroma, appears plainly from a “psalm” by Valentinus
himself quoted by Hippolytus.[101] We see, then, that the fundamental
points of Valentinus’ teaching were the manifestation of the Godhead in
three successive stages, the story of Sophia’s Fall through error and
her restoration by repentance, and the dependence of the lower and more
material parts of the Universe upon the higher ones. We shall see later
that these are also the foundations of the system disclosed in the
earlier documents of the _Pistis Sophia_.

Before considering this, however, it will be well to see if our text was
so entirely unknown to the Fathers as has been generally assumed. We
know from Eusebius that it was the policy of the triumphant Church after
the pact with Constantine to destroy all the writings of the heretics,
and that this policy was continuous is shown by the advice given by St.
Augustine to burn, without regard for their volume or beauty, all the
manuscripts of the Manichæans. Hence we can hardly expect quotations to
be as direct and as accurate as those which the Fathers made, as I have
said elsewhere, from the different summaries of heathen philosophers
then current, and could not have been suppressed by them had they tried
to do so. But there are many allusions to phrases and words peculiar to
our MS. which seem to support the view that it was used in some form or
other by the early heresiologists and especially by Tertullian, who both
as a lawyer striving to prove his case at all hazards and as a rebel (as
he finally proved to be) against ecclesiastical discipline, would be
less likely to be cautious in such matters than high officers of the
Church like Irenæus and Hippolytus. We find Tertullian in his attack on
the Valentinians quoting a remark about those who seek God in simplicity
of heart from “the Sophia not of Valentinus, but of Solomon.” The
quotation is of course from the extra-Canonical _Book of Wisdom_ to be
found in the Apocrypha of the Thirty-nine Articles; and it is, as
Amélineau has well said, most natural that a book should be compared to
a book. But it would be contrary to the whole tenour of Valentinian
ideas as they have come down to us, that the “æon” or emanation or
goddess Sophia should be supposed to write books, and it results that
Tertullian must have been referring to a book by Valentinus bearing the
title of _Sophia_.[102] We may fairly look, then, on the hypothesis just
stated, in our MS. for expressions attributed by Tertullian to
Valentinus, and of these we find a fair number. Thus in the same book
_Adversus Valentinianos_ (c. 27), Tertullian says that the Valentinians
spoke of Christ coming upon Jesus “in the form of a dove,” which are the
very words which the opening of our Second Document puts into the mouth
of St. John. Later, he speaks of the Pneumatici or Spiritual Ones
“despoiling” themselves by putting off their earthly souls, which is the
expression used _ad nauseam_ in the same Second Document for the process
used by the higher Powers and by Jesus Himself with regard to these
heavenly natures. So, again, in the treatise _de Resurrectione Carnis_
(c. 32), Tertullian speaks of the flesh of man being created _ex
faecibus terrae_ “from the dregs of the earth,” which is the explanation
made by Jesus to St. Andrew in the last words of the same Document; and
the parallel is more close because one or other of the many Sophias in
the Valentinian system was always identified with the earth. Again, in
the treatise _de Scorpiace_ (c. 4), he speaks of the hidden sacraments
of the heretics—by which phrase the ante-Nicene Fathers nearly always
mean the Valentinians—and the answers which the soul must make when
arraigned before the _veras potestates et veros homines_, “powers and
men of Truth,” the “Teleti and Abascanti and Akineti of Valentinus,” of
which names some are to be found in the long catalogue of transcendental
Powers inhabiting the heaven of Truth in the Second Document. So, too,
in the _Adversus Valentinianos_ (c. 35), he speaks of many Powers
distinguished by prefixes like _Prae_ and _An_ which according to him
occupied a very high place in the Valentinian Pantheon, and which
correspond fairly to the Proachoreti, the Protripneumata, and the
Hypertripneumata in the last-mentioned catalogue. Nor is Tertullian here
entirely alone among the Fathers of the period. Irenæus, cautious as he
is not to quote the name of powers reverenced by the heretics, says (II.
xlvii. p. 368 H.) that there is no Pleroma of thirty Æons ... _nec lumen
virginale, nec Æon innominabilis_, under cover of which general
expressions it is plain that he is referring to the Virgin of Light and
the “Great Unseen Forefather” of our First Document. So, too, Hippolytus
(_Philosophumena_, VI. 30, p. 283, Cr.), by a sort of slip of the pen,
calls Sophia “the youngest of all the twenty-four” (not thirty or
twenty-eight or thirty-three) Æons which she is indeed said to be in our
First Document. Finally, Origen writing long after Valentinus and his
immediate successors had passed away, speaks of the heretical stories of
“doors opening of their own accord,” an episode which occurs nowhere
else, so far as I know, than in Jesus’ account of His upward journey in
the same Document.[103]

We see, then, that there are adequate grounds for supposing that the
main documents of our MS. or perhaps those upon which, according to the
German commentators,[104] they are themselves based, are by Valentinus,
and that in any case the Greek original from which the Coptic
translation was made, must be earlier than A.D. 170. This, however, does
not apply to the Interpolated Fragment, which in its present form it is
impossible to date, although, as I have before said, I should myself be
inclined to guess that it once formed part of the story of Jesus’ upward
flight. To continue this until it described the Saviour’s entry into the
realms of the Ineffable One would hardly have seemed too daring to a
writer acquainted, as ours evidently was, with the literature that
passes under the name of Enoch, and the author of the part of the _Bruce
Papyrus_ which Dr. Schmidt calls “_Unbekanntes altgnostiche Werk_,”
plunges into a description of the Source of All Being which leaves
nothing to be desired on the ground of temerity. But this last is, on
the face of it, a much later document than the history of Pistis Sophia,
and on the whole it is better to say nothing further as to the
authorship or date of the Fragment.

The case is different when we come to our Third Document to which the
Fragment has somehow been prefixed. While the first two Documents are,
as has been said, probably by Valentinus, it is perfectly certain that
this cannot be the case with the Third. Valentinus was, as his opponents
admitted, a man of genius who for a time must have held a leading
position in the Christian world, and had he been made Pope, might
possibly have introduced a syncretistic religion like that of Manes two
centuries later, and have attempted to fit into the Gospel narrative
elements borrowed from the Egyptian, the Persian, and the Buddhist
religions. But of these, the Egyptian, which Valentinus was naturally
most anxious to amalgamate with Christianity, had long since sunk into
what has been called “a systematised sorcery,” and the result of his
attempt to pour new wine into old bottles was not long in showing
itself. Between the times of Valentinus and of Irenæus a Jewish magician
named Marcus produced a system which anticipates many of the childish
processes of the Mediæval Cabala, and attempted to turn Valentinus’
account of the Pleroma into a senseless juggling with the numerical
value of the Greek letters.[105] Such foolishness seems to have been
popular in Egypt, Catholic writers themselves not being entirely free
from it,[106] and to this Marcus added according to Irenæus, sacraments
with invocations in some Hebrew jargon assisted by tricks which caused
the consecrated wine to change colour and to overflow the cup. Our Third
Document, though not going so far in this respect as the Fourth, tends
manifestly in this direction, and although it resembles the story of
Pistis Sophia in being in the form of a dialogue between Jesus and His
disciples, it has very little in common with it. The constitution of the
Universe, which it rather assumes than describes, is indeed the same,
and the First Mystery and the Ineffable One are still mentioned with
reverence as being “merciful and compassionate and forgiving sins
alway.” Save for this, however, there is nothing to connect it with
Valentinus’ more sublime ideas, and the whole purport of the questions
asked by the disciples and the answers of the Saviour is how the
“mysteries” which Jesus has brought with Him are to be used to enable
their recipients to avoid the consequences of their sins and thus to go
after death to “inherit the Kingdom of Light.” All this is reminiscent
throughout of the _Book of the Dead_ and the other Egyptian funerary
texts, and the likeness is increased when, as before said, we read in it
of “mysteries” which, when spoken into the ears of the dying or repeated
over the dead, or even the knowledge gained during life of the names of
certain Powers set over punishments, will afford the dwellers in Amente
and the other hells deliverance from their tortures and will finally
admit them into the Kingdom. These have already been sufficiently dealt
with in the last part of the Introduction to make further reference to
them unnecessary, and the conclusion there come to, that the whole of
this Document is magical rather than religious must only be repeated.
That the four-fold division of man’s incorporeal part comes from the
belief of Pagan Egypt hardly needs demonstration when we see how closely
the Spirit Counterfeit of our text corresponds to the _Ka_ or double,
while the Fate which leads every man to his appointed death is a
familiar personage in Egyptian folk-lore. If in the description of the
cup of oblivion, the author for once seems to borrow from Plato, it is
by no means certain whence Plato drew his fable, if not from Egypt
itself.[107]

One must see, then, I think, in the Third Document the work of a
Valentinian, but of one of late date, who had slipped back, as the whole
sect probably did, into the systematised sorcery of his ancestor’s
faith, and whose Christianity mainly consisted in putting the account of
the semi-magical “mysteries” or secrets by which he hoped to escape the
horrors of hell, into the mouth of its Founder. But there are also many
other signs that this must have been later in date than the two first
Documents. The author shows a much greater acquaintance with the letter
of the New Testament than his predecessors, and while those quote almost
entirely from Matthew, the quotations in the Third Document are taken
largely from Luke. The author goes so far in one place as to quote from
the Epistle to the Romans as having been written by “our brother
Paul,”[108] which some writers think did not appear until well on in the
second century. The author, too, frequently refers to the persecutions
and the “torments which are in the law” as something imminent and
pressing on all Christians alike, and this can hardly be said of any
measures taken before the reign of Septimius Severus (A.D. 193-211),
when Valentinus had long been dead. The story of the woman who “came to
repent” and the subsequent command to St. Peter to “perform the mystery
which will cut off this soul from the Kingdom of Light,” together with
the many mysteries enumerated as exercising a magical effect on the
living and the dead, argue an established and regulated ritual which can
hardly have been organised in the lifetime of Valentinus or of his
immediate successors, Ptolemy and Heracleon.[109]

Lastly, Dr. Schmidt, following therein Prof. Harnack, attributes the
curious argument in this Third Document as to “a King of to-day” who
gives gifts to a man equal to himself, clothes him with “the vestures of
a King,” and pardons him for the most heinous crimes, to an episode in
the reign of Philip the Arabian recounted in the Augustan History.[110]
There seems the more reason in this contention that the argument—bad
though it may be ethically—comparing the Emperor’s proceeding to the
pardon extended by the Highest Powers to the worst of sinners, is
dragged in, as it were, by the neck and heels. But if it be this episode
which is really hinted at in our Third Document, this last cannot be put
earlier than A.D. 244 or 250, the dates of Philip’s accession—and death.

Passing on to the Fourth Document, there is no need to emphasise what
has been already said in the preceding chapter of this Introduction as
to the ever-increasing use therein of the practices of magic and
astrology as shown in the galimatias with which the prayers of Jesus are
prefaced and the pre-ponderating part in man’s destiny assigned in it to
the stars. Dr. Schmidt and Prof. Harnack follow their predecessor
Köstlin in regarding this as evidence of a more primitive form of heresy
than that which is taught in the earlier documents; but the argument is
really the other way. The same galimatias is found in the Græco-Egyptian
Magic Papyri none of which is assigned on palæographic grounds to an
earlier date than the third century, and the various “magical prayers”
which can be found in the Ethiopic MSS. published by Sir Ernest Wallis
Budge reproduce the same feature _ad nauseam_. It is found, too, in the
very late so-called “Gnostic” Papyrus of Turin, where the “Eli, Eli lama
sabachthani” spoken on the Cross is numbered in entire ignorance of its
context among “the glorious names of God”;[111] while we know from other
sources that the practice of astrology became so frequent under the
Christian Emperors that its use had to be limited by law. The same
assumption that words unintelligible to both writers and readers form
part of a “Divine language” appears strongly marked in even orthodox
Christian literature of the post-Constantinian centuries, as in the
series of Coptic Apocrypha lately acquired for the British Museum which
in their present form are not put earlier than the tenth century.[112]
Another proof of a late date for this Fourth Document can be found in
its concluding words about the Great Name which, although the belief can
be traced to the ancient Egyptian tale of the Illness of Râ, in the form
here given already approaches the stories to the same effect in the
Mediæval Cabala.

The Fifth Document need not detain us long, as nearly all that can be
said about it has been said above. But the picture of the murderer’s
soul tied by the tongue to a great demon in the shape of a horse is
found again in the Coptic Life of Bishop Pisentius which mentions the
invasion of the Persians in the reign of Heraclius and cannot therefore
be earlier than the end of the seventh century.[113] The descriptions of
the torments of hell, without being identical, are cast in the same
mould as those in the _Apocalypse of Paul_, which is attributed to the
year 380 A.D. The doctrine that it is the nature of the sins committed
by the soul which determine the bodily infirmities allotted to it in its
next incarnation also first appears formally stated, so far as I am
aware, in the _Acta Archelai_ written for the refutation of the teaching
of Manes, and therefore not earlier than the end of the third century.
It was probably this which led Lipsius to think that he could perceive
Manichaean features in our text.

                  *       *       *       *       *

To sum up, then, I believe that all the Documents in our text belong to
the School of Valentinus. As to date, the First and the greatest part of
the Second are probably taken from documents written by Valentinus
himself, and therefore before A.D. 160, while the last part of the
Second, and the whole of the Third, Fourth, and Fifth, are by the
degenerate successors of his school and are arranged in date order.
These last may be of any date between A.D. 245 and 388, when we last
hear of the Valentinians as an organised sect, and some parts of them
may not improbably be later still.

Footnote 2:

  _Not_ Greek, as has been sometimes said. The point is of importance
  for dating.

Footnote 3:

  Where not otherwise mentioned, this pagination is used in all
  references hereafter.

Footnote 4:

  Cf. alternative ending of Mark and Apocal. of Paul. Budge, _Misc.
  Coptic Texts_, p. 1084.

Footnote 5:

  See my article “Some Heretic Gospels” in _Scottish Review_ for 1893.

Footnote 6:

  _Archæological Report_ of the Egypt Exploration Fund, 1897-1898, p.
  62.

Footnote 7:

  _Album de Paléographie Copte._

Footnote 8:

  F. Granger, in a review in the _Journal of Theological Studies_, v. v.
  (1904), pp. 0400 ff., says he sees no reason why Coptic should not
  have been its original language. I am inclined to agree with him,
  particularly with regard to the Fourth and Fifth Documents. But the
  balance of expert opinion is distinctly against this view.

Footnote 9:

  In the Preface to the Coptic text of 1851, he states his intention of
  publishing later a “tractate,” showing the Ophite origin of the work;
  but this promise, like others affecting it, remains unfulfilled.

Footnote 10:

  All this is dealt with in the Introduction to my translation of the
  _Philosophumena_, published by the S.P.C.K. in 1921, pp. 5, 6.

Footnote 11:

  _Theologische Jahrbucher_, Bd. XIII., pp. 1-104, 137-196, Edited by
  Baur and Zeller, Tübingen.

Footnote 12:

  Buckle, who was a most omnivorous reader, found Schwartze’s Latin
  version and summarised it in the Commonplace Book, published after his
  death.

Footnote 13:

  I had the pleasure in 1912 of again uncovering a great part of these
  tombs under the leadership of my old friend Prof. Edouard Naville. I
  was astonished both at their extent and the very imperfect account of
  their first discovery given by M. Amélineau in the volumes published
  by him long after the excavation, from what were evidently imperfectly
  taken notes. Lack of funds prevented the Egypt Exploration Fund, for
  which Prof. Naville and I were working, from continuing our
  exploration, but I saw enough to convince me that there is still much
  to be gathered from a fresh exploration of the site.

Footnote 14:

  Dr. Preuschen’s criticism was made in the _Theologische
  Litteratur-Zeitung_ (of Jena) Bd. XIX. (1894), pp. 183-187, and
  answered by Dr. Schmidt in the _Zeitschrift für Wissenschaftliche
  Theologie_ of the same year, Bd. XXXVII., pp. 555 ff. Pastor
  Lichtenhau’s attack was given in the last-named periodical for 1901,
  Bd. XVIII., pp. 236 ff.

Footnote 15:

  Among the earlier writers, I should mention Joh. Nap. Grüber, who, in
  an inaugural Thesis read before the Faculty of the University of
  Würzburg in 1864, on the Ophite heresy, dealt at great length with the
  _Pistis Sophia_. I have worked through this, however, without deriving
  from it any new ideas which could be substantiated by later
  information. Among more recent writers, I may also mention the late
  Mr. P. D. Scott-Moncrieff’s _Paganism and Christianity in Egypt_
  (1913), which contains many useful hints and might, but for the
  writer’s premature death, have been expanded into a useful text-book.

Footnote 16:

  _E.g._ M. Maspero’s review in the _Revue Critique_ (n. 3, LXVIII., 2nd
  plie) for 1909, pp. 192, 193 of Lieblein’s article on the _Pistis
  Sophia_ in the _Kristiania Videnskobs-Selskabs Forhandlingen_ of the
  same year.

Footnote 17:

  The word _topos_ used here and elsewhere in the text seems to be a
  Greek translation of the Egyptian _Ker-t_, which as M. Naville,
  _Litanie du Soleil_, pp. 15, 16, points out, is the place which serves
  as a residence for a spirit or a body such as the Sun. He thinks with
  Champollion that it was also what the Alexandrians sometimes described
  as a zone or sphere.

Footnote 18:

  All this appears in the opening pages of our text with the exception
  of the place of our earth and of Chaos which is nowhere distinctly
  stated. Chaos is represented in the episode of _Pistis Sophia_ as
  being below the twelve Æons or Zodiac; but in her hymn of
  thanksgiving, she describes what has been done there as taking place
  “in the world of men.” Does this mean that the earth was made out of
  the “passions” of Sophia, as Irenæus (I. i., 10, pp. 48, 49 Harvey)
  says Valentinus affirmed? It is probable; but in any case, the
  Egyptians seem always to have regarded Chaos or the Darkness as
  outside rather than below the earth.

Footnote 19:

  See pp. 16-20 Copt.

Footnote 20:

  The word “Æon,” frequently employed in our text, seems to have in it
  quite a different meaning from that which the Fathers attributed to
  it. According to them, the Gnostics used it as equivalent to “Spirit”
  or “Power,” going so far as to describe the Supreme God of their
  system as “the Perfect Æon.” In our MS., however, it generally
  signifies the signs of the Zodiac and their curious adjunct the
  thirteenth Æon, which are all inhabited at some time or other by
  rebellious powers. In other passages, especially in the later
  documents, it resumes its proper etymological meaning of “Age” as when
  “the Consummation of the Æon” is talked of.

Footnote 21:

  Mary Magdalene appears as the chief interlocutor in the dialogues with
  the Saviour, asking, it is said, thirty-nine questions in all out of a
  total of forty-six. A Gnostic work is mentioned by Epiphanius in his
  twenty-sixth Heresy, as being used by a sect which he calls “the
  Gnostics” only, and bearing the title [the great] “Interrogations of
  Mary.” Hence Harnack (_Über das gnostische Buch Pistis Sophia_, pp.
  107 ff.) concludes that this may have been the original title of our
  text or of some part of it, and Schmidt seems to agree with him. But
  the practices which Epiphanius attributes to his Gnostics are
  expressly condemned in one of the later Documents of our text, nor do
  any of the tenets which he assigns to them agree with those here
  described.

Footnote 22:

  The Father is called “the First Mystery looking inward” on p. 126
  (Copt) and Jesus “the First Mystery looking outward” on p. 128, while
  the Veil of the First Mystery who is the Twin Mystery “looking inwards
  and outwards” is mentioned on p. 222.

Footnote 23:

  See pp. 237-240 (Copt).

Footnote 24:

  See p. 246 (Copt).

Footnote 25:

   See pp. 248-252. The Treasurehouse is therefore part of the Kerasmos.

Footnote 26:

  The Ophites actually had such a diagram, and this with their
  “defences” or “passwords” is described by Origen. Cf. _Forerunner_,
  II., pp. 66-74.

Footnote 27:

  These three “rhapsodies” are to be found on pp. 206-216, 219-224, and
  229-231. Scott-Moncrieff in his _Paganism and Christianity in Egypt_,
  pp. 77-80, points out that the early organisation of the Church in
  Egypt included “prophets” who were accustomed to utter things in
  ecstasy; and it is quite possible that these rhapsodies may be a
  specimen of their utterances. Besides being familiar with the _Book of
  the Dead_, they may have had an hereditary connection with the
  prophets of Amen.

Footnote 28:

  That He was supposed to have visited the highest realms is shown by
  the fact that He wore all three robes on his return.

Footnote 29:

  To correspond doubtless to the one “Space” of the Ineffable and the
  three Spaces of the First Mystery; making four in all.

Footnote 30:

  See pp. 279-281, Copt.

Footnote 31:

  See pp. 281-285; 336-341, Copt.

Footnote 32:

  These transmigrations are limited in number (see p. 327, Copt); but
  the number is not stated. It would be interesting to know if they were
  five, like those of the Manichæans.

Footnote 33:

  See p. 355, Copt.

Footnote 34:

  Thus Irenæus (II., 33, 3, p. 331 H.) says He suffered on completing
  His thirtieth year; yet that He taught until He was forty or fifty
  years old.

Footnote 35:

  This is repeated in the _Bruce Papyrus_ in the same connection.

Footnote 36:

  See p. 361, Copt.

Footnote 37:

  See pp. 364-371, Copt.

Footnote 38:

  See pp. 372-376, Copt.

Footnote 39:

  See pp. 379-387, Copt.

Footnote 40:

  See pp. 387-389, Copt.

Footnote 41:

  See pp. 389-390, Copt.

Footnote 42:

  That Valentinus, unlike Marcian, only wished to found a school within
  the Church and not to set up a rival one in opposition to it, is shown
  in _Forerunners_, p. 125.

Footnote 43:

  Our MS. is not only without any heading of the kind, but lacks any of
  the coloured or illuminated initial letters used in the religious
  texts of its period. A good specimen of their practices is seen in
  Budge’s _Coptic Apocrypha_, _passim_. In the _Pistis Sophia_ all this
  is absent, the paragraphs being marked with a single sign, while the
  gaps are filled by the simplest possible ornament corresponding to our
  dots.

Footnote 44:

  The belief that knowledge of the name of a person or thing gave its
  possessor power over it appears in nearly every chapter of the _Book
  of the Dead_ as well as in the story of the Places of Râ. Hence it is
  probable that many of the names given in our text are only pseudonyms
  borrowed, perhaps, from other sects. Thus the names of Iao and
  Maskelli are expressly said to be those by which they are called by
  “the demons” and to correspond to those of certain wicked “Rulers.”

Footnote 45:

  Cf. P. S. B. A., 1903, p. 304.

Footnote 46:

  Pierrot, _Livre des Morts_, 1882, p. 555.

Footnote 47:

  F. C. Burkitt in P. S. B. A., 1901, p. 78. Prof. Burkitt thinks the
  Homily was probably written by Isaac of Antioch. Cf. the thirty-sixth
  Canon of the Council of Laodicea quoted by Lightfoot. _Colossians_, p.
  69.

Footnote 48:

  Cf. the elaborate colophon to the _Apocalypse of Paul_ in Budge’s
  _Miscellaneous Coptic Texts_, p. 1084 and Pl. XL.

Footnote 49:

  P. 8, Copt.

Footnote 50:

  See last note.

Footnote 51:

  P. 127, Copt.

Footnote 52:

  Pp. 120 f., Copt.

Footnote 53:

  P. 128, Copt.

Footnote 54:

  Pp. 11 f., Copt.

Footnote 55:

  Pp. 248, 249, 251, Copt.

Footnote 56:

  P. 22, Copt.

Footnote 57:

  P. 336, Copt.

Footnote 58:

  P. 360, Copt.

Footnote 59:

  Pp. 336 f., Copt.

Footnote 60:

  Pp. 336 ff., Copt.

Footnote 61:

  There are many other discrepancies which I have found myself obliged
  to omit here, lest this Introduction should unduly delay the reader on
  his way to the text. I believe nearly all of them are to be found
  referred to in the Notes.

Footnote 62:

  In the five Words or Addresses in the Vesture of Light.

Footnote 63:

  For the _Excerpta_, see Clem. Alex. III., pp. 107 ff. of Stählin’s
  text or c. VI. of Migne’s. For the _Bruce Papyrus_, see Amélineau,
  _Notices et Extraits_ XXIX., 2nd Ptie., p. 106; or Schmidt, _Koptisch
  Gnostische Schriften_, p. 343.

Footnote 64:

  Ptolemy and Heracleon were contemporary and flourished about 170-200
  A.D.

Footnote 65:

  Prof. Harnack (_op. cit._ pp. 26, 27) gives a long table of supposed
  quotations from the Fourth Gospel which he thinks are to be found in
  our text. There is not one of these which might not equally well be
  taken from the Synoptics until we come to our Fourth Document with two
  exceptions. One of these is given above; the other is on p. 11 (First
  Document) where Jesus says to His disciples: “Wherefore I said to you
  in the Beginning that you are not of the Cosmos. I also am not of it.”
  This Harnack wishes to identify with the words of John xvii. 16: “They
  are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.” The words “in
  the Beginning” frequently used by our author seem to us to show that
  the quotation must be referred to an entirely different time and place
  from those of the Gospel verse.

Footnote 66:

  P. 321, Copt.

Footnote 67:

  P. 373, Copt.

Footnote 68:

  P. 374, Copt.

Footnote 69:

  P. 177, Copt.

Footnote 70:

  As I have shown in _Forerunners_ (II. 45 n. 1; 104 n. 4, etc.) _all_
  the Sophias, pre-Christian as well as Gnostic, in some way or other
  typify the Earth.

Footnote 71:

  According to M. Cumont (_Astrology and Religion_, American edition, p.
  96), Astral religion reached its zenith under the Severi, or from A.D.
  193 to 235.

Footnote 72:

  P. 199, Copt.

Footnote 73:

  P. 252, Copt. He here refers also to the promised revelation on the
  “Distribution of the Universe.”

Footnote 74:

  Maspero, _Hyp. Poy._, pp. 178 ff.

Footnote 75:

  1 Cor. xii, 12.

Footnote 76:

  P. 280, Copt.

Footnote 77:

  _de Mysteriis_, Bk. I. c. 1.

Footnote 78:

  Amélineau, _Gnosticisme Egyptien_ (quoting Pierret), p. 152 and note.

Footnote 79:

  P. 332. Copt.

Footnote 80:

  P. 357, Copt. The same plea is made in the opening of the _Bruce
  Papyrus_.

Footnote 81:

  P. 377, Copt.

Footnote 82:

  P. 184, Amélineau; 369, Schmidt, K. G. S.

Footnote 83:

  P. 376, Copt.

Footnote 84:

  P. 377, Copt.

Footnote 85:

  Pp. 378, 379, Copt.

Footnote 86:

  Maspero, _Hyp. Poy._ p. 179.

Footnote 87:

  P. 361, Copt.

Footnote 88:

  _Forerunners_, II., pp. 178-180.

Footnote 89:

  Axionicus was living at Antioch when Tertullian wrote, and is said by
  him to have preserved Valentinus’ doctrine unaltered. Cf. _adv.
  Valentin._ c. IV. (II. p. 386, Ochl.).

Footnote 90:

  See especially Clement’s quotation from Valentinus given in full in
  _Forerunners_, II. p. 125.

Footnote 91:

  See last note.

Footnote 92:

  Hipp., _Philosophum._ VI. c. 29, pp. 280, 281, Cf. _Forerunners_, II.
  p. 123, for the passage in full.

Footnote 93:

  Mallet, _Culte de Neol. à Saix_, confuses the relations of these two
  to those of Nu and Ptah in the older faith.

Footnote 94:

  See _Forerunners_, II. pp. 104-106, for authorities.

Footnote 95:

  _Ibid._, pp. 106-109.

Footnote 96:

  Budge, _Coptic Apocrypha_, pp. 185, 186.

Footnote 97:

  Irenæus I. vi. 2, p. 112 H.; Tertull. _adv. Valentinia._ c. 36, II. p.
  419 Oehl.

Footnote 98:

  _Forerunners_, II. p. 103.

Footnote 99:

  W. R. Newbold. A Syriac Valentinian Hymn in _Journal of the American
  Oriental Society_, Vol. 38, pt. I. (1918), pp. 1 ff.

Footnote 100:

  _Philosophumena_, VI. 2, 37, pp. 299 Cr.

Footnote 101:

  _Ibid._, p. 301 Cr.

Footnote 102:

  _Forerunners_, II. pp. 159-163; pp. 178-180.

Footnote 103:

  See last note.

Footnote 104:

  Schmidt and Lichtenhaus in the articles above quoted attribute many of
  the discrepancies in the story of Pistis Sophia to the supposed fact
  that the translator or the scribe was working on several different
  documents or on different recensions of one document. This is likely
  enough; but as its details savour of the textual criticisms or, as it
  seems to me, the guess work which has given us the “polychrome” Bible,
  I have thought it best not to dwell further upon it.

Footnote 105:

  Irenæus, I. 7, 8, II. pp. 114-156 H.

Footnote 106:

  Cf. _Epistle of Barnabas_, c. 10, pp. 23, 24, Hilgenfeld; quoted in
  _Forerunners_, II. p. 1566, n. 2.

Footnote 107:

  In _Forerunners_ I have given my reasons for adhering to M. Foucart’s
  opinion that the Eleusinian Mysteries originally came from Egypt.

Footnote 108:

  P. 294, Copt.

Footnote 109:

  Ptolemy in his letter to his “dear sister Flora,” given in full in
  Epiphanius, does not even hint at anything of the kind, nor does
  Heracleon in his commentaries on St. John quoted by Origen.

Footnote 110:

  Harnack, _op. cit._ p. 100.

Footnote 111:

  Cf. Amélineau, _Le Nouveau Traité Gnostique de Turin_, 1895, p. 18.

Footnote 112:

  Budge, _Miscellaneous Coptic Texts_, _passim_.

Footnote 113:

  Budge, _Coptic Apocrypha_, p. 329.




                  LITERAL TRANSLATION OF PISTIS SOPHIA
                           THE FIRST DOCUMENT


But it happened after that Jesus rose out of those who (are) dead, and
he spent eleven years speaking with his disciples, and teaching them
only as far as the Places of the First precept (Law?), and as far as the
Places of the First Mystery, this which (is) the inward of the veil
which (is) within the First precept, namely the twenty-fourth mystery
out(side) and below; these (Places) which become in the second Space of
the First Mystery which (is) before every mystery, the Father in the
form of dove. Jesus is saying to his disciples, I came out of that First
Mystery, namely [1^b] the Last mystery which is the twenty-fourth, and
which the disciples knew not and understood not that there is anything
within that mystery; but they were thinking of that mystery that it is
the head of the Universe, and the head of all those which become.

And they were thinking that it is the completion of all the completions
because that Jesus was saying to them concerning that mystery that it
(is) that which surroundeth the first precept with the five Marks and
with the great Light and with the five Helpers and with all the Treasury
of the Light. And also Jesus had not said unto his disciples all the
distribution [2^a] of all the Places of the great Invisible with the
three Triple Powers with the twenty-four Invisibles with all their
Places with their Aeons with all their arrays as they are distributed,
these namely the emanations of the great Invisible and with their
Unbegotten (ones) and with their Self begotten (ones) and with their
Begotten (ones) and with their luminaries and with their Unpaired (ones)
and with their Rulers with their Authorities with their Lords with their
Archangels with their Angels with their Dekans with their Ministers with
all the houses of their Spheres, and [2^b] with all the arrays each one
of them. And Jesus had not said unto his disciples all the distribution
of the emanations of the Treasury nor their arrays as they are
distributed: nor had he said unto them their Saviours according to the
array of each one as they are. Nor had he said unto them what Guardian
is at each (door) of the Treasury of the Light. Nor had he said unto
them the Place of the Twin Saviour, namely the child of the child. And
he had not said unto them the Place of the three Amens in what Place
they are distributed [3^a]. And he had not said unto them in what Place
the five Trees are distributed, nor the other seven Amens, namely, the
seven Voices, what is their Place according as they are distributed. And
Jesus had not said unto his disciples of what type are the five Helpers,
or in what Place they were brought. Nor had he said unto them in what
manner the great Light was distributed, or in what Place it was brought.

Nor had he said unto them the five Marks, nor concerning the First
precept in what Place it was brought.

But he was only speaking [3^b] with them simply, teaching them that they
exist (become). But their distribution with the array of their Places he
had not said unto them according as they exist.

Because of this indeed they knew not that there are other Places
becoming the inward of that Mystery. And he had not said unto his
disciples out of what Place I came until I came into that Mystery, until
I came forth out of it. But he was wont to say to them, teaching them
that I came out of that Mystery. Because of this therefore they were
thinking of that Mystery that it is the completion of all completions;
and that it is the head of the Universe; and that [4^a] it is the whole
Pleroma: since Jesus is wont to say unto his disciples that that Mystery
(is) that which surroundeth the Universe of all which I said unto you
from the day when I met you even unto to-day. Because of this therefore
the disciples were thinking that there is not anything becoming within
that mystery.

It happened therefore while the disciples are sitting with one another
upon the mountain of the Olives saying these words and rejoicing in
great joy and being very glad, and saying to one another, We happy are
beyond all men who (are) upon the earth, because the [4^b] Saviour
revealed these (things) to us, and we received the Pleroma with all the
completion. While these they are saying unto one another Jesus is
sitting, being distant from them a little (way). But it happened on the
fifteenth day of the month of Tōbe, namely the day in which the moon is
wont to be full, on that day therefore the sun having come out in his
course, (there) came out after him a great power of light enlightening
greatly greatly, (there) being no measure for the light which was made,
for it came out of the Light of the lights, and it came out of the Last
mystery, namely the twenty-fourth mystery (reckoning) from within [5^a]
unto without, these (mysteries) which become in the array of the second
Space of the First Mystery. But that power indeed of light came upon
Jesus and surrounded him altogether, while sitting at a distance from
his disciples, and he was enlightening greatly greatly, (there) being no
measure for the light which was becoming. And the disciples had not seen
Jesus from the great light in which he was being, or which was being
(from) him; for their eyes had been darkened from the great light in
which he was being. But they were only seeing the light casting out
beams of light which are great. And not equal with one another [5^b]
were the beams of light; and the light was being of different kinds, and
it was being of different types (reaching) from below to above, one
being more excellent than one at a time in a great glory of light
immeasurable, it was reaching from below on the earth even up to the
heavens.

And the disciples having seen that light, they became in great fear and
in great disturbance.

It happened therefore when the power of that light came upon Jesus, it
surrounded him entirely (by) little (and) little. Then Jesus mounted up,
or flew, unto the Height having enlightened greatly greatly in light for
which there is not measure. And the disciples were looking [6^a] at him,
none of them speaking until he went up unto the heaven, but they were
all being in great silence. These (things) therefore happened on the
fifteen of the moon, the day on which is wont to be completed the month
of Tōbe.

It happened therefore Jesus having gone into the heaven, after three
hours were disturbed all the powers of the heavens, and they all quaked
against one another, they with all their Aeons with all their Places and
with all their arrays; and all the earth was moved with all those who
dwell upon it. And were disturbed all the men who (are) in the World
with the disciples also, and they were all thinking that perhaps [6^b]
will be rolled up the World. And had not ceased all the powers which
(are) in the heavens being disturbed, they with all the World, and they
were all being moved upon one another from three of the fifteen of the
moon of Tōbe even unto nine of the morrow. And all the Angels with their
Archangels and with all the Powers of the Height were all hymning unto
the inner part of the inner parts. So that all the earth heard their
voices, not ceasing even unto the nine of the morrow.

But the disciples were sitting with one another being in fear, and they
had been disturbed [7^a] greatly greatly, but they were fearing because
of the great earthquake which becometh, and they were weeping with one
another, saying, What then is it that will happen? Perhaps the Saviour
is about to overturn all the Places.

These therefore they are saying, weeping toward one another. At the hour
of nine of the morrow the heavens opened, and they saw Jesus coming
down, enlightening greatly greatly, there being no measure for his light
in which he is becoming, for he was enlightening more than the hour in
which he went up unto the heavens, so that it was not possible for
world-men to speak of the light which was being from him: and he was
casting out beams of [7^b] light greatly greatly, there being no measure
for his beams; and his light was not being equal with itself (one
another), but it was being of different kinds, and it was being of
different types, some more excellent than one another at a time; and all
the light was in itself different; it was being of three manners and one
more excellent than one at a time; the second which is in the middle was
being more excellent than the first which is below, and the third which
is above them all was more excellent than the two which (are) below. And
the first ray placed below them all, being of the kind of light which
[8^a] came upon Jesus before that he went up unto the heavens, and being
equal to it only in his light. And the three lights were being of
different kinds of light, and they were being of different types, some
more excellent than some at a time.

But it happened, (that) the disciples having seen these they feared
greatly and were disturbed. Jesus therefore the merciful and the sweet
(of) heart, having seen his disciples that they were disturbed in a
great disturbance spake with them, saying, Be confident of heart, I am,
fear not.

It happened therefore, the disciples having heard this word said they,
Lord if thou art, draw away unto thee thy light of glory, that [8^b] we
may be able to stand, otherwise our eyes are darkened, and we were
disturbed, and also was disturbed all the World out of the great light
which becometh from thee.

Then Jesus drew away unto him the glory of his light, and this having
happened were confident of heart all the disciples, they came up to foot
of Jesus, they prostrated all, at once, they worshipped to him rejoicing
in great joy. Said they to him, Hrabbei, whither wentest thou, or what
is thy Service which thou wentest (upon), or in what indeed were all
these disturbances with all these earthquakes which happened? Then said
he to them Jesus, the merciful, Rejoice and be glad from this hour,
because [9^a] I went even to the Places out of which I came. From
to-day, therefore, henceforth I shall speak with you in boldness from
the beginning of the Truth even to its end, and I shall speak with you
face to face without parable, I shall not hide anything from you, from
this hour, of the (things) of the Height and the (things) of the Place
of the Truth; for they gave authority from the Ineffable and from the
First Mystery of all the mysteries for me to speak with you from the
beginning even to the Pleroma, and from within even to without and from
without even to within. Hear therefore that I may say unto you
everything. It happened while I am sitting being distant from you [9^b]
a little upon the mountain of the Olives, thinking of the arrangement of
the service concerning which they sent me, that it was finished: and the
Last mystery dispatched not to me my vesture, namely the twenty-fourth
mystery (reckoning) from within even to without, these which become in
the second Space of the First Mystery in the array of that Space. It
happened therefore, I having known that was finished the arrangement of
the service, concerning which I came, and not yet that Mystery
dispatched to me my vesture this which I left in it, until was finished
his time. These (things) therefore thinking, sitting [10^a] upon the
mountain of the Olives distant from you a little, it happened as the sun
came up in the Places of rising, afterward therefore through the First
Mystery, this which was becoming from at first, this because of whom the
Universe became, this out of which I also came now, not at the time
before they crucified me, but now. It happened by the commandment of
that Mystery, he dispatched to me my vesture of light, this which he
gave for me from (at) first, this which I left in the Last mystery,
namely the twenty-fourth mystery (reckoning) from within out, these
which become in the arrays of the second Space of the First [10^b]
Mystery. That vesture of light therefore, that which I, I left in the
Last mystery, until finished the time for me to put it on, and to begin
for me to speak with the race of mankind, and reveal to them all from
the beginning of the Truth even unto its end, and speak with them from
the inward part of the inward parts even unto the outward part of the
outward parts, and from the outward part of the outward parts even unto
the inward part of the inward parts. Rejoice therefore with gladness and
make more joy, because ye are those to whom they gave it for me to speak
with you at first from the beginning of the Truth [11^a] even unto its
end. Because of this indeed I chose you from at first through the First
Mystery. Rejoice therefore and be glad, because having come, coming out
unto the World from at first I brought twelve powers with me according
as I said unto you from at first, which I received from the twelve
Saviours of the Treasury of Light, according to the commandment of the
First Mystery. These therefore I cast unto the womb of your mother, from
when I come unto the World, these which (are) in your body to-day, for
they gave these powers unto you beyond all the World, because ye are
those who will save all the World; and that ye should [11^b] prevail to
endure the threat of the Rulers of the World with the toils of the World
with their dangers and with their persecutions, all which will bring
upon you the Rulers of the Height. For I said to you many times that the
power which becometh within you, this which I brought out of the twelve
Saviours, these who become in the Treasury of the Light. Because of this
indeed I said to you from at first that ye are not (such as are) out of
the World, this I also, I am not out of it, for every man who (is) in
the World received soul out of the Rulers of the Aeons, but the power
which becometh [12^a] in you is (something) from me. But ye, your souls
are numbered unto the Height. I brought twelve powers of 12 Saviours to
the Treasury of the Light, which I took out of the part of my power,
that which I took at first. And having come, coming unto the World I
came unto the midst of the Rulers of the Sphere, I was the likeness of
Gabriel the angel of the Aeons, and knew me not the Rulers of the Aeons.
But they were thinking that I am Gabriel the angel. It happened
therefore, having come unto the midst of the Rulers of the Aeons, I
looked down unto the World of the mankind by the command of the First
Mystery, I found Elisabet the mother of Iohannes, [12^b] the baptist,
before that that (woman) yet conceived him, I sowed a power into her,
this which I received from the little Iao, the good, he who (is) in the
Middle, that he should prevail to preach in front of us, and prepare my
road and baptise in water for forgiving sin. That power therefore, that
(is) that which becometh in the body of Iohannes, and also in the Place
of the soul of the Rulers, destined to receive it, I found the soul of
Helias the prophet in the Aeons of the Sphere, and I took him in, and I
took his soul also, I brought it to the Virgin of the Light and she gave
it to her Receivers, they brought it unto the Sphere of the [13^a]
Rulers and they cast it into the womb of Elisabet. But the power of the
little Iao, he of the Middle, and the soul of Helias the prophet, they
(are) those which are bound in the body of Iohannes the baptist. Because
of this therefore ye doubted, at the time I having said to you, that
Iohannes said, I am not the Christ, and ye said to me, It is written in
the Scripture that if the Christ should come, he coming, cometh Helias
before him and prepareth his road. But I, ye having said to me these
(things) I said to you, Came indeed Helias, and he prepared everything
according as it is written, and they did to him as they are willing (to
do). And having known that ye did not understand that I said to you
[13^b] concerning the soul of Helias which is bound in Iohannes the
baptist, I answered to you in the word in boldness of face with face, If
ye are willing to receive (it) Iohannes the baptist, he is Helias, he
whom I said that he cometh.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he, It happened therefore after these
(things), by the command of the First Mystery I looked also down upon
the World of the mankind I found Maria this whom they are wont to call
my mother according to the body of the matter. I spake also with her
according to the form of Gabriel, and she having turned herself unto the
Height unto me I cast in unto her the first power that which I took from
the Barbelo, [14^a] namely, the body which I wear in the Height and in
the place (Coptic) of the soul I cast in unto her the power, that which
I took from the great Sabaoth, the good, this who becometh in the Place
of the Right (hand), and the twelve powers of the twelve Saviours of the
Treasury of the Light, those which I took from the twelve Deacons which
(are) in the Middle, I cast them unto the Sphere of the Rulers, and the
Dekan of the Rulers with their Ministrants, they were thinking that
souls they were of the Rulers, and brought them the Ministrants, I bound
them in the body of your mother. And when your time was finished they
produced you in [14^b] the World, there not being soul of the Rulers in
you; and ye took your part out of the power, this which breathed in unto
the Confusion the last Helper, this (power) which is mixed with all the
Invisibles with all the Rulers, with all the Aeons, once simply being
mixed in the World of the corruption which is the Confusion: this
(power) which I brought out of me from at first, I cast it in unto the
First precept, and the First precept cast a part from it in unto the
great Light, and the great Light cast a part from that which he received
in unto the five Helpers, and the last Helper received a part from that
which he received he cast it in unto the Confusion, [15^a] and it became
in all (things) those which become in the Confusion, according as I have
already said to you.

These therefore Jesus is saying to his disciples upon the mountain of
the Olives.

Added Jesus also in the word with his disciples, Rejoice and be glad and
add joy upon your joy because fulfilled were the times for me to put on
my vesture, this which was being prepared for me from at first, this
which I left in the Last mystery even unto the time of its fulfilment.
But the time of its fulfilment is the time which they will command by
the First mystery for me to speak with you from the beginning of the
Truth even unto its end, and from the inward part [15^b] of the inward
parts, because that the World will be delivered by you. Rejoice
therefore and be glad because ye are happy beyond all the men who (are)
upon the earth, because ye are those who will deliver all the World.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, he added also in the word, said he to them, Behold therefore
I wore my vesture, and they gave to me all authorities by the First
Mystery. Yet a little more time is, and I shall say unto you the mystery
of the all with the Pleroma of the all; and I shall hide nothing from
you from this hour, but in a fulfilment I shall fulfil you in every
Pleroma and in every completion and in every mystery, namely the
completion of all completions, and [16^a] the Pleroma of all the
Pleromas and the knowledge of all the knowledges these which become in
my vesture I shall say unto you all the mysteries from the outward part
of the outward parts unto the inward part of the inward parts.

Nevertheless, hear, that I may say unto you everything which happened to
me. It happened therefore the sun having come up in the places (Coptic)
of rising, (there) came down a great power of light, my vesture being in
it, this which I left in the twenty-fourth Mystery according as I have
already said to you now, and I found a mystery in my vesture, written in
the sort of, the writing of the (things) of the Height _zama zama ozza
rakhama ozai_, namely, its interpretation, The mystery which is outside
of the World, this [16^b] because of which the Universe became. This is
with the whole (going) out the whole taking away up, this which
distributed all the distributions with all those which are in them, and
this because of which every mystery became and with all their Places.
Come up even unto us, because we (are) thy fellow members, but we all
(are) with thyself also, we (are) One of One and thou art One of One,
that is the First Mystery which became from at first in the Ineffable
before that he came forth, and the name of that (One) we all (are). Now
therefore we all together we wait for thee at the last Boundary, namely,
the last mystery (reckoning) from within, he also is a part of us. Now
therefore we have dispatched to thee thy vesture [17^a] which is thy
very own from at first, this which thou left in the last Boundary,
namely, the Last mystery from within, until his time is completed
according to the command of the First Mystery.

Behold, having been completed his time, put it on. Come even unto us, we
all wait for thee, for us to put on thee the First Mystery with all his
glory through his own command, the First Mystery having given him to us
being two vestures for us to put on thee, beside this which we
dispatched to thee, because thou art worthy of them, since thou (art) he
who preceded us and thou becomest before us.

Because of this, therefore, the First Mystery dispatched to thee through
us the mystery of all his glory, being two vestures. (The) First indeed
being [17^b] in it all the glory of all names of all the mysteries with
all the emanations of the arrays of the Spaces of the Ineffable. And the
second clothing, being in it all the glory of all the names of all the
mysteries with all the emanations, these which become in the arrays of
the two Spaces of the First Mystery. And this vesture which we
dispatched to thee now, being in it the glory of the name of the mystery
of the Herald, namely, the First precept, and the mystery of the five
Marks, and the mystery of the great Legate of the Ineffable, namely, the
great Light and with the mystery of the five Leaders, these who are the
five Companions; and also becometh in that vesture the glory [18^a] of
the name of the mysteries of all the arrays of the emanations of the
Treasury of the Light and with their Saviours, and with the arrays of
the arrays, namely, the seven Amens, and, namely, the seven Voices and
with the five Trees, and with the three Amens and with the Twin Saviour,
namely, the child of the child, and with the mystery of the nine Guards
of the three Gates of the Treasury of the Light, and also being in it
all the glory of the name of all those who (are) on (the) Right (hand)
with all those who become in the Middle, and also being in it all the
glory of the name of the great Invisible, namely, the great Forefather,
and with the mysteries of the three Triple-powers, and with the
mysteries of all their Places, [18^b] and with the mysteries of all
their Invisibles, with all those who become in the thirteenth of the
Aeons, and with the name of the twelve Aeons and with all their Rulers,
and with all their Archangels and with all their Angels, and with all
those who become in the twelve Aeons: and all the mysteries of the names
of all those who become in the Destiny, with all the heavens, and all
the mysteries of the names of all those who become in the Sphere, and
with their firmaments, with all those who (are) in them, and with all
their Places. Behold, therefore, we dispatched to thee that vesture,
which no one knew from the First precept downwards, because that the
glory of his light [19^a] was being hid in it, and the Spheres with all
the Places (knew it not). Hasten therefore put this vesture on thee,
come even unto us because we (may) wait for thee, for us to put on thee
thy two vestures by the command of the First Mystery (Margin: these
which become to thee from the first together with the First Mystery)
until the time is fulfilled, this which is defined by the Ineffable.

Behold, therefore, was fulfilled the time. Come therefore unto us in
haste that we may put them on thee, until thou completest all the
service of the completion of the First Mystery, this (service) which is
defined by the Ineffable. Come, therefore, unto us quickly that we may
put them on thee according to the command of the First Mystery. For yet
other little time is very short: thou comest up to us and thou wilt
cease (being) in the World [19^b]. Come, therefore, quickly that thou
mayest receive all thy glory, which is the glory of the First Mystery.

It happened therefore, I, having seen the mystery of all these words in
the vesture which he dispatched to me, I put it on me in that hour: and
I enlightened greatly greatly, and I flew unto the Height, and I came at
the gate of the firmament enlightening greatly greatly, there being no
measure unto the light with which I was becoming. And were disturbed
upon one another the gates of the firmament, all were opened at once,
and all the Rulers with all the Authorities, with all the Angels who
(were) in it, they were all disturbed together because of the great
light which becometh from me. And they looked at the vesture of light
which (was) on me, which [20^a] enlighteneth, they saw the mystery on
which is being their name, they feared greatly greatly, and were
loosened all their bonds, these in which they are bound, and each one
ceased from his array. And they prostrated all before my presence, they
worshipped, saying, In what manner passed through us the Lord of the
Universe, while we knew (it) not? And they all hymned together unto the
inward part of the inward parts. But I, they were seeing me not, but
they were seeing the light only, and they were becoming in great fear
and they were disturbed greatly, and they hymned unto the inward part of
the inward parts: but I left that Place, I came up unto the first Sphere
enlightening greatly greatly, more than as I enlightened [20^b] in the
firmament forty-nine of double of time. It happened therefore, I having
reached the gate of the first Sphere, were disturbed its gates and they
opened themselves at once. I came into the houses of the Sphere
enlightening greatly greatly, there being no measure unto the light
which becometh from me; and were disturbed upon one another all the
Rulers with all those who become in that Sphere, and they saw the great
light which becometh from me, and they looked at my vesture, they saw
the mystery of their name in it and they were disturbed and they became
in great fear, saying, How did the Lord of the Universe pass through us
while we knew (it) not? And were loosened all their bonds and with their
Places [21^a] with their arrays. And each ceased in his array. They
prostrated all together, they worshipped at my presence or at presence
of my vesture and they hymned all together unto the inward part of the
inward parts, becoming in great fear with great disturbance. And I left
that place behind me, I came even unto the gate of the second Sphere,
this, namely, the Destiny. But were disturbed all her gates, and they
were opened one on another, and I went in unto the houses of the Destiny
enlightening greatly greatly, there being no measure unto the light
which becometh from me. For I was enlightening in the Destiny more than
the Sphere forty-nine of double of time. And were disturbed all the
Rulers with [21^b] all those who become in the Destiny, and they fell
upon one another, they became in great fear greatly, seeing the great
light becoming from me. And they looked at my vesture of light, they saw
the mystery of their name in my vesture, and they were made more
disturbed, they became in great fear saying, In what manner did the Lord
of the Universe pass through us, while we know (it) not? And were
loosened all their bonds of their Places with their arrays with their
houses: they came all together, they prostrated they worshipped at my
presence, and they hymned all together unto the inward part of the
inward parts, becoming in great fear with great disturbance. And I left
that Place behind me, I came unto the great Aeons of the Rulers, [22^a]
I came at their veils and with their gates, enlightening greatly
greatly, and there being no measure unto the light which becometh from
me. It happened therefore when I had reached unto the twelve Aeons, were
disturbed one upon another their veils and with their gates: drew (away)
of themselves the veils, and their gates opened one upon another, and I
went in unto their Aeons enlightening greatly greatly, there being no
measure unto the light which becometh from me: more than the light in
which I enlightened in the houses of the Destiny forty-nine of double of
time: and all the Angels of the Aeons with their Archangels with their
Rulers (Another (2nd) hand begins here.) with their Gods with their
Lords with their [22^b] Authorities and their Tyrants with their powers
with their sparks with their luminaries, with their Unpaired-ones, with
their Invisibles and with their Forefathers, with their
Triple-powered-ones, they saw me enlightening greatly, there being no
measure unto the light which becometh from me: and they were disturbed
one upon another, and great fear fell upon them, seeing the great light
which was becoming from me. And their great disturbance with their great
fear reached even unto the Place of the great invisible Forefather, and
with the three great Triple-powered-ones. But through the great fear of
their disturbance continued running hither and thither in his Place the
great Forefather, [23^a] he with the three Triple-powered-ones. And they
were not able to shut all their Places because of the great fear in
which they were becoming: and moved all their Aeons together, with all
their Spheres with all their orderings, fearing and being disturbed
greatly because of the great light which was becoming from me, not as
once was becoming from me being upon the earth of the mankind, having
come upon me the vesture of light, for it was not possible for the World
to endure the light, as it was in its truth, otherwise the World would
have dissolved with all those who (are) upon it together. But the light
which was becoming from me in the twelve Aeons [23^b] was greater than
that which became from me in the World together with you (of) eight
thousand with seven hundred of ten thousand of double of time.

It happened therefore all those who become in the twelve Aeons, having
seen the great light which was becoming from me, they were all disturbed
one upon another, and they ran hither and thither in the Aeons, and
moved one upon another all the Aeons with all the heavens with all their
ordering, because of the great fear which became to them, because that
they knew not the great mystery which became. And the Adamas the great
Tyrant with all the Tyrants who become in all the Aeons began to war
without cause against the light and they knew not [24^a] with whom they
are warring, because that they were not seeing anyone except the light
which surpassed greatly.

It happened therefore, they having warred against the light, they all
burned one with another and fell down in the Aeons, they became as the
earth-beings who are dead, no breath being in them. And I took away a
third part of all their powers, that they should not work in their evil
doings, and that whenever the men who (are) in the World should invoke
them in their mysteries, these who brought them down even the Angels who
transgressed—these which were their magic, that therefore whenever they
should invoke them in their evil doings, they should not be able to
accomplish them: and the Destiny with the Sphere which is lord unto them
I removed, [24^b] and I caused them to spend six months turned to the
Left (hand) and they fulfilling their influences, and six months,
looking to the Right (hand) fulfilling their influences: but (it was)
through the command of the First precept, and through the command of the
First Mystery, Ieou the overseer of the light, put them looking to the
left every hour fulfilling their influences and with their doings. It
happened therefore, I having come unto their place, they were refractory
and they warred against the light: I took away the third part of their
power, that they should not be able to prevail in fulfilling their evil
doings; and the Destiny with the Sphere [25^a] which is lord unto them I
removed, and I put them looking to the Left for six months, fulfilling
their influences, and I put them for six other months turned to the
Right, fulfilling their influences. These therefore having said unto his
disciples, said he to them, He who hath ear to hear let him hear. It
happened therefore, Mariham having heard these words, saying them the
Saviour, she gazed in the air for the time of an hour. Said she, My Lord
command to me that I may speak in boldness.

Answered Jesus the merciful, said he to Mariham, Mariham the happy, this
whom I shall complete in all the mysteries [25^b] of the (things) of the
Height. Speak in boldness, because thou art she whose heart straineth
toward the Kingdom of the heavens more than all thy brothers.

Then said she, Mariham to the Saviour, My Lord, the word which thou
saidst to us, He who hath ear to hear let him hear, art thou saying that
we should understand the word which thou saidst? Hear, therefore, my
Lord and I (will) say in boldness. The word which thou saidst that I
took away the third part from the power of the Rulers of all the Aeons;
and that I removed their Destiny with their Spheres, these which are for
lord unto them, that whenever the race of the men should invoke them in
their mysteries, these which taught them the Angels, who transgressed,
unto the accomplishment of their evil [26^a] works and unlawful, in the
mystery of their magic; in order that they should not be able to prevail
any more from this hour to accomplish their unlawful works, because that
thou tookest away their power from them: with their hour-setters, with
their enquirers, with those who are wont to show to the men, who are in
the World, everything which will happen, that they should not understand
from this hour to show to them any thing which will happen, because thou
removedst their Spheres; and thou causedst them to spend six months
turned to the left, fulfilling their influences, and other six months
looking to the right, fulfilling their influences. Because of this word
therefore, my Lord, which it said thus (viz.) the power which (is) in
Esaias the prophet, and which it uttered in a spiritual parable, [26^b]
once speaking concerning the vision of Egypt: Where, therefore, Egypt,
where are thy enquirers, with thy hour-setters, with those who are wont
to call out of the earth, with those who are wont to call out of their
belly? Let them show to thee, therefore, from this hour the works which
will do the Lord, Sabaoth. Of whom prophesied therefore before that thou
camest, the power which (is) in Esaias the prophet who prophesied about
thee, that thou would take away the power of the Rulers of the Aeons,
and remove their Sphere with their Destiny that they should not know
anything from this hour? Concerning this indeed it said, Ye will not
know, therefore, what the Lord, Sabaoth will do, namely, [27^a] that
there is not any in the Rulers about to know the (things) which thou
wilt do from this hour, which (Rulers) are (called) Egypt because that
they are of matter: which the power, therefore, which is in Esaias
prophesied about thee once saying, Ye will not know therefore from this
hour the (things) which will do the Lord, Sabaoth, because of the power
of light which thou receivedst from Sabaoth the good, this who becometh
in the Place of Right (hand), this (power) which becometh in thy
material body of to-day. Concerning this therefore thou saidst to us, my
Lord Jesus, He who hath ear to hear let him hear, that thou shouldest
know who is he whose heart is eager for the Kingdom [27^b] of the
heavens.

It happened, therefore, Maria having finished saying these words, said
he, Well (done) Maria because thou art happy beyond every woman who (is)
upon the earth, because thou art she who will become the Pleroma of all
the Pleromas and the completion of all the completions.

But Maria having heard the Saviour saying these words, she was glad
greatly, and she came before Jesus, she prostrated at his presence, she
worshipped to his feet, said she to him, My Lord, Hear me, that I may
ask thee of this word, thou having not yet spoken with us of the Places
unto which thou wentest.

Answered Jesus, said he to Mariham, Speak in boldness, [28^a] and fear
not. Every thing which thou seekest after I shall reveal to thee.

Said she, My Lord; Every man who knoweth the mystery of the magic of all
the Rulers of all the Aeons, with the magic of the Rulers of the
Destiny, with those of the Sphere, according as taught them the Angels
who transgressed; if they should invoke them in their mysteries, namely
their evil magic, to hinder the works which are good, will they
accomplish them from this hour or otherwise?

But answered Jesus, said he to Maria, They will not accomplish them as
they were accomplishing them from at first, because I took away a third
part of their power, but they will make [28^b] a pretext in those who
know the mysteries of the magic of the thirteenth Aeon. And if they
should invoke the mysteries of the magic of those who become in the
thirteenth Aeon, they will accomplish them well and in accuracy, because
that I took not away power from that Place according to the command of
the First Mystery.

But it happened, Jesus having finished saying these words, added again
Maria, said she, My Lord, then the hour-setters, with the enquirers,
then they will not show to the men that which will happen to them from
this hour?

But answered Jesus, said he to Maria: If the hour-setters—if they should
find the Destiny, with the Sphere turned [29^a] to the Left according to
their first distribution, their words are wont to come (right), and they
will say that which it is right to become; but if they come (upon) the
Destiny or the Sphere turned to the Right, they are not wont to say
anything true, because that I turned their influences with their
four-corners with their three-corners with their eight-forms. Since were
being constant their influences from at first (so long as they were)
turned to the Left, with their four-corners, with their three-corners,
with their eight-forms. But now I caused them to spend six months turned
to the Left and six months turned to the Right: he who will find their
numbering from the time which I [29^b] altered them; having put them for
to spend six months looking unto their Left paths, and six months unto
their Right paths, he who attendeth therefore to them thus, he will know
their influences in accuracy, and he will utter every thing which they
will do. Likewise also the enquirers if they should invoke the name of
the Rulers, and come upon them looking to the Left, everything
concerning which they will seek of their Dekans they will tell them in
accuracy. If however should their enquirers invoke their names looking
to the Right, they will not hear them, because that they are looking
another form contrary to their first precept (position) in which settled
them Ieou; since some of their names [30^a] are turned to the Left and
other of their names are turned to the Right: and if they should invoke
them turned to the Right, they will not say unto them the truth, but in
confusion they will confuse them and in a threat they will threaten
them. Those who know not therefore their direction turned to the Right,
and with their three-corners, and with their four-corners, with all
their figures, they will find nothing true, but they will be confused in
great confusion, and they will become in a great error, and they will
stray in great straying (from the truth): because that the works which
they were wont to do once in their four-corners turned to the Left and
in their three-corners and in their eight-figure, these in which they
were being constant, [30^b] doing them turned to the Left. I altered
them now, and I caused them to spend six months doing all their forms
turned to the Right, that they might be confused in confusion in all
their circuit; and further I cause them to spend six months turned to
the Left, doing the works of their influences with all their forms, that
in confusion should be confused and in an error should err the Rulers
who become in the Aeon and in their Spheres and in their heavens and in
all their Places, that they should not understand their own movements.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words,
Philippos (was) sitting, writing every word which Jesus is saying;
[31^a] it happened therefore after these (things) Philippos came forward
he prostrated, he worshipped unto the feet of Jesus, saying, My Lord,
the Saviour, give authority to me for me to speak in thy presence and
ask thee this word before that thou spakest with us of the Places unto
which thou wentest because of thy service.

Answered the Saviour merciful, said he to Philippos, The authority is
given to thee to utter the word which thou art willing (to say).

But answered Philippos, said he to Jesus, My Lord, because of which
mystery removedst thou the binding of the Rulers with their Aeons, with
their Destiny, with their Sphere, with all their Places, and in
confusion thou causedst them to be confused in their paths, and they
erred [31^b] in their course. Didst thou this therefore to them because
of the salvation of the World or otherwise?

But answered Jesus, said he to Philippos with the disciples all
together: I altered their path unto salvation of all the souls, Amen
amen I say to you that except that I altered their path, they would have
destroyed a multitude of souls, and they would have spent much time,
having not been dissolved the Rulers of the Aeons, and the Rulers of the
Destiny with the Sphere, and with all their Places, with all their
heavens with all their Aeons. And the souls would have spent a great
amount of [32^a] time outside this (place ?); and they would have
delayed from completion the number of the perfect souls, these which
will be reckoned unto the inheritance of the Height by the mysteries,
and become in the Treasury of the Light. Because of this, therefore, I
altered their path that they should be confused and be disturbed, and
put away the power, this which becometh in the matter of their World,
this which is wont to make the souls, that they should purify them
quickly, and they should be lifted up to those who will be saved, they
with all the power; and be dissolved quickly those who will not be
saved.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Maria, she who is beautiful in her speaking, and
the happy (one) she prostrated at the feet of Jesus. [32^b] Said she, My
Lord bear with me that I may speak in thy presence, and be not angry
unto me because I add trouble unto thee for many times enquiring of
thee.

Answered the Saviour in compassion, said he to Maria, Say the word which
thou art willing (to say), and I, I shall reveal it to thee in boldness.

But answered Maria, said she to Jesus, My Lord, in what manner will the
souls be delaying outside of this (place)? or in what form will they be
purifying them indeed quickly?

But answered Jesus, said he to Maria, Well (done) Maria, thou enquirest
aright in the enquiring which is good, and thou givest light upon
everything in accuracy and in exactness. Now therefore I shall not hide
anything from you from this hour, but I shall reveal [33^a] everything
to you in accuracy and in boldness. Hear therefore, Maria and listen all
ye disciples. Before that I preached to all the Rulers of the Aeons and
with all the Rulers of the Destiny with the Sphere, they were all being
bound in their bonds and in their Spheres and in their seals, according
as bound them from at first Ieou the overseer of the Light: and each of
them was continuing in his array, and each one was walking according to
his course, according as put them Ieou the overseer of the Light: and
whenever should come the time of the number of Melkhisedek, the great
Receiver of Light is wont to come unto [33^b] the midst of the Aeons
with all the Rulers who are bound in the Sphere and in the Destiny, and
he is wont to take away the purgation of the light from all the Rulers
of the Aeons and from all the Rulers of the Destiny with those of the
Sphere. For he was wont to take away there that which disturbed them.
And he is wont to put in motion the task-master who is over them, and
cause them to be turned in their orbit quickly; and he is wont to take
away their power which is in them, with the breath of their mouth, and
with the tears of their eyes and with the sweat of their bodies. And
Melkhisedek the Receiver of the Light is wont to purify those powers,
and carry their light unto the Treasury of the Light: and all their
matter, whatever it be, they are wont to gather it in, the Ministers of
all the Rulers, [34^a] and are wont to take them the Ministers of all
the Rulers of the Destiny, with the Ministers of the Sphere, these who
(are) below the Aeons, and make them souls of man and of beast and of
creeping thing and wild-beast and bird, and send them unto this World of
the mankind: and further the Receiver of the sun, with the Receiver of
the moon, whenever they should look unto the heaven and see the forms of
the courses of the Aeons, with the forms of the Destiny, with those of
the Sphere, and he is wont to take away the power of the light from
them, and the Receivers of the sun are wont to prepare and put it
(down), until they give it to the Receiver of Melkhisedek the purifier
of light; and their material purgations they are wont to take it unto
the Sphere which is below the Aeons [34^b], and make it for soul of man;
and also they are wont to put it for creeping thing and beast and
wild-beast and bird according to the cycle of the Rulers of that Sphere,
and according to all the forms of its turning. And they cast them unto
this World of the mankind, and they become for soul in that Place
according as I finished saying to you. These therefore, they were
completing, continuously, before that their power diminished in them,
and they (were) impaired and they became weak, or they became powerless.

It happened therefore, they having become powerless, and their power
began to cease in them, and they became weak in their power, and ceased
their light which becometh in their Place, and their kingdom dissolved
and the Universe was caught up [35^a] quickly. It happened therefore,
they having known these (things) in the time, and whenever became the
number of the ticket, of Melkhisedek, the Receiver was wont to come out
also and go in unto the midst of the Rulers of all the Aeons, and unto
the midst of all the Rulers of the Destiny, with those of the Sphere,
and he is wont to disturb them and cause them to put away indeed their
cycles quickly, and then they are wont to be distressed, and sow the
power outside of them, out of the breath of their mouth and out of the
tears of their eyes, and out of the sweat of their bodies. And is wont
to purify them Melkhisedek the Receiver of the Light according as he is
wont to do, continuously; and [35^b] to take their Light unto the
Treasury of the Light: and the matter of their purgation all the Rulers
of Aeon and the Rulers of the Destiny with those of the Sphere are wont
to surround it and swallow it (down); and they are not wont to let them
come to make soul in the World; they are wont therefore to swallow
(down) their matter, that they should not become powerless and weak, and
their power should cease in them, and their kingdom be dissolved, but
they are wont to swallow it (down) that they should not be dissolved,
but that they should tarry and spend much time, having not been
completed the number of the perfect souls, these which will become in
the Treasury of the Light. It happened therefore while the Rulers of the
Aeons, with those of the Destiny, with those of the Sphere are abiding,
doing this kind (of thing) [36^a] turning them round, eating the
purgation of their matter, having not been allowed to make souls in the
World of the mankind, that they should tarry being kings and spend much
time outside this, namely the powers; these in which become the powers,
namely the souls; these therefore remained making themselves for two
cycles, continuously. It happened therefore, I having come, about to go
up unto the service, having been invited because of it by the command of
the First Mystery, I came up unto the midst of the Tyrants of the Rulers
of the twelve Aeons, my vesture of light being upon me, enlightening
greatly greatly, there not being measure for the light which was
becoming from me. It happened therefore, they having seen the great
light which becometh from me those Tyrants [36^b] the great Adamas the
Tyrant with all the Tyrants of the twelve Aeons, they all began to war
with the light of my vesture, wishing to hold (it) down together with
them, that they should tarry still in their kingdom. These (things)
therefore they were doing, not knowing with whom they were warring. They
therefore having rebelled, having warred with the light, then I
according to the command of the First Mystery I altered the paths with
the courses of their Aeons, with the paths of their Destiny with their
Sphere; and I caused them to spend six months looking unto (the) Left
(hand) three-corners and unto the four-corners and unto those who were
in front of them, and unto their eight-figure according as indeed they
were at [37^a] first. But their turning, or their looking, I altered it
unto other array; and I caused them to spend six other months looking at
the works of their influences in the Right (hand) four-corners and in
their three-corners and in those who are in front of them and in their
eight-figure. And I caused them to be confused in great confusion, and I
caused them to stray in straying even the Rulers of Aeons, and all the
Rulers of the Destiny, with those of the Sphere; and I disturbed them
greatly; and they were not able to prevail any more from this hour to
turn them unto the purgation of their matter, for them to swallow it
(down), that their Places should tarry continually, and that they should
spend much time being kings. But having taken away a third part of their
power, [37^b] I altered their Spheres for them to spend time looking to
(the) Left, and to spend another time looking to (the) Right. I altered
all their path with all their course, and I caused it to hasten even
their path of their course, that should be purged quickly and be caught
up quickly; and I shortened their orbit, and I caused to go more easily
their path: and they hastened greatly, and they were confused in their
path, and they prevailed not from this hour to swallow (down) the matter
of the purgation of the purifying of their light: and also I shortened
their periods with their times, that should be completed quickly the
perfect number of the souls which will receive mysteries, these which
will become in the Treasury of the Light. Except therefore that I
altered [38^a] their courses, and except that I shortened their times,
they would not have let any of the souls come unto the World, because of
the matter of their purgation which they swallow (down), and they would
have destroyed a multitude of souls. Because of this therefore I said to
you once, that I shortened the times because of my chosen (ones),
otherwise there is not any soul able to be saved. But I shortened the
periods with the times because of the perfect number of the souls, which
will receive mysteries, namely the chosen (ones): and if I did not
shorten their times, there is not any material soul (which) will be
saved. But they would have been consumed in the fire, this which
becometh in the flesh of the Rulers. This therefore is the word about
which thou enquirest of me in accuracy.

[38^b] But it happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto
his disciples, they all prostrated together, they worshipped to him, and
said they to him, We are happy (ones) beyond every man, thou having
revealed to us these great grandeurs.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, Hear, hear
concerning the words which became to me among the Rulers of the twelve
Aeons, with all their Rulers, with their Lords, with their Authorities,
with their Angels with their Archangels. They having seen therefore the
vesture of light which (is) upon me, they with their Unpaired (ones)
every one of them saw the mystery of their name becoming in my vesture
of light, this [39^a] which (is) upon me, they prostrated all one after
another, they worshipped to the vesture of light which (is) upon me, and
they all cried out together, saying, How did the Lord of the Universe
pass through us, we having not known (it). And they all hymned together
unto the inward part of the inward parts. And all their Triple powers,
with their great Forefather and their Unbegotten (ones) with their
Self-begotten (ones) with their Begotten (ones) with their Gods with
their sparks with their luminaries, in one word, with all their great
(ones) they saw the Tyrants of their Places abiding in feebleness,
having their power diminished in them, and they became themselves in
great weakness, and they became also in great fear, there being no
measure unto it. And they were [39^b] beholding the mystery of their
name in my vesture, and they had begun to come and worship the mystery
of their name, which (is) in my vesture: and they were not able to
prevail because of the great light which becometh with me. But they
worshipped distant from me a little: but they worshipped the light of my
vesture, and they all cried out together hymning unto the inward part of
the inward parts. It happened therefore, these having happened, to the
Tyrants, who become among the Rulers, they were all weakened, they fell
down in their Aeons, and they became as the men of the world who are
dead, having not breath in them, as also they did at the hour (in) which
I took away their power from them. It happened therefore after these
(things) I having come out to those Aeons, each [40^a] one of all those
who become in the twelve Aeons, they were all bound in unto their
arrays, and they completed their works according as I put them, for to
spend six months turned to the Left, doing their works in their
four-corners with their three-corners, with those who (are) in front of
them.

And again to spend another six months beholding the Right in their
three-corners and in their four-corners, with those who are in front of
them. Thus also will move, those who become in the Destiny with the
Sphere.

It happened therefore after these (things) I came unto the Height even
unto the veils of the thirteenth Aeon (MS. Aeons). It happened therefore
having come upon their veils, they drew (away) of their own (accord),
they opened to me, I came [40^b] in unto the thirteenth of the Aeon (MS.
Aeons), I found the PISTIS SOPHIA being below the thirteenth Aeon, she
by herself, being none of them with her. But she was sitting at that
place grieving and making lament, because they took her not unto the
thirteenth Aeon, her Place which is at the Height. And also she was
grieving concerning the tribulations which did to her the Self-willed
(one), this who is one of the three Triple powers. But these whenever I
should speak with you concerning their distribution, I shall say unto
you the mystery, how these became. It happened therefore, she having
seen me, the Pistis Sophia, as I am enlightening greatly greatly, there
being not measure unto the light which is from me, she became in great
disturbance [41^a], and she looked in the light of my vesture, she saw
the mystery of her name in my vesture, and all the glory of its mystery:
because she was becoming at first in the Place of the Height in the
thirteenth Aeon. But she was wont to hymn the light which (is) at the
Height, this which she saw in the veil of the Treasury of the Light. It
happened therefore, she having continued hymning the Light which is at
the Height, all the Rulers looked, who (are) together with the great two
Triple powers and with her Invisible, who is joined unto her, and the
other twenty-two emanation Invisibles. Since the Pistis Sophia with her
partner, they with the other twenty-two emanations are wont to make (up)
twenty-four emanations, [41^b] these which emanated them out the great
Forefather Invisible, he with the great two Triple powers.

It happened therefore while Jesus saith these (things) unto his
disciples came forward Mariham, said she, My Lord I heard thee once
saying, The Pistis Sophia is not herself One out of the twenty-four
emanations, and how she becometh not in their Place. But thou saidst
that I found her being below the thirteenth Aeon.

Answered Jesus, said he to his disciples, It happened while the Pistis
Sophia (was) in the thirteenth of the Aeons in the Place of all her
brothers the Invisibles, namely twenty-four emanations of the great
Invisible, it happened [42^a] therefore by the precept of the First
Mystery, looked unto the Height the Pistis Sophia, she saw the light of
the veil of the Treasury of the Light, and she desired to go unto that
Place: and she could not prevail to go unto that Place. But she ceased
doing the mystery of the thirteenth Aeon. But she was hymning unto the
Light of the Height, that which she saw in the light of the veil of the
Treasury of the Light. It happened therefore while she is hymning unto
the Place of the Height, all the Rulers who become in the twelve Aeons
hated her, these who (are) below, because that she ceased from their
mysteries, and because that she wished to go unto the Height and be
above them all. Because of this, therefore, they were angry against her
and they hated her. [42^b] And the great Triple power Self-willed who is
the third Triple powered, this who becometh in the thirteenth Aeon, this
who was disobedient, having not emanated all the purgation of his power
which (is) in him, nor did he give the purgation of his light at the
time when the Rulers gave their purgations in him: wishing to be lord
over all the thirteenth Aeon with those who become below it. It happened
therefore, the Rulers of the twelve Aeons having been angry against the
Pistis Sophia, she who is above them, they hated her greatly and the
great Triple power Self-willed, this concerning whom I finished saying
to you now, he [43^a] himself followed the Rulers of the twelve Aeons,
and he was angry himself against the Pistis Sophia, and he hated her
greatly, because she thought to go unto the Light, this which is higher
than her. And he emanated out of him a great power of face of lion; and
out of his matter which (is) in him, he emanated many other material
emanations cruel exceedingly, and he sent them unto the Places below,
unto the parts of the Chaos, that they should waylay the Pistis Sophia
there, and take away her power from her; because that she thought to go
unto the Height, this which (is) over all of them; and (because) that
she ceased also doing their mystery. But she continued making lament,
seeking for the light which she saw: and hated her the Rulers [43^b] who
are living, or who continue unto the mystery, doing it; and also hated
her all the Guards who (are) at the gates of the Aeons. It happened
therefore after these (things) through the precept of the First precept
the great Triple power Self-willed, being one of the three Triple
powers, he pursued the Sophia in thirteenth Aeon, for her to look at the
parts below, that she should see his power of light at that Place, this
(power) which is of face of lion, and lusteth for her, and would come
unto that Place, and take away her light from her. It happened therefore
after these (things), she looked down, she saw his power of light in the
parts below, and she was not knowing that it is that of the Triple power
Self-willed: but she was [44^a] thinking of her (self) that it is out of
the light, that which she saw from at first in the Height, this which is
out (side) of the veil of the Treasury of the Light: and she thought in
her (self), I am about to go unto that Place apart from my partner, and
take away the light which fashioned for me some Aeons of Light, that I
should be able to prevail to go unto the Light of the Lights, this which
(is) in the Height of the Heights. These (things) therefore thinking,
she came out of her Place of the thirteenth Aeon, and she came down into
the twelve Aeons. Pursued her the Rulers of the Aeons, and they were
angry with her, because she thought of greatness. But she came also out
of the twelve Aeons, she came unto the Place of the Chaos, and she came
up [44^b] unto the power of light of face of lion, that she should
swallow it (down): but surrounded her all the material emanations of the
Self-willed, and the great power of light of face of lion swallowed
(down) the powers of light in the Sophia, and it purged her light she
having swallowed it, and her matter was cast out unto the Chaos. It
became a Ruler of face of lion in the Chaos, whose (one) half became
fire and whose other half became darkness, namely, Ialdabaoth this which
I said unto you many times. These therefore having happened, was
weakened the Sophia greatly greatly; and also began that power of light
of face of lion to cause itself to take away all the powers of light in
the Sophia; and all [45^a] the material powers of the Self-willed
surrounded the Sophia together, they afflicted her. She cried out
greatly greatly the Pistis Sophia, she cried up unto the Light of the
Lights, this which she saw from at first, having believed it, and she
said this Repentance, saying thus, O Light of the Lights, this whom I
believed from at first, Hear therefore now, O Light, my repentance.
Deliver me, O Light, because evil thoughts came in unto me. I looked, O
Light, unto the parts which (are) below, I saw a light at that place, I
am thinking that I am about to go unto that Place and (to) take away
that light: and I went, I became in the darkness which (is) in the Chaos
below, and I was not able to prevail to fly out to go unto my Place:
[45^b] because that I was afflicted in all the emanations of the
Self-willed, and the power of face of lion took away my light which
(was) in me: and I cried out for a help, and came not my shout up in the
darkness, and I looked unto the Height that should help me, the Light
which I trusted. And having looked unto the Height, I saw all the Rulers
of the Aeons which are many. And they are looking upon me, rejoicing at
me who did not anything to them for evil; but they were hating me
without cause. And they having seen the Rulers of the Aeons rejoicing at
me, (they) the emanations of the Self-willed, knew that would not help
me the Rulers of the Aeons; and were glad of heart those emanations,
these which were afflicting me in violence; and the light which I took
not away from them indeed, they took it away from me [46^a]. Now
therefore, O Light of the Truth, thou knowest that I did these (things)
in my innocence, in thinking that (thy light) is belonging unto the
light of the face of lion, and the sin which I did is manifest in thy
presence. Let me not therefore be cut off, O Lord, because I trusted
unto thy light from at first, O Lord, O light of the powers, let me not
be cut off therefore from my light: for by reason of thy cause and thy
light I became in my affliction and shame covered over me: and because
of the pretext of thy light I became alien unto my brothers the
Invisibles; and with the great emanations of the Barbelo: these (things)
happened to me, O Light, because I was jealous of thine abode, and came
up upon me the anger of the Self-willed, this who hearkened not unto thy
command for him to emanate out of the [46^b] emanation of his power;
because that I became in his Aeon, not doing his mystery: and were
deriding me all the Rulers of the Aeons: and I became in that Place,
making lamentations seeking after the light which I saw in the Height:
and were seeking after me the Guards of the gates of the Aeons, and all
were mocking me even those who are living in their mystery. But I, I was
looking up unto the Height, up unto thee O Light. And I trusted unto
thee: now therefore, O Light of the Lights, I am afflicted in the
darkness of the Chaos: if thou wishest therefore to come to deliver me,
great is thy mercy; hear me in truth and deliver me: deliver me out of
the matter of this darkness, that I should not be drowned in it, that I
should be delivered unto the emanations of the Self-willed God, [47^a]
these which afflict me, and out of their evil: let not this darkness
drown me, and this power with face of lion, let not it swallow (down)
all my power for ever, and let not this Chaos cover over my power. Hear
me, O Light, because good is thy mercy, and look upon me according to
the multitude of mercifulness of thy light. Turn not thy face away from
me because I am tormented greatly. Hasten, hear me and deliver my power,
deliver me because of the Rulers who hate me, because thou art he who
knoweth my affliction with my torment, with the torment of my power
which they took away from me. They are being in thy presence, those who
planted me in all these evils: use them according to that which thou
willest. My power looked out of the midst of the Chaos, and (out) of the
midst of the darknesses. I looked out [47^b] for my partner, that he
should come and fight for me, and he came not. And I was looking that he
should come and give power to me, and I did not find him. And having
sought after the light, they gave to me a darkness, and having sought
after my power they gave to me matter. Now therefore, O Light of the
Lights, the darkness with the matter, which brought upon me the
emanations of the Self-willed: let them become to them for a snare, and
let them be entangled among them, and pay back to them; and (let) them
stumble and not come unto the Place of their Self-willed: let them
continue in the darkness and not see out unto the light, let them look
unto the Chaos for every hour; and let them not look unto the Height.
Bring upon them their vengeance and let catch them [48^a] thy judgment.
Let them not go unto their Place from this hour together with their
Self-willed God; and let not his emanations go unto their Places from
this hour, because impious and self-willed is their God; and he was
thinking that he did these evils through himself, not knowing of course
that unless they humbled me according to the precept he would not have
been able to prevail against me: but thou having humbled me by thy
precept they pursued me the more, and their emanations added trouble to
my humbling, and they took away a power of light in me. And also they
began again, they afflicted me greatly for to take away all the light
which (is) in me. Because of those in which they planted me, let them
not [48^b] go up unto the thirteenth Aeon the Place of the
righteousness, and let them not be reckoned unto the lot of those who
purify themselves and their light. And let them not be reckoned unto
those who will repent quickly, for them to receive mystery quickly in
the light. Because that they took away my own light from me, and my
power began to fail in me, and I was lacking of my light. Now therefore,
O Light which is in me, that which becometh with me, I hymn thy name, O
Light, in glory. And my hymn, O Light, let it be pleasing to thee as of
a mystery surpassing this which taketh into the gates of the Light, this
which will say those who will repent and will purge [49^a] his light.
Now therefore let all the gates rejoice. Seek ye all after the Light,
that may live the power of your soul which is in you: because the Light
heard the (things of) matter and it would not leave any matter which it
did not purge. Let the souls with the (things of) matter bless the Lord
of all Aeons, with the matter, with all those who are in them: because
God will deliver their souls out of every matter, and they will prepare
a city in the Light: and all the souls who will be delivered will dwell
in that city, and inherit it: and the souls of [49^b] those who will
receive mystery will be in that Place, and those who receive mystery in
his name will become in it.

It happened therefore, while Jesus is saying these words unto his
disciples, said he to them, This is the hymn which said the Pistis
Sophia in her first repentance, repenting because of her sin, and saying
everything which happened to her. Now therefore he who hath ear to hear
let him hear.

Came forward again Maria, said she, My Lord, my companion of light hath
ear, and I hear in my power of light, and was wakeful in me thy spirit
which (is) with me, hear, therefore, that I may speak concerning the
repentance which said the Pistis Sophia, saying her sin with all the
(things) which happened to her. Thy power [50^a] of Light prophesied
about her once through David the prophet in the sixty-eighth psalm. O
God, save me because waters came in unto my soul. I sank, or I was
drowned, in the mire of the abyss and there was not strength (left): I
came unto the depths of the sea. A whirlwind it is which drowned me. I
toiled, crying out, my throat is that which flew away, mine eyes fail
while I trust unto God: were multiplied more than the hairs of my head
those who hate me without cause: prevailed my enemies, those who pursued
me in violence: the (things) which I did not rob, they required them of
me: O God thou knewest my foolishness and [50^b] my sins they hid them
not from thee: let them not be ashamed because of me, those who wait for
thee, O Lord. O Lord of the powers cause them not to be disgraced
because of me, those who seek for thee, O Lord the god of Israel, O God
of the powers! For because of thee I took up unto me reproach, the shame
covered over my face, I was alien unto my brothers, strange unto the
sons of my mother: because the zeal of thy house is that which ate me;
the reproaches of those who reproached thee they fell upon me; I bowed
my soul in fasting, it became for me unto reproach; I put a sackcloth
upon me, I became to them for proverb. They lifted up their voice upon
me, those who sit [51^a] in the gates; and were singing at me, those who
drink the wine. But I was praying in my soul up unto thee, O Lord; the
time of thy will it is, O God. In the multitude of thy mercy listen unto
my salvation in truth. Save me from this mire, that I should not sink in
it, (that) I should be saved from those who hate me, and out of the
depth of the waters. Let not a flood of water drown me, let not the pit
swallow me (down), let not a well take hold with mouth upon me. Hear me,
O Lord, because kind is thy mercy. According to the multitude of thy
compassion look upon me. Turn not thy face away from thy servant because
I am afflicted. Hear me quickly, [51^b] take heed unto my soul and
redeem it. Deliver me because of my enemies; for thou art (he) who
knoweth my reproach with my shame and my disgrace: all those who afflict
me (are) in thy presence. My heart looked out for a reproach with
wretchedness; I looked out for him who will grieve with me, I found him
not, and he who will comfort me I discovered him not. They gave gall for
my food; they gave me to drink vinegar in my thirst. Let their table
become in their presence unto a snare with a trap and a recompense with
a scandal; and bow (down) their back every time. Pour upon them thy
wrath and the anger of [52^a] thy wrath let it catch them. Let their
abode be made desert; and let there be not him who dwelleth in their
abodes. Because he whom thou smotest they pursued him; they added upon
the pain of his wounds, they added unlawfulness upon their
unlawfulnesses; and let them not come in unto thy righteousness; let
them wipe them out of the book of those who live, and let them not write
them with the righteous. I am a poor (one) suffering also pains; the
salvation of thy face, O God, is that which accepted me. T shall bless
the name of God in a song, and I shall exalt him in a blessing. It will
please God more than a new calf which putteth forth horn and hoof. Let
the poor [52^b] see and be glad. Seek after God that your souls may
live. Because the Lord heard the poor (ones) and he despised not those
who are in fetters of brass. Let the heavens with the earth bless the
Lord, the sea with all the (things) which (are) in it, because the Lord
will deliver Sion; and they will build the cities of the Ioudaia and
dwell there and inherit it. The seed of his servants will possess it,
and those who love his name will dwell in it.

It happened therefore, Mariham having finished these words unto Jesus in
the midst of the disciples, said she to him, My Lord, this is the
explanation (of the) mystery (in margin) of the repentance of the Pistis
Sophia.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard Mariham saying [53^a] these
words, said he to her, Well (done) Mariham the happy, the Pleroma, or
the all-blessed of Pleroma, this (woman) whom they will call happy in
every generation.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he, Added also the Pistis Sophia she
hymned in a second Repentance saying thus, O Light of the Lights I
believed thee, leave me not in the darkness even unto the completion of
my time, help me and deliver me through thy mysteries. Incline thine ear
unto me and deliver me. Let the power of thy light deliver me and take
me away unto the Aeons which are on high; because thou art he who will
deliver me and take me unto the Height [53^b] of thy Aeons. Deliver me,
O Light from this power of face of lion, and from the emanations of the
Self-willed of the Gods. Because thou, O Light, art he whose light I
believed, and whose light I trusted indeed from at first. And I believed
him from the hour (in) which he emanated me, and thou indeed art he who
caused them to emanate me, and I myself, I believed thy light from at
first. And having believed thee, were not mocking me the Rulers of the
Ages saying, She ceased from her mystery? Thou (art) he who will deliver
me, and thou art my Saviour, and thou art my mystery, O Light. My mouth
was full of glory, that I should say the mystery of thy [54^a] greatness
at every time. Now therefore, O Light, leave me not in the Chaos for the
completion of all my time. Leave me not behind thee O Light, because
they took away all my power of light in me, and surrounded me all the
emanations of the Self-willed. They wished to take away all my light in
me for ever, and they watched my power, saying to one another at once,
that the light forsook me, Lay hold on her and, let us take away all the
light which is in her. Because of this therefore, O Light, cease not
from me: turn thee, O Light, and deliver me from the unmerciful (ones).
Let them fall and be powerless, these who wish to take away my power.
Let them wrap them up in the darkness, and become in [54^b]
powerlessness, these who wish to take away my power of light in me. This
therefore is the second Repentance which said the Pistis Sophia hymning
up unto the Light.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, said he, Understand ye in what manner I am speaking with you.
Sprang up Petros, said he to Jesus, My Lord, we are not able to bear
with this woman, saying instead of us; and she let not any of us speak,
but she is speaking many times.

Answered Jesus, said he to his disciples, He in whom the power of his
spirit will bubble up in him to cause him to understand that which I
say, let him come forward and speak. [55^a] Nevertheless therefore, thou
Petros I see thy power in thee understanding the explanation of the
mystery of the repentance, which said the Pistis Sophia. Now therefore
thou Petros, say the meaning of her repentance in the midst of thy
brothers.

But answered Petros, said he to Jesus, O Lord hear, that I may say the
meaning of her repentance about which prophesied thy power once by David
the prophet, saying her repentance in the seventieth psalm, O Lord my
God I trusted unto thee. Let me not be ashamed for ever. Save me in thy
righteousness and deliver me. Incline thy ear unto me and save [55^b]
me. Become to me unto a God of trust, and unto a Place firm unto the
salvation, because thou art my firmness and my place of refuge: my God
save me from the hand of the sinner, and out of the hand of the
law-breaker with the impious. Because thou art the lord of my patience,
O Lord thou art my hope from my youth; I leaned upon thee from the
belly; thou, thou broughtest me out of the belly of my mother. My
remembrance in thee will be at every time. I became as the fools to
many. Thou art my helper and my firmness. Thou art my Saviour, O Lord.
My mouth was filled with blessing, that I should bless the glory of thy
greatness all the day long. Cast me not away unto a time of old age, in
the failing of my soul; [56^a] forsake me not. Because mine enemies say
evil against me, and those who watch for my soul, they took counsel
against my soul, saying together, The God forsook him, run and catch
him, because there is not he who will deliver him. O God take heed unto
my help. Let them be ashamed and fail, those who slander my soul. Let
them wrap them in shame with ignominy, those who seek after evil
(things) against me. This therefore is the explanation of the second
repentance which said the Pistis Sophia.

Answered the Saviour, said he to Petros, Well (said), Petros, this is
the explanation of her repentance. Ye are happy (ones) beyond every man
who is upon the earth, because [56^b] I revealed unto you these
mysteries. Verily verily I say to you, I shall complete you with every
Pleroma from the mysteries of the inward part even unto the mysteries of
the outward part; and I shall fill you with the spirit, that they should
call you the spiritual (ones), completed with every Pleroma. And verily
verily I say to you, that I shall give to you all the mysteries of all
the Places of my Father, and of all the Places of the First Mystery,
that that which ye will accept upon the earth, they shall accept unto
the Light of the Height, and they whom ye will reject upon the earth,
they will reject in the kingdom of my Father which is in the heavens.
Nevertheless therefore hear and listen [57^a] unto all the repentances,
these which said the Pistis Sophia.

She added also, she said the third Repentance, saying, O Light of the
powers, take heed and deliver me: let them be diminished and be in the
darkness, these who wish to take away my light in me. Let them turn them
unto the Chaos and be ashamed, those who wish to take away my power. Let
them turn them unto the darkness quickly, these who afflict me, who say,
We are lords over her. Let them rejoice indeed and be cheerful, every
one who seeketh for the Light, and let them say in every time, Let the
Mystery be exalted, those who wish (for) thy mystery. Me therefore now,
O Light, deliver me, because I diminished (in) my light which they took
away, and I am [57^b] lacking in my power which they took away from me.
Thou therefore, O Light, thou art my Saviour and thou art my deliverer,
O Light, Hasten and deliver me from this Chaos.

But it happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, saying, This is the third repentance which said the Pistis
Sophia: said he to them, He in whom was exalted the spirit of
perception, let him come forward and say the meaning of the repentance
which said the Pistis Sophia.

It happened therefore, before that finished speaking Jesus, came forward
Martha, she prostrated at his feet, she kissed them, she cried out, she
wept in a cry, and in humility saying My Lord have mercy on me and pity
me, and let me [58^a] say the explanation of the repentance which said
the Pistis Sophia.

And Jesus helped Martha, he said he to her, Happy is every man who is
wont to humble himself, because he is he on whom they will have mercy.
Now therefore Martha thou art happy. Nevertheless therefore utter the
explanation of the meaning of the repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

But answered Martha, said she to Jesus in the midst of the disciples,
Concerning the repentance which said, O my Lord Jesus, the Pistis
Sophia, prophesied once thy power of Light which (is) in David in the
sixty-ninth psalm saying, O Lord God take heed unto my help. Let them
[58^b] be ashamed and disgraced, those who seek after my soul. Let them
turn them henceforth and be ashamed, those who say to me, Well (done).
Well (done)! Let them be glad and delighted over me, every one who
seeketh after thee, and say at every time, Let God be exalted, even
those who love thy salvation. But I am poor I am miserable, O Lord help
me. Thou art my helper and my trust, O Lord, tarry not. This therefore
is the explanation of the third repentance which said the Pistis Sophia
hymning unto the Height.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard Martha saying these words,
said he, Well done, Martha, and fairly (said). Added also [59^a] Jesus
in the word, said he to his disciples, Added also the Pistis Sophia
saying in the fourth Repentance, before that afflicted her the second
time, for to take away all her other light which is in her, even the
power of face of lion with all the material emanations which (are) with
her, these which the Self-willed sent unto the Chaos. She said therefore
this repentance thus, O Light unto which I trusted, hear my repentance
and let my shout come in unto thy abode. Turn not thy image of light
away from me, but take heed unto me, whenever they should afflict me.
Hasten, deliver me at the time when I shall cry up unto thee. [59^b]
Because my time failed as a breath, and I became matter. They took away
my light from me. And my power dried up. I forgot my mystery this which
I was wont to do at first. From the shout of the fear with the power of
the Self-willed my power failed in me—I became as a mere demon, dwelling
in matter in which there is not light. And I became as a counterfeit
spirit, being in a material body in which there is not power of light.
And I became as a dekan, being over the air, alone. Afflicted me greatly
the emanations of the Self-willed, and had said in him(self) my partner.
Instead of the light which is in her, they filled her with Chaos. I
swallowed (down) the sweat [60^a] of my own matter and with the anguish
of the tears of the matter (deleted in MS.) of mine eyes, lest they
should take away these also, those who afflict me. All these (things), O
Light, happened to me through thy precept and with thy commandment. And
thy precept is for me to become in these (things): thy precept brought
me down, and I came down as a power of the Chaos. And my power was
benumbed in me. But thou O Lord art Light unto age, and thou art wont to
visit those who are afflicted at every time. Now therefore, O Light,
arise and seek after my power with the soul which is in me. Completed
was thy precept which thou orderedst unto me in my afflictions. My time
became for thee to seek after my power with my soul. And this is the
[60^b] time which thou orderedst to seek after me, because thy redeemers
sought after the power which is in my soul: because completed was the
number, and (the time) for them to deliver her matter also. And then at
that time all the Rulers of the material Aeons they will fear thy Light,
and all the emanations of the thirteenth material Aeon they will fear
the mystery of thy light, to cause the others to put on the purification
of their light. Because the Lord will seek after the power of your soul:
he manifested his mystery, that he should look at the repentance of
those who become in the Places below, and he did not forsake their
repentance. This therefore is that mystery [61^a] this which became type
for the race which they are about to beget, and the race which they are
about to beget will hymn unto the Height: because the Light looked out
the Height of his Light, he will look over all the matter to hear the
groan of those who are bound, to let loose the power of the souls, those
whose power they bound, for him to put his name in the soul and his
mystery in the power.

But it happened while Jesus is saying these words unto his disciples
saying to them, This is the fourth repentance which said the Pistis
Sophia. Now therefore he who understandeth, let him understand. It
happened therefore, Jesus having said these words, came forward
Iohannes, he worshipped unto the breast of Jesus, said he, My Lord
command to me also, and allow to me for to say the explanation of the
fourth repentance, [61^b] this which said the Pistis Sophia. Said Jesus
to Iohannes, I command to thee and I allow to thee, for to say the
explanation of the repentance which said the Pistis Sophia.

Answered Iohannes, said he, My Lord, the Saviour, concerning this
repentance which said the Pistis Sophia, prophesied once concerning it
thy power of Light which (was) in David in the hundred and first psalm,
O Lord hear my prayer and let my shout come even unto thee, turn not thy
face away from me, incline thine ear unto me at the day in which I shall
be afflicted. Hasten, hear me in the day (in) which I shall cry up unto
thee. Because my days failed as a smoke, and my bones burned as a stone.
I was scorched as grass, and my heart dried up so that I forgot [62^a]
to eat my bread, out of the shout of my groan my bone clave to my flesh,
I was as a pelican in the desert, I became as an owl in a house. I spent
night in watching: I was as a sparrow on a roof alone. Mine enemies
reproached me all the day, and those who honour me were swearing at me.
Because I ate ash instead of my bread, I mingled that which I shall
drink with tears at presence of thy anger with thy wrath; because thou
tookest me up, thou sentest me down. My days inclined as a shadow, and I
was dried as grass. But thou, O Lord, thou becometh even unto age, and
thy remembrance even unto a generation of a generation. Arise thou and
have compassion on Sion, because the time became of having compassion on
her: because the season came. Thy servants wish (for) her stones, and
they [62^b] will have compassion on her earth, and the heathen (will)
fear the name of the Lord, and the kings of the earth will fear thy
glory: because the Lord will build Sion and manifest in his glory. He
looked upon the prayer of those who are humble and he despised not their
supplication. Let them write this unto another generation, and the
people whom they will create will bless the Lord: because he looked out
upon his Height which is holy, the Lord looked out of the heaven upon
the earth to hear the groan of those who are bound, to unloose the sons
of those whom they put to death, to say the name of the Lord in Sion and
his blessing in Jerusalem. This is, my Lord, [is] the explanation of the
mystery (M) of the repentance which said the Pistis Sophia.

It happened therefore, Iohannes having finished saying these words unto
Jesus in the midst [63^a] of his disciples, said he to him: Well (done)
Iohannes the Virgin, this who will rule in the kingdom of the Light.

But added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened
also thus: the emanations of the Self-willed afflicted also the Pistis
Sophia in the Chaoses, they wished to take away all her light: and was
not yet completed her precept to bring her up from the Chaos, and the
command had not yet come to me from the First Mystery, for me to deliver
her from the Chaos. It happened therefore, having afflicted her all the
material emanations of the Self-Willed, she cried out, saying the fifth
Repentance, saying: O Light of my salvation, I hymn unto thee in the
Place of the Height, and also [63^b] in the Chaos. I shall hymn unto
thee in my hymn. I hymned unto thee in the Height, and that in which I
hymned unto thee while I am being in the Chaos, let it come before thy
face; and take heed, O Light, unto my repentance, because my power was
full of darkness and my light came down unto the Chaos. I became also as
the Ruler of the Chaos, those who are going unto the darkness below. I
became as a material body which has not him who will deliver him in the
Height. I became also as (things of) matter from which they took away
their power, casting in the Chaos these which thou didst not deliver,
and they perished by thy precept. Now therefore, they put me in the
darkness (M) below, in darknesses and in (things of) matter being dead,
and there being not power in them. Thou broughtest thy precept upon me,
and with every [64^a] thing which thou orderest: and thy spirit ran
(away), it left me, and also through thy precept helped me not the
emanations of my Aeon, and they hated me and they ceased from me; and
also I perished, not for ever; and my light was diminished in me: and I
cried up unto the Light in all the light which is in me, and I spread my
hands up unto thee. Now therefore, O Light, wilt thou not complete thy
precept in the Chaos? And the deliverers those who are coming according
to thy precept, will they not arise in the darkness and come and be
disciples to thee? Will they not say the mystery of thy name in the
Chaos (or otherwise rather will they say thy name in a matter of Chaos)
this in which thou wilt not purify? But I [64^b] hymned up unto thee, O
Light and my repentance will attain thee up unto the Height. Let thy
Light come upon me, because they took away my light from me. And I
became in tribulations because of the light, since the time (in) which
they emanated me. And I having looked at the Height unto the light, I
looked down unto the power of light which (is) in the Chaos. I arose I
came down: thy precept came upon me, and the fears which thou orderedst
unto me disturbed me, and they surrounded me being numerous as water,
they laid hold on me together in all my time: and by thy precept thou
didst not let my fellow emanations to help me, and thou didst not let my
partner to deliver me out of my afflictions. This [65^a] therefore is
the fifth repentance which said the Pistis Sophia in the Chaos, they
having finished afflicting her, all the material emanations of the
Self-willed.

These therefore, while Jesus is saying unto his disciples said he to
them, He who hath ear to hear let him hear, and he whose spirit is
bubbling in him, let him come forward and say the explanation of the
meaning of the fifth repentance of the Pistis Sophia. And Jesus having
finished saying these words, sprang up Philippos, he stood up, he put
down the book which (is) in his hand; for he it is who writeth every
word which Jesus was saying, and with all the (things) which he is
doing: came therefore forward Philippos, [65^b] said he to him, My Lord,
Am I not alone he to whom thou gavest for me to take care of the World,
and to write every word which thou wilt say, and with those which thou
wilt do. And thou lettest me not come forward, that I may say the
explanation of the mysteries of the repentance of the Pistis Sophia? For
my spirit bubbled in me for many times, and was unloosed and compelled
me greatly for to come forward that I may say the explanation of the
repentance of the Pistis Sophia, and I was not able to come forward,
because that I am he who writeth every word.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard Philippos, said he to him,
Hear O Philippos the happy, that I may speak with thee, because thou
with Thomas with Maththaios are those to whom it was given by the First
Mystery to write every word which I shall say, [66^a] with the (things)
which I shall do, and with every thing which ye will see. But as for
thee, was not yet completed until now the number of the words which thou
wilt write. Whenever therefore they should be completed, thou wilt come
forward and utter that which thou willest. Now therefore ye are the
three, those who will write every word which I shall say, with the
(things) which I shall do, with the (things) which I shall see, and that
I may bear witness of everything of the kingdom of the heavens.

These therefore having said them Jesus, said he to his disciples, He who
hath ear to hear let him hear. Sprang up again in front Mariham, she
came unto the midst, she stood by Philippos, said she to Jesus, My Lord,
hath ear my companion of light, and I prepare me to hear out of my
power, and I understood the words [66^b] which thou saidst. Now
therefore, My Lord, hear that I may say it boldly. Thou saidst to us, He
who hath ear to hear let him hear. Concerning the word which thou saidst
unto Philippos, Thou with Thomas with Maththaios are those three to whom
it was given by the First Mystery to write every word of the kingdom of
the Light, and (to) bear witness to them: hear therefore that I may
utter the explanation of this word, this (is) that which thy power of
light prophesied once by Mōysēs, that by witness (of) two and three
every thing will be established. The three witnesses are Philippos with
Thomas with Maththaios. It happened therefore, Jesus having heard this
word, said he, Well (done) Maria, this is the explanation [67^a] of the
word. Now therefore thou Philippos, Come forward and utter the
explanation of the mystery of the fifth repentance of the Pistis Sophia.
And afterwards sit (down) and write every word which I shall say, until
is completed the number of thy part which thou wilt write in the words
of the kingdom of the Light. After these (things) thou shalt come
forward and say that which thy spirit will understand. Nevertheless
therefore now utter the explanation of the mystery of the fifth
repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

But answered Philippos, said he to Jesus, My Lord, hear that I may say
the explanation of her repentance: for thy Power prophesied concerning
it by David once saying in the eighty-seventh [67^b] psalm; O Lord God
of my salvation I cried up unto thee in the day with the night: let my
prayer come in to thy presence. Incline thine ear, O Lord, unto my
supplication, because my soul was filled with evil, my life draweth near
into Amente, they numbered me with those who are going down unto the
pit. I became as a man who hath not helper: free among those who are
dead as wounded (ones), being cast (away) sleeping in the tombs, these
whom thou rememberedst not any more, and they, they perished out of thy
hands. They put me in a pit below, in darkness with the shade of the
death thy wrath was firm upon me, and all thy cares came upon me.
Diapsalma. Thou causedst those who know me to be distant from me, thou
lettest me be to them for abomination: [68^a] they left me and I went
not (away). Mine eye is weak out of my poverty: I cried up unto thee O
Lord, all the day. I spread my hands up unto thee. Wilt thou make thy
wonder in those who are dead? Are not the physicians those who will
arise and confess to thee? Will they be saying thy name in the tombs and
thy righteousness in a land which thou forgottest? But I cried up unto
thee, O Lord, and my prayer will catch thee at the hour of early (day).
Turn not thy face away from me because I am poor; beg in tribulations
since my youth. But having been exalted, I humbled myself and I arose.
Thine angers came upon me, and thy fears disturbed me. They surrounded
me as water, they laid hold on me all the day: they caused my fellows to
be distant from me, and those who [68^b] know me, away from my misery.
This therefore is the explanation of the mystery of the fifth repentance
which said the Pistis Sophia, they having afflicted her in the Chaos.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words, saying them
Philippos, said he, Well (done) Philippos the beloved. Now therefore
come, sit (down) and write thy part of every word which I shall say, and
with the things which I shall do, with everything which thou wilt see.
And at that hour sat down Philippos, he wrote.

It happened also after these (things), Jesus added also in the word,
said he to his disciples, Then cried up unto the Light the Pistis
Sophia. It forgave her sin, because she forsook her Place, she came down
unto the darkness, she said the [69^a] sixth Repentance, saying thus, I
hymned up unto thee, O Light, in the darkness below: hear my repentance,
and let thy light take heed unto the shout of my prayer. O Light, if
thou shouldest remember my sin I shall not be able to come toward thee,
and thou wilt forsake me: because thou, O Light, art my deliverer,
because of the light of thy name. I believed thee, O Light, and my power
believed thy mystery, and also my power trusted unto the light which
becometh in the (things) of the Height, and it trusted unto him, being
in the Chaos below. Let every power which (is) in me trust unto the
Light while I am in the darkness below. And also let them trust unto
him, if they should come unto the Place of the Height: because it (is)
he who will see and redeem us, and there is a great mystery [69^b] of
deliverance in him: and he is he who will deliver all the powers out of
the Chaos, because of my transgression: because I forsook my Place, I
came down unto the Chaos. Now therefore he who whose mind is exalted,
let him understand.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, said he to them, Understand ye that I am speaking with you in
what manner? Came forward Andreas, said he, My Lord, concerning the
explanation of the sixth repentance of the Pistis Sophia thy power of
light prophesied once by David in the hundred and twenty-ninth psalm
saying, I cried up unto thee, O Lord, in those which are deep, hear my
shout. Let thine ears give heed unto the shout of my supplication, O
Lord, if thou should give heed unto the [70^a] unlawfulness, who is he
who will be able to stand? Because the forgiveness is being from thee.
Because of thy name I had patience unto thee, O Lord. My soul had
patience unto thy word. My soul hoped in the Lord from morning even unto
evening, Let the Israel hope in the Lord from morning unto evening.
Because the mercy is being from the Lord. And there is a great
redemption with him, and he it (is) who will redeem the Israel out of
all his unlawfulness.

Said to him Jesus, Well (done), Andreas, the happy, this is the
explanation of her repentance. Amen amen I say to you, I shall fill you
with all the mysteries of the Light and with all knowledge, from the
inward part of the inward parts, even unto the outward part of the
outward parts, from the Ineffable even unto the darkness of the
darknesses, [70^b] and from the Light of Lights unto the matter (haab)
of the matter, from all the Gods even unto the Demons, from all the
Lords even unto the Dekans, from all the Authorities even unto the
Ministers, from the fashioning of the men unto that of the wild-beasts
with the beasts with the creeping things: because they shall call you
the perfect (ones) who are completed with every Pleroma. Amen, amen I
say to you, The Place in which I shall become in the kingdom of my
Father ye also shall become there with me. And if should be fulfilled
the perfect number for the Confusion to be dissolved, I shall command
that they shall bring all the tyrant Gods these who gave not the
purification of their light. And I shall command the discerning fire
(wise fire), [71^a] this which are wont the perfect (ones) to pass
across, for it to eat into those Tyrants, until they give (up) the
remainder (last) of the purification of their light.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, said he to them, Ye understand in what manner I am speaking
with you?

Said Maria: Yea, O Lord, I understood the word which thou sayest.
Concerning the word therefore which thou saidst, In the dissolving of
all the Confusion thou wilt sit upon a power of light, and thy
disciples, namely we, (will) sit on right of thee, and thou (wilt) give
judgment upon the tyrant Gods, these who gave not the purification of
their light. And the discerning fire will eat after them until they give
the remainder (last) of light which is in them. [71^b] Because of this
word therefore thy power of light prophesied once by David, saying in
the four-twentieth with one psalm, God will sit in the assembly of the
gods and (will) give judgment unto the gods. Said he to her Jesus, Well
(done) Maria.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened, the
Pistis Sophia having finished saying the sixth repentance concerning the
forgiveness of her transgression, she turned also unto the Height to see
whether they forgave to her her sins, and to see if they will bring her
up from the Chaos. And they did not yet hear her by the command of the
First Mystery for them to forgive her sin and bring her up from the
Chaos. She having turned therefore unto the Height to see whether they
[72^a] received her repentance from her, she saw all the Rulers of the
twelve Aeons mocking at her, and rejoicing at her, because that they
received not her repentance from her. She having seen therefore them
mocking at her, she was grieved greatly, she lifted up her voice unto
the Height saying in the seventh Repentance, O Light, I lifted up my
power unto thee; my Light, I believed thee: let me not be despised, and
let them not rejoice at me the Rulers of the twelve Aeons, these who
hate me: for every one who believeth thee will not be ashamed: shall
remain in darkness those who took away my power, and will not make gain
of it, but it will be taken from them. O Light, show to me thy ways, and
I shall be delivered from them and [72^b] show me thy paths, that I
should be delivered from the Chaos, and guide me in thy light. And let
me know, O Light, that thou art my deliverer, I shall trust unto thee in
all my time. Give heed for to deliver me, O Light, because thy
mercifulness becometh even unto age: because of my transgression which I
did from at first in my ignorance, reckon it not unto me, O Light, but
deliver me rather in thy great mystery of forgiver of sin: because of
thy goodness, O Light, because good (and) straight is the Light: because
of this thou wilt give thy way to me for to be delivered from my
transgression, and my powers which were diminished by the fear of the
material emanations [73^a] of the Self-willed, it will draw them near by
its precept; and my powers which were diminished by the unmerciful
(ones) it will teach them his knowledge: because all the knowledges of
the Light are deliverances, and are mysteries for everyone who seeketh
for the Places of his inheritance with his mysteries. Because of the
mystery of thy name O Light, forgive my transgression, because it is
great. Every one who trusteth unto the Light will give to himself the
mystery which he willeth, and his soul will become in the Place of the
Light, and his power will inherit the Treasury of the Light. The Light
is that which giveth power to those who believe it, and the name of his
mystery is that of those who trust unto him, and he will show to them
the Place of the inheritance [73^b] which is in the Treasury of the
Light. But I, I believed the Light at every time, because it is he who
will deliver my feet out of the bonds of the darkness. Give heed unto
me, O Light, and deliver me. For I, they took away my name from me in
the Chaos. Beyond all the emanations, were multiplied greatly my
afflictions with my oppressions. Deliver me out of my transgressions,
and with this darkness, and see the tribulation of my oppression, and
forgive my transgression. Give heed unto the Rulers of the twelve Aeons,
these which hated me in jealousy. Be watchful with my power and deliver
me, and let me not remain in this darkness: because I believed thee, and
they made me foolish greatly because I believed [74^a] thee, O Light.
Now therefore, O Light, deliver my powers up from the emanations of the
Self-willed, these in which I am oppressed.

Now therefore he who is sober let him be sober. These therefore Jesus
having said them unto his disciples came forward Thomas, said he, My
Lord, I am sober I become soberer and my spirit is ready in me, and I am
glad greatly, because thou revealedst to us these words: nevertheless
therefore I am bearing with my brothers up till now, that I should not
be angry with them. But I bear with each of them, coming forward to
thee, saying the explanation of the repentance of the Pistis Sophia. Now
therefore, my Lord, concerning the explanation of the seventh repentance
of the Pistis Sophia, [74^b] thy power of light prophesied about it by
David the prophet, saying thus in the twenty-fourth psalm, O Lord, I
lifted my soul up unto thee, my God, I confided in thee, let me not be
ashamed, nor let mine enemies mock at me. For even every one who is
patient with thee, they will not be ashamed. They shall be ashamed,
those who are unlawful without a cause. O Lord, show to me thy ways and
teach me thy paths guide me in the way of thy truth and teach me:
because thou art my God my Saviour, I will have patience with thee all
the day. Remember thy compassions, O Lord, and thy [75^a] mercies
because they become from age. The sins of my youth with my ignorance
remember not; remember me rather according to the multitude of thy
mercy, because of thy kindness, O Lord: kind and being straight is the
Lord, because of this he will teach the sinners on the road: he will
guide the meek in judgment, he will teach the meek his roads. All the
roads of the Lord mercies are and truth, to those who seek for his
righteousness and his testimonies: because of thy name, O Lord, forgive
my sin to me which is plentiful greatly. Who is the man who feareth the
Lord? He will establish law for him on the road which he wished. His
soul [75^b] will dwell in goods, and his seed will inherit the earth.
The Lord is the firmness of those who fear him, and the name of the Lord
is that of those who fear him, to show to them his covenant. Mine eyes
are gazing at the Lord at every time; because he it is who will draw my
feet out of the snare. Look upon me, and have mercy upon me, because I
am orphan, I am poor, indeed. The afflictions of my heart widened. Bring
me out of my necessities. See my humility with my tribulations and
forgive all my sins. See mine enemies because they increased; and they
hated me in a hatred of violence. Guard my soul [76^a] and save me. Let
me not be ashamed because I hoped unto thee. The innocent (ones) with
those who are straight clave unto me, because I have patience unto thee,
Lord God, redeem the Israel out of all his afflictions.

But Jesus having heard the words of Thomas, said he to him, Well (done)
Thomas and fairly. This is the explanation of the seventh repentance of
the Pistis Sophia. Amen, amen I say to you, Will call you happy upon the
earth all the generations of the World, because I revealed these
(things) to you, and ye received out of my spirit, and ye became
understanding and spiritual (ones), understanding the (things) which I
say. And after these (things) I shall [76^b] fill you with all the light
and with all the power of the spirit that ye should understand from this
hour all the (things) which they will say unto you, and with the
(things) which they will see. Yet a little other time (and) I shall
speak with you all the (things) of the Height from outward even unto
inward, and from inward even unto outward.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he to the disciples. It happened
therefore, having said her seventh repentance in the Chaos the Pistis
Sophia, and not yet the command came to me through the First Mystery,
for me to deliver her and bring her up from the Chaos. But I through my
own self in mercifulness, without [77^a] command I brought her unto a
Place widened a little in the Chaos. And having known the material
emanations of the Self-willed, that they brought her unto a Place
widened a little in the Chaos, they ceased oppressing her for a little,
thinking that they are going to bring her up from the Chaos altogether.
These (things) therefore having happened was not knowing the Pistis
Sophia that I it (is) who helpeth her, nor was she knowing me at all;
but she was wont to continue hymning unto the light of the Treasury,
this which she saw at the time, and this which she believed: and she was
thinking that he also it (is) who helpeth her, and he it (is) unto whom
she was hymning, thinking that it is the Light [77^b] of the truth. But
since she believed the Light, this which belongeth unto the truth of the
Treasury, because of this they will bring her up from the Chaos, and
receive her repentance from her: but not yet had been fulfilled the
precept of the First Mystery for them to receive her repentance from
her. Nevertheless therefore hear that I may say unto you all the words
which happened to the Pistis Sophia. It happened I having brought her
unto a Place widened a little in the Chaos, ceased oppressing her
entirely the emanations of the Self-willed, thinking that they are going
to bring her up from the Chaos altogether. It happened therefore, having
known the emanations of the Self-willed, that they brought not the
Pistis Sophia up from the Chaos, they turned also (back) oppressing her
greatly. Because of [78^a] this therefore she said the eighth
Repentance, because they had (before) ceased oppressing her, and also
they turned (back) they oppressed her unto the end. She said this
repentance, saying thus, I confided in unto thee, O Light, leave me not
in the Chaos, redeem me and deliver me in thy knowledge. I confided in
thee and thou deliverest me: become for me deliverer, O Light, and
deliver me and bring me (close) to thy light: because thou art my
Saviour, and thou wilt bring me (close) to thee. And because of the
mystery of thy name guide me, and give to me thy mystery: and thou wilt
deliver me from this power of face of lion which ensnared me; because
thou art my Saviour, and I shall give the purgation of my light unto thy
hands. Thou [78^b] deliveredst me, O Light, by thy knowledge. Thou wast
angry with those who are watchful against me, these who will not be able
to lay hold on me for ever. But I, I trusted unto the Light, I shall
rejoice and hymn, because thou hadst compassion upon me, and thou gavest
heed unto the straits in which I become, and thou deliveredst me: and
also thou wilt save my power out of Chaos, and thou didst not leave me
in hand of the power of face of lion, but thou broughtest me unto a
Place which is not oppressing.

These therefore, Jesus having said unto his disciples, he answered also,
said he to them, It happened therefore having known the power of face of
lion that they brought not the Pistis Sophia up from the Chaos
altogether (that power) came also with all the other material emanations
of the Self-willed, [79^a] they oppressed also the Pistis Sophia. It
happened therefore, they having oppressed her, she cried out in the same
Repentance, saying, Have compassion upon me, O Light, because they
oppressed me also. Was disturbed because of thy precept the light which
is in me. And my power and my mind: my power began to fail, while I
become in these oppressions; and the number of my time while I become in
Chaos. My light was diminished because they took away my power from me,
and shook all the powers which (are) in me. I became powerless beyond
all the Rulers of the Aeons, these who hate me, and beyond the
twenty-four emanations, these in whose Place I was becoming. And feared
to help me my brother, my partner, because of [79^b] the (things) in
which they planted me. And all the Rulers of the Height reckoned me unto
them as matter in which is not light. I became as a material power,
which fell out of the Rulers, and said all those who are in the Aeons,
She became Chaos. And after these (things) surrounded me the merciless
powers, and they said about taking away all my light which is in me. But
I, I trusted unto thee, O Light, and I said, Thou art my Saviour. And my
precept which thou orderedst unto me being in thy hands. Deliver me from
the emanations of the Self-willed these which oppress me and which
persecute me. Send thy light upon me, because I am nothing with thee.
And deliver me in thy [80^a] compassion: let me not be despised, because
thou art he whom I hymned, O Light: the Chaos will cover over the
emanations of the Self-willed, and take them below unto the darkness.
Let be shut the mouth of those who wish to swallow me (down) in guile,
these who say, Let us take away all the light which is in her, to whom I
did not anything evil. But these having said them Jesus, came forward
Maththaios said he, My Lord, thy spirit moved me, and sober in me is thy
light for me to utter the eighth repentance of the Pistis Sophia. For
thy power prophesied about her once by David in the thirtieth psalm,
saying, I confide in thee, O Lord, let me not be ashamed [80^b] for
ever. Save me in thy righteousness. Incline thy ear unto me. Hasten and
save me. Become to me a God of defence, and a house of refuge, to save
me: because thou art my firmness and my refuge, because of thy name thou
wilt guide me and nourish me and thou wilt bring me out of this snare,
this which they hid from me: because thou art my defence. I shall
deposit my spirit into thy hands. Thou redeemedst me, O Lord, the God of
the truth. Thou hatedst those who keep that which is vain without cause;
but I, I trusted, I shall be glad about the Lord, and I shall be
delighted over thy mercy: because thou lookedst upon my humility and
thou savedst my soul out of the necessities, and thou shutest not me up
in the hands of the darkness, thou madest stand my feet in a [81^a] wide
place: have mercy on me, O Lord, because I am afflicted. Mine eyes were
disturbed in the anger, and my soul with my belly. Because my years
failed in pain of heart, and my life failed in groanings. My power was
weakened in poverty, and were disturbed my bones. I became for reproach
to all my enemies, and those who are near unto me. I became for fear to
those who know me. And those who see me they ran away from me. They
forgot me as a corpse in their heart, and I was as a vessel which
perished. Because I heard the contempt of multitudes surrounding me
round about me, in their gathering upon me together. They counselled to
take away my soul from me. But I trusted unto thee, O Lord. I said, Thou
art my God [81^b] my lot is being in thy hands. Deliver me from the hand
of mine enemies and save me from those who persecute me. Manifest thy
face upon thy servant, and save me in thy mercy, O Lord. Let me not be
ashamed because I cried up unto thee, let them be ashamed, the impious
(ones), and (let) them turn them unto Amente. Let be silenced the lips
of guile, those who utter unlawfulness at the just in pride with
contempt.

But Jesus having heard these words, said he, Fairly (said) Maththaios.
Now therefore, Amen I say to you, Whenever should be completed the
perfect number, and the Universe be caught up, I shall sit in the
Treasury of the Light, and ye also ye will sit upon twelve powers of
light until we shall [82^a] restore all the arrays of the twelve
Saviours unto the Place of the inheritance of each of them.

But these having said them, said he, Understand ye what I am saying?

Came forward Maria, said she, O Lord, because of this indeed thou saidst
unto us once in a parable, Ye, ye were patient with me in the
temptations, I shall establish with you a kingdom according as my Father
established with me, that ye should eat and drink upon my table in my
kingdom, and ye, ye will sit upon twelve thrones and judge the twelve
tribes of the Israel.

Said he to her, Well (done) Maria. Added also Jesus, said he to his
disciples [82^b]. It happened therefore also after these (things),
having oppressed the Pistis Sophia in the Chaos, the emanations of the
Self-willed, she said the ninth Repentance, saying, O Light, Smite those
who took away my power from me, and take away the power of those who
took away mine from me, because I am thy power with thy light. Come and
deliver me. Let a great darkness cover over those who oppress me. Say to
my power, I am he who will deliver thee. Let them be diminished of their
power, all these who wish to take away my light from me altogether. Let
them turn them unto the Chaos, and let them be powerless, those who wish
to take away my light from me altogether. Let their power become as
dust, and let smite them Ieou thy [83^a] angel; and whenever they should
set out to come unto the Height, let darkness catch them, and let them
slide down, and let them turn them unto the Chaos. And let persecute
them Ieou thy angel, and send them unto the darkness below. Because they
ensnared me with a power of face of lion, I having not done evil to
them, this (power) from which they will take away its light: they
oppressed the power which (is) in me, this which they will not be able
to take away. Now therefore, O Light, take away the purgations of the
light of the power of face of lion, it having not known: and the thought
which thought the Self-willed to take away my light, take away his own
also; and let them take away the light of the power of face of lion,
this which ensnareth me. My power itself will be cheerful in the light,
and it will rejoice because thou wilt deliver it. And will say all parts
of my power, There is not other deliverer except thee; because thou
[83^b] art he who will deliver me from the power of face of lion, this
which took away my power and my light from me, and thou art he who
delivereth me from those who took away my power from me with my light.
Because they stood against me, lying about me and saying, I know the
mystery of the Light which (is) in the Height, this which I believed,
and they compelled me, saying, Say unto us the mystery of the Light
which is in the Height, this indeed which I know not. And they repaid to
me all these evils, because that I believed the Light of the Height. And
they made my power lightless. But I, they having compelled me, I sat
down in the darkness, my soul being humbled in a lamentation. And, O
Light, because of whom I hymn up unto thee, Deliver me. I know that thou
wilt deliver me, because that I was doing thy wish since [84^a] becoming
in my Aeon. I was doing thy wish as the Invisibles who become in my
Place, and as my partner, and I was lamenting, gazing, seeking after thy
Light. Now therefore surrounded me all the emanations of the
Self-willed, and they rejoiced over me, and they oppressed me greatly,
while I know not (the cause?). And they ran (away) they ceased from me,
and they had not mercy upon me, they turned (back) also, they tempted
me, and they oppressed me in the great oppression: they gnashed their
teeth at me, wishing to take away my light from me altogether. How long
therefore, O Light, art thou bearing with them oppressing me? Deliver my
power out of their evil thoughts, and deliver me from the power of face
of lion, because I alone among the Invisibles am that which becometh in
this [84^b] Place. I shall hymn unto thee, O Light, being in the midst
of all those who collected unto me, and I shall cry up at thee in the
midst of all those who oppress me. Now therefore, O Light, let not
rejoice at me those who hate me, and who wish to take away my power from
me, these who hate me; who move their eyes at me, I having not done
anything to them. Because they were flattering me indeed in words fair,
seeking from me the mysteries of the Light, these which I know not;
saying unto me, being crafty unto me, and being angry with me because I
believed the Light which (is) in the Height. They opened their mouth
against me, said they, Yea, we shall take away her light. Now therefore,
O Light, thou knewest their guile. Bear not with them, and let not thy
help be far away [85^a] from me. Hasten, O Light. Do my judgment with my
avenging, and give judgment unto me in thy goodness. Now therefore, O
Light of the Lights, let them not take away my light from me, and let
them not say within them, Our power was satisfied with her light, and
let them not say, (We) swallowed (down) her power, but let darkness
rather come upon them, and let them be powerless, those who wish to take
away my light from me: and let them clothe them with Chaos and darkness,
those who say, We shall take away her light with her power. Now
therefore deliver me that I may rejoice, because I wish for the
thirteenth Aeon the Place of the righteousness. And I shall say at every
time, Shall make more light the light of Ieou thy angel, because I long
for the light, [85^b] and my tongue will hymn unto thee in thy knowledge
in all my time in the thirteenth Aeon.

It happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, said he to them, He who is sober among you, let him utter
their explanation. Came forward Iakobos. He kissed the breast of Jesus,
said he, My Lord, was sober in me thy spirit, and I am ready to utter
their explanation. Concerning this indeed thy power prophesied once by
David in the thirty-fourth psalm, saying thus concerning the ninth
repentance of the Pistis Sophia. Give judgment, O Lord, unto those who
illtreat me, fight with those who fight with me: lay hold on a weapon
with a shield and arise to help me. Draw out a sword [86^a] and shut off
(the way) in the presence of those who afflict me. Say to my soul, I am
thy salvation: let them be ashamed and be disgraced those who seek after
my soul. Let them turn them back and be ashamed those who think unto me
evil (things). Let them be as the dust before a wind and the angel of
the Lord persecuting them. Let their road become darkness and slippery
and the angel of the Lord afflicting them. Because they hid unto me a
snare without cause unto their own destruction. And they reproached my
soul with that which is vain. Let come to them the snare which they know
not, and let seize them the trap which they hid for me, and they will
fall into this snare. But my soul will be glad over the Lord, and [86^b]
it will be cheerful over its salvation. All my bones will say, O Lord,
who is he who will be able to be like thee? Thou savest the poor (one)
from the hand of him who is stronger than he, and thou deliverest a poor
(one) with a miserable (one) from those who spoil him. Arose witnesses
of violence; they questioned me about the things which I know not: they
repaid to me evil (things) instead of good, (things) and childlessness
to my soul. But I, they having annoyed me, I clothed me with a sackcloth
and I humbled my soul in a fasting, my prayer will turn (back) into my
bosom. I was pleasing to thee, as he who is my neighbour, and as my
brother; and I humbled my(self) as he who lamenteth, and as he who
mourneth. They delighted [87^a] over me, and they were ashamed. Scourges
collected upon me, and I knew not. They were separated, and they were
not pained at heart. They tempted me and they derided me in derision,
they gnashed their teeth upon me. O Lord, when wilt thou look upon me?
Set up my soul out of their evil works, and deliver mine only sonship
from the lions. I shall manifest to thee, O Lord, in a congregation
which is many, and I shall bless thee in a people which hath not number.
Let them not rejoice at me, those who are enemies unto me in violence,
those who hate me without a cause, and they are winking with their eyes.
Because I indeed, they are wont to speak with me in words of peace, and
they are [87^b] wont to think in anger in guiles. They widened their
mouth upon me, and they said, Well (done) our eyes were full of sight of
him. Thou sawest, O Lord. Be not silent, O Lord, withdraw not thee from
me. Arise, O Lord, and give heed unto my judgment. Give heed unto my
avenging, my God and my Lord. Judge me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness: let them not rejoice at me, my God, nor let them say,
Well (done), our soul! Let them not say, We swallowed him (up). Let them
be ashamed and be disgraced together, those who rejoice over my evil.
Let them clothe them with shame with disgrace, those who say great words
against me. Let them be glad and be joyful, those who wish my
righteousness [88^a] and let them say, Let the Lord be great and be
exalted. Let them be exalted, those who wish the peace of his servant.
My tongue will be glad for thy righteousness with thy honour in all the
day.

These therefore having said them Iakobos, said he Jesus, Well (and)
fairly (done), Iakobos: this is the explanation of the ninth repentance
of the Pistis Sophia. Amen, amen I say to you, Ye will be first in unto
the kingdom of the heavens before all the Invisibles with all the Gods
with all the Rulers, these which become in the thirteenth Aeon and in
the twelve Aeons. But ye, not ye alone, [88^b] but every one also who
will do my mysteries. But these having said them, said he to them,
Understand ye in what manner I am speaking with you? Sprang up again
Mariham, said she, Yea, O Lord, This is that which thou saidst to us
once, The last (ones) will be first, and the first (will) be last. The
first (ones) therefore (are those) whom they fashioned before us, the
Invisibles. Since they it is, who became before the mankind, they with
the Rulers, and the men who will receive mysteries, will be first
(before) them in unto the kingdom of the heavens. Said he to her Jesus,
Well (done), Mariham. Added also Jesus, said he to his disciples, It
happened therefore, she having uttered [89^a] the ninth repentance the
Pistis Sophia, oppressed her again the power of face of lion, wishing to
take away every power from her. She cried also up unto the Light,
saying, O Light, whom I believed from at first, because of whom I
suffered these great tribulations, help me. And they accepted from her
her repentance at that hour: heard her the First Mystery and they
dispatched me by his command, I came to help her, I brought her up from
the Chaos, because she repented, and also because that she believed the
Light, she suffered these great tribulations with these great dangers,
(she was deceived) by the Self-willed God, and she was not deceived by
any work except [89^b] by a power of light, because of the likeness to
the light which she believed. Because of this therefore they dispatched
me by the command of the First Mystery for me to help her in
concealment: but that I should not yet come unto the Place of the Aeons
altogether. But I came out of all their midst, not any power knew (it),
neither those of the inward part of the inward parts, nor those of the
outward part of the outward, except the First Mystery only.

It happened therefore, I having come unto the Chaos to help her, she saw
me, I being comprehensible and enlightening greatly, becoming in
mercifulness toward her. For I was not being self-willed as the power of
face of lion, this which took away the power of light from the Sophia,
and also this which oppressed her to take away all the light which (is)
in her. [90^a] Saw therefore me enlightening, the Sophia, more than the
power of face of lion a number of ten thousand times, and I am becoming
in great mercifulness toward her. And she knew that I am out of the
Height of the Heights, this whose light she believed from at first. Was
confident of heart the Pistis Sophia, and she said the tenth Repentance,
saying, I cried up unto thee, O Light of the Lights, in my being
oppressed, thou heardest me. O Light, deliver my power out of lips of
violence and the unlawful, and out of snares of guile, O Light, that
which they will take away from me by a snare of guile, they would not
have brought it to thee. For the snares of the Self-willed are spread
abroad and with the traps of the unmerciful (ones). Woe [90^b] to me
indeed, because my place of dwelling was distant, and I became in the
places of dwelling of the Chaos: my power became in Places which are not
mine; and I flattered those unmerciful (ones): and whenever I should
flatter them they are wont to fight against me without a cause. These
therefore Jesus having said them to his disciples, said he to them, Now
therefore he whose spirit moveth him, let him come forward and say the
explanation of the tenth repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

Answered Petros, said he, O Lord, concerning this also thy power of
light prophesied by David once, saying in the hundred and nineteenth
psalm, I cried up unto thee, O Lord, in my being oppressed, thou
heardest me, O Lord, deliver my soul [91^a] out of lips of violence and
from a tongue of guile. What will they give to thee, and what will they
add unto thee with a tongue of guile? The arrows of the strong one are
sharp with the coals of the desert. Woe to me because my place of
dwelling became far away. I dwelt in the places of dwelling of Kedar. My
soul was made sojourner in a multitude of places. I was being peaceable
with those who hate the peace, whenever I should speak with them they
are wont to fight with me without a cause. This therefore now, O Lord,
is the explanation of the tenth repentance of the Pistis Sophia, that
which she said while are oppressing her the material emanations of the
Self-willed, they with his power of face of lion afflicted her greatly.
Said he [91^b] to him Jesus, Well (done) Petros and fairly (said). This
is the explanation of the tenth repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

Added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened
therefore, having seen me the power of face of lion, I having come near
unto the Pistis Sophia enlightening greatly, it was angry unto the more,
and it emanated out of it other multitudes of emanations being fierce
greatly. These therefore having become, said the eleventh Repentance the
Pistis Sophia saying, Why exalted itself the power of the strong (one)
among evils? Its thought is taking away the light from me at every time;
and as iron they are cutting, [92^a] they took away a power from me. I
loved to come down unto the Chaos, more than to remain in the Place of
the thirteenth Aeon the Place of the righteousness; and they wished to
take me by guile, for to swallow down all my light. Because of this
therefore the Light will take away all their light, and (will) be
overthrown all their other matter and it will take away their light, and
not let them dwell in the thirteenth Aeon their place of dwelling, and
not leave their name in the Place of those who will live: and will see
the (things) which happened to thee O power of face of lion, the
twenty-four emanations, and they (will) fear and not be disobedient, but
they (will) give up the purgation of their light, and they will see
thee, and (will) rejoice over thee, and (will) say, Behold, an emanation
[92^b] which did not give up the purgation of its light, that it should
be delivered, but it boasteth itself in the multitude of the light of
its power, because that it did not emanate out of the power which is in
it, and it said, I shall take away the light of the Pistis Sophia, this
which they will not take from her. Now therefore he whose power was
exalted in him let him come forward and utter the explanation of the
eleventh repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

Then came forward Salome, said she, My Lord, concerning this thy power
of light prophesied once by David, saying in the fiftieth with one
psalm, Why doth the powerful boast himself in his wickedness? Thy tongue
meditateth the violence all the day; as a razor [93^a] being sharp thou
didst beguile. Thou lovedst the evil more than the good. Thou lovedst
the violence more than speaking of the righteousness. Thou lovedst all
the words of the deceit with a tongue of guile. Because of this God will
overthrow thee for ever, he will pluck thee up, and he (will) drag thee
out of thy abode: and he will tear (away) thy root, and he (will) cast
it outside of those who live. Diapsalma. The righteous will see and they
(will) fear and they will mock at him and they (will) say, Behold a man
who put not God to him for helper. But he trusted upon his wealth which
is much, and he presumed upon his vanity. But I, I am being as a tree of
olive yielder of fruit in the house of the God, I trusted unto the mercy
of God even unto age of the age. [93^b] And I shall manifest to thee
because thou workedst with me, and I have patience upon thy name because
kind it is in presence of thy holy (ones). This therefore now, my Lord,
is the explanation of the eleventh repentance of the Pistis Sophia, thy
power of light having moved me, I said it according to thy wish.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words which said them
Salome, said he, Well (done) Salome. Amen, amen I say to you, I shall
complete you in every mystery of the kingdom of the light. But added
also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened therefore
after these (things) I drew near unto the Chaos enlightening greatly
greatly, that I should take away the light of that power of face of
lion: while I am enlightening [94^a] greatly, it (she MS.) feared and it
cried up unto its God Self-willed, for him to help it: and at that hour
looked out of the thirteenth Aeon the God Self-willed, he looked down
unto the Chaos being angry greatly, wishing to help his power of face of
lion, and at that hour surrounded the Pistis Sophia the power of face of
lion, itself with all its emanations, wishing to take away all the light
which (is) in the Sophia. It happened therefore, they having oppressed
the Sophia, she cried up unto the Height, crying up unto me for to help
her. It happened therefore, she having looked unto the Height she saw
the Self-willed being angry greatly, and she feared, she said the
twelfth [94^b] Repentance concerning the Self-willed (God) with his
emanations. But she cried up against me saying thus, Forget not, O
Light, my hymn; because opened mouths upon me the Self-willed with his
power of face of lion: they make guile unto me, and they surrounded me
wishing to take away my power; and they hated me because I hymned unto
thee. Instead of loving me, they slandered me. But I, I was hymning,
they plotted for to take away my power because I hymned unto thee, O
Light; and they hated me because I loved thee. Let the darkness come
upon the Self-willed, and let remain at his right (hand) the Ruler of
the Darkness which (is) outer: and in thy giving judgment unto him
[95^a] take away his power from him: and the work which he thought unto
himself to take away my light from me, thou shalt take away his own from
him: and let fail all his powers of his lights which (are) in him. And
let another take his greatness among the three Triple-powered: Let
become lightless all the powers of his emanations, and (let) his matter
become having not light in it. Let his emanations remain in the Chaos,
and (let) them not allow them to go unto their Place: let their light
fail which (is) in them, and allow them not to go up unto the thirteenth
Aeon their Place. Let [95^b] the Receiver, the purifier of the lights,
purify all the lights which become in the Self-willed, and let him take
them from him (them?). Let them lay hold upon his emanations, the Rulers
of the Darkness below; and let not any (one) accept him in his Place,
and let not any obey the power of his emanations in the Chaos: let them
take away the light which is in his emanations and (let) them blot out
their name in the thirteenth Aeon, and his own also (let) them take away
his name out of that Place for ever: and the power of face of lion let
them bring upon it the sin of him who emanated it in presence of the
Light, and (let) them not blot out the unlawfulness of the matter which
he sent out, (the Self-willed); [96^a] and their sin altogether shall
become in presence of the Light for ever; and (let) them not allow them
to see out; and (let) them take away their name from every Place.
Because that they spared me not, and they oppressed her (his, MS) whose
light they took away with her (his MS.) power. And furthermore those in
whom they planted me they wished to take away all my light from me: they
loved to come down unto the Chaos; they shall become in it, and they
shall not bring them up from this hour. They wished not the place of
dwelling of the Place of the righteousness, and they shall not receive
them unto it from this hour. He clothed him(self) with the darkness as
clothing, and it went into his belly as water, and it went into all his
powers as oil. [96^b] Let him wrap him(self) up in the Chaos as in a
garment, and (let) him bind him(self) with the darkness as with a girdle
of leather at every time. These (things) are happening to those who
brought these upon me because of the light, and those who said, Let us
take away all her power. But, thou, O Light, have compassion on me
because of the mystery of thy name; and save me in the kindness of thy
mercy: because that they took away my light with my power, and my power
was shaken within me, and I was not able to stand in their midst. I was
as matter which fell; they cast me unto this part and that, as a demon
being in the air. My power perished, because I have not mystery; and my
matter is worn out (?) because of my light, because they took it away.
And I, they were deriding me, [97^a] they are wont to look at me
beckoning unto me. Help me according to thy compassion. Now therefore he
whose spirit is ready, let him come forward and say the explanation of
the twelfth repentance of the Pistis Sophia.

But came forward Andreas, said he, My Lord, the Saviour, thy power of
light prophesied once by David concerning this repentance which said the
Pistis Sophia. And it said in the hundred with eight psalm, O God be not
silent unto my blessing, because the mouth of the sinner with the guile,
they opened their mouth upon me: they spake at me in a tongue of guile;
and they surrounded me in words [97^b] of hatred, and they fight with me
without a cause: instead of loving me. They slandered me, but I, I was
praying. They established against me evil (things) instead of good
(things), and a hatred instead of my love. Set up a sinner over him, and
let the Accuser stand at his right (hand). Whenever they should give
judgment unto him, let him (come) out being condemned, and let his
prayer become unto a sin. Let his days be shortened, and let another
take his episcopate. Let his sons be orphans, and let his wife be widow.
Let them turn out his children, and let them remove them away, and (let)
them beg. Let them cast them out of their houses. Let the usurer demand
[98^a] all the (things) which become to him; and let strangers rob all
his toils. Let there not become him who will help him; nor let
compassion become to his orphans. Let them blot his sons out, and let
them blot his name out in one generation. Let them remember the sin of
his fathers in presence of the Lord, and let them not blot out the
unlawfulness of his mother. Let them become in presence of the Lord at
every time. Let them scatter his remembrance out of the earth. Because
that he remembered not to do a mercy, and on the contrary he persecuted
a poor man and miserable, and he persecuted after one being [98^b]
pained at heart unto putting him to death. He loved the curse, and it
shall come to him. He did not wish the blessing, it shall be far from
him. He clothed him with the curse as a tunic, and it went unto his
inside as water, it was as oil in his bones. Let it become to him as
vesture which he will wrap about him, and as a girdle, being about to
gird him with it at every time. This is the work of those who slander
with the Lord and those who say contrary to lawful (things) against my
soul. But thou, O Lord, do mercy with me because of thy name. Save me
because I am poor and I am miserable: my heart was disturbed in my
inward part, they took me away from the midst, as a shadow which
declined. They drive me away [99^a] as locusts. My knees weakened in the
fasting, and my flesh changed because of (the want of) the oil. But I, I
became to them for reproach: they saw me, they moved their heads. Help
me, O Lord God, and save me according to thy mercy. Let them know that
this is thy hand, and thou, thou fashionedst it, O Lord. This therefore
is the explanation of the twelfth repentance, this which said the Pistis
Sophia being in the Chaos.

But added again Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened
also after these (things), cried up at me the Pistis Sophia, saying, O
Light of the Lights, I transgressed in the twelve [99^b] Aeons, I came
down from them. Because of this I said twelve Repentances according to
each one of the Aeons. Now therefore, O Light of the Lights, forgive to
me my transgressions, because great greatly it is, because I forsook the
Place of the Height, I came, I dwelt in the Place of the Chaos. These
therefore, having said them the Pistis Sophia, she added also in the
thirteenth Repentance, saying, Hear me while I hymn unto thee, O Light
of the Lights. Hear me saying the Repentance of the thirteenth Aeon, the
Place out of which I came down, that should be completed the thirteenth
Repentance of [100^a] the thirteenth Aeon: these Aeons which I
transgressed, I came down out of them. Now therefore, O Light of the
Lights, hear me while I hymn unto thee in the thirteenth Aeon, my Place
out of which I came. Deliver me, O Light, in thy great mystery, and
forgive my transgression in thy forgivingness. And give to me the
baptisms and forgive my sins, and cleanse me out of my transgression.
And my own transgression is the power of face of lion, this which shall
not be hidden from thee in every time, because I came down because of
it. And I, I transgressed alone among the Invisibles, in whose Place I
become. I came down unto the Chaos, [100^b] I transgressed before thee,
that thy precept should be completed. These therefore said the Pistis
Sophia. Now therefore, he whose spirit moveth him for to understand her
words, let him come forward and utter their meaning. Came forward
Martha, said she, O Lord, my spirit moveth me for to utter the
explanation of those (words) which said the Pistis Sophia. Thy power
prophesied once concerning them by David in the fiftieth psalm, saying
thus, Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy great mercy. According
to the multitude of thy compassions blot out my sin. Wash me greatly out
of my unlawfulness. And my sin is in my presence [101^a] at every time:
that thou shouldst be justified in thy words, and conquer in thy giving
judgment unto me. This is the explanation of the words which said the
Pistis Sophia.

Said he to her, Jesus, Well (done) (and) fairly, Martha the happy. But
added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened
therefore, the Pistis Sophia having said these words, completed was the
time for bringing her up from the Chaos, and through my own self,
without the First Mystery I brought a power of light out of myself; I
sent it down unto the Chaos for it to bring the Pistis Sophia up from
the Place which is deep of the Chaos [101^b], and bring her unto the
Place which (is) upper of the Chaos, until the command (should) come out
from the First Mystery for them to bring her up from the Chaos
absolutely. And my power of light brought the Pistis Sophia up unto the
Places which (are) upward of the Chaos. It happened therefore, the
emanations of the Self-willed having known that they brought the Pistis
Sophia up unto the Places which (are) upward of the Chaos they again
persecuted her unto the high (part), wishing to take her again unto the
Places which (are) of the Chaos below. And was enlightening greatly my
power of light, this which I sent to bring the Pistis Sophia up from the
Chaos. It happened therefore, having persecuted the Sophia, the
emanations [102^a] of the Self-willed, they having brought her unto the
Places which (are) upward of the Chaos, she hymned again, and she cried
up at me saying, I shall hymn up unto thee, O Light, because I wished to
come (close) to thee. I shall hymn up unto thee, O Light, because thou
art my deliverer: leave me not in the Chaos: deliver me, O Light of the
Height, because thou art he unto whom I hymned: thou dispatched to me
thy light through thyself and thou deliveredst me: thou broughtest me
unto the Places which (are) upward of the Chaos. Let them fall therefore
below unto the Places which (are) beneath of the Chaos, the emanations
of the Self-willed, these which are persecuting me: and let them not
come unto the Places which (are) upward, for to [102^b] see me. And let
great darkness cover over them, and let come to them an obscurity of
darkness: and let them not see me in the light of thy power, this which
thou dispatchedst to me to deliver me, that they should not lay hold
upon me: and their plot which they thought for to take away my power,
let it not happen for them: and according as they spake of me to take
away my light from me, take away theirs also instead of mine. And they
said to take away all my light, and they were not able to take it away,
because thy power of light becometh indeed with me, because they plotted
without thy precept, O Light, because of this they were not able to take
away my [103^a] light, because that I believed the light, and I shall
not fear; and the light is my deliverer, and I shall not fear. Now
therefore he whose power is exalted, let him say the explanation of the
words which said the Pistis Sophia. But it happened, Jesus having
finished saying these words unto his disciples, came forward Salome,
said she, My Lord, my power forced me for to say the explanation of the
words which said the Pistis Sophia. Thy power prophesied once by Solomon
saying, I shall manifest to thee, O Lord, because thou art my God. Leave
me not, O Lord, because [103^b] thou art my hope: thou gavest to me thy
judgment without a cause, and I was delivered through thee. Let fall
those who are persecuting me; and let them not see me. Let a cloud of
smoke cover over their eyes, and a mist of air let it make darkness unto
them: and let them not see the day, that they should not lay hold on me.
Let become powerless their plot, and the (things) which they plotted let
them come upon themselves they deliberated unto a plot, and it did not
happen for them: and they conquered them though being mighty; and the
(things) which they prepared evilly fell down upon them. My hope (is)
being in the Lord, and I shall not fear: because thou art my God,
[104^a] my Saviour.

It happened therefore, Salome having finished saying these words, said
he to her, Jesus, Well (done) Salome and fairly: this is the explanation
of the words which said the Pistis Sophia.

But added also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples, It happened
therefore, the Pistis Sophia having finished saying these words in the
Chaos, I caused the power of Light which I sent to her for to deliver
her, I caused it to make a crown of light unto her head, that should not
be able to prevail against her from this hour the emanations of the
Self-willed. And it having made a crown of light unto her head, moved
all the matter which (are) evil, which (are) in her, and they were all
purged from her [104^b], they perished and they became in the Chaos,
looking at them the emanations of the Self-willed, and rejoicing at
them. And the purities of true light which (are) in the Sophia, her true
light combined to give power with the light of my power of Light, this
which made a crown for her head. It happened therefore also, while (my
power) surroundeth the true light which (is) in the Sophia, her true
light did not become outside of the crown of the power of the flame of
light, that should not steal it, the emanations of the Self-willed.
These (things) therefore having happened to her, the power of true light
which (is) in the Sophia began (and) hymned. But she hymned unto my
power of Light which became for a crown unto her head: [105^a] but she
hymned saying, The Light becometh for a crown unto my head, and I shall
not become outside it, that should not rob me the emanations of the
Self-willed: and (even) if should move all the matters, but I shall not
be moved: and (even) if should perish all my matters, and remain in the
Chaos, these which were seen by the emanations of the Self-willed. But I
shall not perish, because the light becometh with me, and I also become
with the light. But these words said the Pistis Sophia. Now therefore he
who understandeth the meaning of these words, let him come forward and
utter their explanation. But came forward Maria the mother of Jesus,
said she, My son according to the world, [105^b] my God and my Saviour
according to the Height, command to me and (let) me utter the
explanation of the words which said the Pistis Sophia. But answered
Jesus, said he, Thou also Maria, this (one) who tookest form which (is)
in the Barbelo according to the matter, and thou tookest likeness which
(is) in the Virgin of the Light according to the Light, thou with the
other Mariham the happy. And the darkness became because of thee, and
also came out of thee the body of the matter in which I am becoming,
this which I cleansed and I purified it. Now therefore I command to thee
for to utter the explanation of the words, these which said the Sophia.

But answered Maria the mother of Jesus, said she, My Lord, thy power of
light prophesied about these [106^a] words once by Solomon in his
nine(teenth) ode and said it, The Lord upon my head as a crown, and I
shall not become outside of him. They planted for me the crown of the
truth and he caused thy branches to burst forth in me: because he is not
being like to a crown drying up, which is not wont to burst forth; but
thou art living upon my head and thou bursteth forth over me, thy fruits
are full and they are completed, being full of thy salvation. It
happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words, which is saying
Maria his mother, said he to her, Well (done and) fairly. Amen, amen I
say to thee, Will call thee happy from (one) end of the world even unto
(the other) end, because [106^b] sojourned with thee the pledge (of) the
First Mystery: and through that pledge are about to be delivered all the
(things) of the earth with all the (things) of the Height. And that
pledge itself is the beginning and the end. But added also Jesus in the
word, said he to his disciples, It happened, having said the thirteenth
repentance the Pistis Sophia, from that hour indeed was completed the
precept of all the afflictions, these which they ordered unto the Pistis
Sophia because of the completion of the First Mystery, this which
becometh from at first; and came the time for them to deliver her from
the Chaos [107^a] and to bring her up from all the darknesses: for was
received (they received, MS) from her her repentance by the First
Mystery. And himself that Mystery, dispatched to me a great power of
Light out of the Height for me to help the Pistis Sophia and to bring
her up out of her Chaos. But I looked at the Height of Aeons, I saw the
power of Light which the First Mystery dispatched to me, that I should
deliver the Sophia from the Chaos. It happened therefore, I having seen
it coming out of the Aeons and rushing toward me, but I, I was being
over the Chaos, another power of Light came out of me also, that it
should help also the Pistis Sophia. And the power of [107^b] Light which
came out of the Height by the First Mystery came down upon the power of
Light which came out of me, and they met one another, they made a great
effluence of light. These therefore having said them Jesus to his
disciples, said he, Do ye understand in what manner I am speaking with
you? Sprang up again Mariham, said she, My Lord I understand what thou
art saying concerning the explanation of this word: thy power of light
prophesied once by David in the eighty-fourth psalm, saying, The mercy
with the truth met one another, and the righteousness with the peace
kissed one another. The truth burst forth out [108^a] of the earth and
the righteousness looked out of the heaven. The mercy therefore is the
power of Light which came by the First Mystery, because he heard the
Pistis Sophia, the First Mystery, he had mercy on her in all her
afflictions. The truth also is the power which came out of thee, because
that thou completedst the truth, for thee to deliver her from the Chaos.
And again the righteousness is the power which came by the First Mystery
which will steer the Pistis Sophia: and again the peace is the power
which came out of thee, because that it will go toward the emanations of
the Self-willed, and take away from them the lights, which they took
away from the Pistis Sophia, namely, that thou may gather them into the
Sophia [108^b] and make them at peace with her power. The truth also is
the power which came out of thee, thou being in the Place below of the
Chaos. Because of this, thy power said by David, The truth burst forth
out of the earth, because that thou art in the Place below of the Chaos.
The righteousness also which looked out of the heaven, that is the power
which came out of the Height by the First Mystery, this which went into
the Sophia.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words, said he, Well
(done), Mariham the happy, this (One) who will inherit all the kingdom
of the Light. After these (things) there came also forward Maria the
mother of Jesus, said she, My Lord [109^a] and my Saviour, command to me
also, for me to say this word of answer? Said he, Jesus, He whose spirit
will become understanding I forbid him not, but I urge him the more for
to say the meaning which moved him.

Now therefore Maria my mother according to the matter in which I
sojourned I command to thee, for thee to say also the meaning of the
word. But answered Maria, said she, My Lord, concerning the word which
thy power prophesied by David, The mercy with the truth met one another,
the righteousness with the peace, they kissed one another, the truth
burst forth in the earth, and the righteousness looked out of the
heaven. Thy power prophesied this word once concerning thee, thou being
yet little, before [109^b] the spirit came upon thee, thou being in a
vineyard with Ioseph came the spirit out of the Height, he came to me
into my house, being like to thee, and I was not knowing him, and I was
thinking that (it) is thou. And said to me the spirit, Where is Jesus my
brother that I may meet him? And he having said this to me, I was
puzzled, and I was thinking that (it) is a phantasm to the tempting me.
But I took him up I bound him unto the foot of my place of lying which
is in my house, until I should come to you out unto the field, thou with
Ioseph. And I having found thee in the vineyard, while Ioseph giveth the
vineyard unto the reed, it happened therefore, thou having heard me
saying the word to Ioseph, thou understoodest the word, thou rejoicedst,
and saidst thou, Where is he that I may see him or else I am remaining
[110^a] for him in this place? But it happened, Ioseph having heard thee
saying these words he was disturbed, and we came up together, we went
into the house: we found the spirit bound unto the place of lying, and
we looked at thee with him, we found thee being like to him, and was
loosened he who was bound unto the bed, he embraced thee, he kissed
thee, and thou also thou kissedst him, ye became only one. This
therefore is the word with its explanation. The mercy is the spirit
which came out of the Height by the First Mystery: because that he had
mercy on the race of the men, he dispatched his spirit for to forgive
the sins of all the world, and for them to receive mystery and inherit
the kingdom of the light. The truth also is the power which sojourned in
me, having come [110^b] out of the Barbelo, it became for thee for body
material and it preached of the Place of the truth. The righteousness is
thy spirit, this which brought the mysteries out of the Height for him
to give them to the race of the mankind. The peace also is the power
which sojourned in thy material body according to the World, this which
baptised the race of the mankind, until it made them stranger unto the
sin, and made them at peace with thy spirit, and become being at peace
with the emanations of the Light, namely, that the righteousness with
the peace kissed one another. And according as he said, The truth burst
forth out of the earth, but the truth is [111^a] thy material body, this
which burst forth from me according to the earth of the mankind, this
which preached of the Place of the truth (Coptic) of the Truth: and also
according as he said, The righteousness burst forth out of the heaven,
(so) the righteousness is the power which looked out of the Height, this
which will give the mysteries of the light to the race of the mankind,
and for them to become righteous and for them to be good, and inherit
the kingdom of the light. It happened therefore, Jesus having heard
these words which said Maria his mother, said he: Well (done and)
fairly, Maria. Came forward the other Maria, said she, My Lord, bear
with me, and be not angry with me. While thy mother was [111^b] speaking
with thee concerning the explanation of these words, my power disturbed
me for to come forward, and say also the explanation of these words.
Said he to her Jesus, I command to thee for to say their explanation.
Said she Maria, My Lord, the mercy and the truth met one another. The
mercy therefore is the spirit which came upon thee, thou having received
baptism by Iohannes: the mercy therefore is the spirit of the divinity,
this which came upon thee: he had mercy on the race of the mankind, he
came down, he met the power of Sabaoth the good, this which is in thee,
this which preached of the Places of the truth. But she said also, The
righteousness with the peace kissed one another. [112^a] The
righteousness therefore is the spirit of the Light, this which came upon
thee, this which brought the mysteries of the Height, for to give them
to the race of the mankind. The peace also is the power which (is) in
thee of Sabaoth the good, this which baptised (and) forgave to the race
of the mankind, and it made them at peace with the sons of the light.
And also according as thy power said by David, The truth burst forth in
the earth, namely, the power of the Sabaoth the good. He said, It burst
forth in the earth. This which burst forth in Maria thy mother the
native of earth. The righteousness also which looked out of the heaven,
that [112^b] is the spirit which (is) in the Height, this which brought
all the mysteries out of the Height, he gave them to the race of the
mankind, they became righteous and they became good, they inherited the
kingdom of the light. It happened therefore, Jesus having finished
hearing these words, saying them Mariham, said he, Well (done) Mariham,
inheritor of the light. Came again forward Maria the mother of Jesus,
she prostrated at his feet, she kissed them, and said she, My Lord and
my son and my Saviour, be not angry with me, but spare me that I may say
the explanation of these words another time. The mercy with the truth
met one another [113^a]. I am Maria thy mother with Elisabet the mother
of Iohannes, I met her: the mercy therefore is the power which (is) in
me of the Sabaoth: this which came out of me, namely thee, thou hadst
mercy on all the race of the mankind. The truth also is the power which
(is) in Elisabet, namely Iohannes, this who came, he preached of the way
of the truth, namely thee: who preached before thee. And again the mercy
with the truth which met one another, are thou my Lord who met Iohannes
on the day, thou being about to receive baptism (and Iohannes himself).
But thou also with Iohannes [113^b] are the righteousness with the peace
who kissed one another.

The truth burst forth out of the earth, and the righteousness looked out
of the heaven, namely, the time (at) which thou ministeredst to thy own
self: thou madest form of Gabriel, thou lookedst out upon me out of the
heaven, thou spakest with me, and thou having spoken with me, thou
burstedst forth in me, namely the truth, namely the power of Sabaoth the
good, this which becometh in thy material body, namely the truth which
burst forth out of the earth.

It happened therefore, [114^a] Jesus having heard these words, saying
them Maria his mother, said he: Well (done and) fairly. This is the
explanation of all the words, these which my power of light prophesied
about them once by David the prophet.


   [_Written on the vacant page between the 1st and 2nd Documents._]


[114^b] But these are the names which I shall give from the Boundless
(One downwards). Write them with a sign, that the sons of God should be
manifested from this place (onwards). This is the name of the Deathless
(One) ααα ωωω. And this is the name of the sound by which the Perfect
Man was moved ιιι. But these are the interpretations of the names of
these Mysteries. The first is ααα. Its interpretation is φφφ. The second
is μμμ or is ωωω. Its interpretation is ααα. The third is ψψψ. Its
interpretation is οοο. The fourth is φφφ. Its interpretation is ννν. The
fifth is δδδ. Its interpretation is ααα. He who (is) upon the throne is
ααα. This is the interpretation of the second αααα αααα αααα. This is
the interpretation of the whole name.




                          THE SECOND DOCUMENT
                  THE SECOND TOME OF THE PISTIS SOPHIA


[115^a] Came also forward Iohannes, said he, O Lord, command to me also
for to say the explanation of the words which thy power of light
prophesied once by David. But answered Jesus, said he to Iohannes, Thou
also Iohannes I command to thee for to say the explanation of the words,
these which my power of light prophesied by David, The mercy with the
truth met one another, and the righteousness with the peace kissed one
another. The truth burst forth in the earth and the righteousness looked
out of the heaven. But answered Iohannes, said [115^b] he, This is the
word which thou saidst unto us once, I came out of the Height, I went in
unto Sabaoth the good. I embraced the power of light which (is) in him.
Now therefore the mercy with the truth which met one another: thou art
the mercy, which dispatched thee out of the Places of the Height by thy
Father, the First Mystery which looketh inward, having dispatched thee
for to have mercy on all the World. The truth also is the power of the
Sabaoth the good, this which planted itself in thee, this which thou
castedst in the Left, thou, the First Mystery which looked outward. And
received it the little Sabaoth the good, he cast it in unto the matter
of the Barbelo. [116^a] And he preached of the Place of the truth (of
the alethia) in all the Places of those on the Left. That matter
therefore of the Barbelo, that (is) which becometh to thee for body
to-day. And the righteousness with the peace which kissed one another:
the righteousness is thou, who broughtest all the mysteries out of thy
Father the First Mystery which looked in, and thou baptisedst the power
of the Sabaoth the good, and thou camest unto the Place of the Rulers;
thou gavest to them the mysteries of the Height: and they became
righteous and they became good. The peace also is the power of the
Sabaoth, this which itself is thy soul, this which went in unto the
matter [116^b] of the Barbelo. And all the Rulers of the six Aeons of
the Sabaoth (Iabraoth) made them at peace with the mystery of the light.
And the truth which burst forth in the earth: that is the power of the
Sabaoth the good. This which came out of the Place of the Right, this
which is outside of the Treasury of the Light. And it went unto the
Place of those on the Left, it went in unto the matter of the Barbelo,
and it preached to them the mysteries of the Place of the truth. The
righteousness also which looked out of the heaven: thou art the First
Mystery, which looked outward, having come out of the Spaces of the
Height with the Mysteries of the kingdom of the light, and [117^a] thou
camest down upon the vesture of the light, this which thou tookest from
the Barbelo, which is Jesus our Saviour, thou having come down upon him
as a dove.

It happened therefore when Iohannes had uttered these words, said he to
him, the First Mystery which looked outward, Well (done), Iohannes the
brother, the beloved. Added the First Mystery saying, It happened
therefore, the power which came out of the Height, which is I, whom my
Father dispatched, for me to deliver the Pistis Sophia from the Chaos. I
therefore with the power also which came out of me, and the soul which I
took from Sabaoth the good, they came close to one another [117^b], they
became one effluence of light which enlighteneth greatly greatly; I
called unto Gabriel down out of the Aeons, and with Mikhael through the
command of my Father the First Mystery who looked inward: I gave to them
the effluence of light, I caused them to go down unto the Chaos for to
help the Pistis Sophia, and (to) take away the powers of light, these
which the emanations of the Self-willed took away from her, (to) take
them away from them, and (to) give them to the Pistis Sophia. And
immediately they took the effluence of light down unto the Chaos, it
enlightened greatly greatly in all the Chaos. And it widened out in all
their Places: and having seen the great [118^a] light of that effluence,
the emanations of the Self-willed they feared one upon another, and that
effluence drew out of them all powers of light, these which they took
away from the Pistis Sophia. And were not able to dare the emanations of
the Self-willed to lay hold on that effluence of Light in the Chaos of
darkness, nor were they able to lay hold on her by art of the
Self-willed, this who laid hold on the emanations. And Gabriel with
Mikhael brought the effluence of Light upon the body of the matter of
the Pistis Sophia, and they cast in unto it all her lights which they
took away from her, and received all the light the body of her matter,
[118^b] and again received light all her powers which (are) in her,
these whose light they took away, and they ceased being diminished of
light, because they took up their light which they took away from them,
because that they gave the light to them through me. And Mikhael with
Gabriel, these who ministered to me, these who took the effluence of
light unto the Chaos, they will give to them the mysteries of the light:
they are those who were entrusted with the effluence of Light, this
which I gave to them, I took it unto the Chaos. And Gabriel (Mikhael
added in margin without ‘with’) did not take away for themselves any
from the lights of the Pistis Sophia, these which they took away from
the emanations of the Self-willed. It happened therefore, the effluence
of Light, it [119^a] having cast in unto the Pistis Sophia all her
powers of light, these which it took from the emanations of the
Self-willed, she became light all (over), and the other powers of light,
those which become in the Pistis Sophia, these which the emanations of
the Self-willed did not take away, they were cheerful again, and they
were filled with light: and the lights which they cast in unto the
Pistis Sophia vivified the body of her matter, this in which there is
not light, this which was about to perish, (or this which is wont to
perish), and they set up all her powers, these were about to dissolve:
and they received for them a power of light, they became as they were
being at first. [119^b] And again they were exalted in the perception of
light, and all the powers of light of the Sophia recognised one another
through the effluence of Light, and they were delivered by the light of
that effluence. And my effluence of Light, having taken away the lights
from the emanations of the Self-willed, these which they took from the
Pistis Sophia. It cast them in unto the Pistis Sophia, and it returned,
it came up from the Chaos. These (things) therefore while the First
Mystery is saying unto the disciples, that they happened to the Pistis
Sophia in the Chaos, answered, said he to them, Do ye understand in what
manner I am speaking with you?

Came forward [120^a] Petros, said he, My Lord, concerning the
explanation of the words which thou saidst, thy power of light
prophesied about them once by Solomon in his Odes, Came out an effluence
it made a great river being wide, it drew all (things) and it turned
itself toward the Temple. They were not able to lay hold on it with
strong-banks, with places built: nor were able to lay hold on it the
arts of those who lay hold on the waters: they brought it over all the
earth, and it laid hold on all. Drank those who became upon the sand
which is dry: their thirst was dissolved and it was quenched, they
having given to them the drink from that which is exalted: happy (ones)
are the deacons [120^b] of that drink, those who were entrusted with the
water of the Lord: they turned lips which were dry, took a cheerful
heart those who were brought low: they laid hold on souls giving up the
breath, that they should not die: they set up the limbs which fell, they
gave power to their boldness, and they gave light to their eyes: because
they all knew themselves in the Lord, and they were delivered through a
water of life eternal. Hear therefore, my Lord and I (shall) utter the
word in boldness, according as thy power prophesied by Solomon. An
effluence came out it became a great river being wide, namely, that the
effluence of Light was wide [121^a] out in the Chaos in all the Places
of the emanations of the Self-willed. And the word also which thy power
said by Solomon, It drew all (things), it brought them toward the
Temple, namely, that it drew all the powers of light out of the
emanations of the Self-willed, these which they took away from the
Pistis Sophia, and it cast them in unto the Pistis Sophia another time.
And the word also which thy power said, Were not able to lay hold on it
strong-banks with places built, namely, that the emanations of the
Self-willed were not able to lay hold on the effluence of Light in the
wall of the darkness of the Chaos. And the word [121^b] also which it
said, They brought it over all the earth, and it filled every thing,
namely, that Gabriel with Mikhael they having brought it upon the body
of the Pistis Sophia, it cast in unto her all the lights, these which
took away from her the emanations of the Self-willed and became light
the body of her matter. And the word which it said, Drank those who
become upon the sand which is dry, namely, that received light all those
which become in the Pistis Sophia, these whose light they took away at
first. And the word which it said, Their thirst was dissolved and it was
quenched, namely, that her power ceased being diminished of light and
they were satisfied with light, because they gave (back) to them their
light [122^a] which they took away from them. And also according as also
said thy power, They gave to them the drink through him who is exalted,
namely, that they gave the Light to them through the effluence of Light,
this which came out of me, I the First Mystery. And according as said
thy power of light, Happy are the deacons of that drink, namely, the
word which thou saidst, Mikhael with Gabriel, these who served they took
the effluence of Light unto the Chaos, and also they brought it up (from
Chaos). They will give to them the mysteries of the Light of the Height,
these who were entrusted with the effluence of the Light. And also
according as said thy power, They turned [122^b] lips which were dry,
namely, Gabriel with Mikhael took not away for themselves the light of
the Pistis Sophia, these which they snatched from the emanations of the
Self-willed, but they cast them in unto the Pistis Sophia. And also the
word which it said, Received a cheerfulness of heart those who were
dissolved, namely, that all the other powers of the Pistis Sophia, these
which took not away the emanations of the Self-willed were cheerful
very, and they were filled with light out of the other light, because
they cast it in unto them. And the word which thy power said, They
vivified souls giving-up the breath, that they should not die, [123^a]
namely, that they having cast the lights in unto the Pistis Sophia they
vivified the body of her matter, this from which they took away its
light at first, this which was about to perish. And also the word which
thy power said, They set up limbs which fell, (or that they should not
fall), namely, that they having cast in unto her her lights, they set up
all her powers, these which were about to be dissolved. And also
according as thy power of light said, They gave a power to their
boldness, namely, that they took again their light, and they became as
they were being at first. And also the word which [123^b] said, They
gave a light unto their eyes, namely, that they received perception from
the light, and they knew the effluence of Light, that it is belonging
unto the Height. And also the word which it said, They all knew them in
the Lord, namely, that all the powers of the Pistis Sophia knew one
another by the effluence of Light. And also the word which it said, They
were delivered by a water of life eternal, namely, that they were
delivered by the whole the effluence of Light. And the word which it
said, Drew them all the effluence of Light. And it drew them toward the
Temple, namely, that the effluence of Light [124^a] having taken up all
the lights of the Pistis Sophia and having snatched them from the
emanations of the Self-willed, it cast them in unto the Pistis Sophia
and it returned, it came out of the Chaos, it came upon thee, who
thyself art the Temple. This is the explanation of all the words, these
which said thy power of light by the Ode of Solomon. It happened
therefore, the First Mystery having heard these words, saying them
Petros, said he to him, Well (done), O happy Petros, this is the
explanation of the words which they said. But added also in the word the
First Mystery said he, It happened therefore, I having not yet brought
the Pistis Sophia up from the Chaos, because that they had not yet
commanded to me by my Father, [124^b] the First Mystery who looked
inward. Then therefore after these (things) having known the emanations
of the Self-willed that my effluence of Light took away the powers of
light from them, these which they took away from the Pistis Sophia, it
cast them in unto the Pistis Sophia, and also they saw the Pistis Sophia
becoming light as she was being from at first, they were angry with the
Pistis Sophia, and also they cried up against their Self-willed for to
come and help them and take away the powers which (are) in the Sophia
another time. And the Self-willed dispatched out of the Height in the
thirteenth Aeon, he dispatched another great power of light, it came
down unto the Chaos as an [125^a] arrow flying, that he should help his
emanations, and take away the lights of the Pistis Sophia another time.
And having come down that power of light, the emanations of the
Self-willed, these which become in the Chaos, which afflicted the Pistis
Sophia, they were confident of heart greatly, and again they persecuted
the Pistis Sophia with great fear and in a great disturbance; and they
afflicted her some among the emanations of the Self-willed, one indeed
among them changed himself unto a form of great serpent, another also
changed himself unto a form of serpent of basilisk having seven heads:
another also changed himself unto a form of dragon, and also the first
[125^b] power of the Self-willed which is of face of lion, and also all
his emanations which are many greatly came together they oppressed the
Pistis Sophia, and also they brought her into the Places which are below
(of) the Chaos, and also they disturbed her greatly. It happened
therefore, they having disturbed her, she ran from them, she came unto
the Places which (are) of the upper part of the Chaos, and ran after her
the emanations of the Self-willed, they disturbed her greatly. It
happened therefore after these (things), looked out of the twelve Aeons
the Adamas the tyrant, this (one) also was being angry with the Pistis
Sophia, because that she was wishing to go unto the Light of the Lights,
this who was being above all of them: [126^a] because of this he was
angry with her. It happened therefore, the Adamas the tyrant having
looked out of the twelve Aeons, he saw the emanations of the Self-willed
oppressing the Pistis Sophia, until they take away all the lights in
her. But it happened the power of the Adamas having come down unto the
Chaos (close) to all the emanations of the Self-willed, it happened
therefore, that demon having come down unto the Chaos he thrust the
Pistis Sophia down, and the power of face of lion, with the face of
serpent, and with the face of basilisk serpent, and with the face of
dragon, and with all the other emanations of the Self-willed which are
[126^b] many greatly, they all surrounded the Pistis Sophia, wishing to
take away her powers which (are) in her another time. And they oppressed
the Pistis Sophia greatly, and they threatened her. It happened
therefore, they having oppressed her and having disturbed her greatly,
she cried again up towards the Light and she hymned saying, O Light thou
(art) he who helped me: let thy light come upon me, because thou art my
accepter, and I am coming (close) to thee, O Light. I am believing thee,
O Light, because thou art my deliverer of me from the emanations of the
Self-willed and with the Adamas the tyrant; and thou (art) he who
delivereth me from all his [127^a] threats which are cruel.

But these having said the Pistis Sophia, then also by the command of my
Father the First Mystery which looked inward, I sent also Gabriel with
Mikhael with the ten (?) great effluences of Light, that they should
help the Pistis Sophia. And I ordered unto Gabriel with Mikhael, that
they should take away the Pistis Sophia upon their hands, that her feet
should not touch the darkness below: and also I ordered unto them for to
steer her from the Places of the Chaos, into those which they are about
to bring her. It happened therefore, the angels having gone down unto
the Chaos, they with the effluence of Light, and also all the emanations
of the Self-willed [127^b] with the emanation of the Adamas, they saw
the effluence of Light enlightening greatly greatly, there being not
measure unto the light which becometh from it, they feared and they let
go of the Pistis Sophia: and the great effluence of Light surrounded the
Pistis Sophia on every side of her on left of her and on right of her,
and on every side of her, and it became a crown of light unto her head.
It happened therefore, the effluence of Light having surrounded the
Pistis Sophia, she was confident of heart greatly greatly, and it ceased
not surrounding her on every side of her; and she feared not the
emanations of the Self-willed, these which become in the Chaos, nor also
she feared the other new [128^a] power of the Self-willed, this which he
cast down unto the Chaos as an arrow flying; nor also she trembled at
the demonic power of the Adamas, this which came out of the Aeons. And
also by my command, I, the First Mystery who looked outward, enlightened
greatly greatly my effluence of Light, this which surrounded the Pistis
Sophia on every side of her. And the Pistis Sophia remained in the midst
of the light, there being a great light on left of her and on right of
her and on every side of her, and being also a crown unto her head: and
all the emanations of the Self-willed changed not also their face, nor
were they able to support the rush of the great [128^b] light of the
effluence, this which became a crown unto her head. And all the
emanations of the Self-willed, a multitude among them fell on right of
her, because that she is enlightening greatly greatly; and other
multitudes fell on left of her, and they were not able to approach unto
the Pistis Sophia at all, from the great light. Nevertheless they fell
all upon one another (or they came all who are close to one another).
And they were not able to do anything of evil to the Pistis Sophia,
because that she was trusting unto the light. And through the command of
my Father the First Mystery, who looked inward, I also, I came down unto
the Chaos enlightening greatly greatly. [129^a] I came up to the power
of face of lion, this (power) which was enlightening greatly, and I took
away all its light which (is) in it, and I held down all the emanations
of the Self-willed for them not to go unto their Place from this hour,
which (is) the thirteenth Aeon. And I took away the power from all the
emanations of the Self-willed: and they fell all in the Chaos being
powerless. And I brought out the Pistis Sophia, being on (the) right of
Gabriel with Mikhael. And the great effluence of Light, it went also in
unto them; and filled her sight with her enemies the Pistis Sophia,
because I took away their power of light from them, and I brought the
Pistis Sophia out of the Chaos, she having trampled [129^b] upon the
emanation of the Self-willed the face of serpent, and also she was
trampling upon the emanation of face of basilisk having seven heads. And
she is trampling upon the power of face of lion, with the face of
dragon. I caused the Pistis Sophia to remain standing upon the emanation
of the Self-willed, this which became of face of basilisk of serpent
having seven heads, but it was being strong(er) than all of them in its
evils. And I, the First Mystery, I stood upon it, and I took away all
the powers which (are) in it, and I destroyed all its matter, that seed
from it should not rise up from this hour.

But these while the First Mystery is saying unto the disciples, he
answered saying, Understood ye in what manner I am speaking [130^a] with
you. Came forward Iakkobos said he, My Lord, concerning the explanation
therefore of the words which thou saidst, prophesied about them once thy
power of light by David in the ninetieth psalm, He who dwelleth under
the help of him who is high shall abide under the shadow of the God of
the heaven. He will say to the Lord, Thou art my accepter, and my place
of refuge: my God I am trusting unto him; because he it is who will save
me from the snare of the snarer, and from a word being cruel. He will
make shadow unto thee under his (thy, MS) breast, and thou wilt trust
under his wing. His [130^b] truth will surround thee as an armour
(weapon, MS). Thou wilt not fear for a fear of night, and for an arrow
which flieth in the day, for a thing which moveth in the darkness; for a
calamity of demon of the hour of mid-day. There are a thousand (who)
will fall on left of thee and ten thousand on right of thee; but they
will not approach unto thee. Nevertheless thou wilt fill thy sight with
them, thou wilt see the recompense of the sinners: because thou art, O
Lord my hope; thou placest for thee that which is high for place of
refuge: there is not evil (which) will approach unto thee; there is not
scourge (which) will approach in unto thy place of abiding: because he
will order unto [131^a] his angels because of thee, for to keep thee in
all thy ways; and they (will) lift thee upon their hands
lest-at-any-time thou should dash against a stone with thy foot. Thou
wilt mount upon a serpent with a basilisk, and trample upon a lion with
a dragon. Because he trusted unto me I will save him; I will make shadow
unto him, because he knew my name: he will cry up unto me, and I, I
shall hear him, I am with him in his affliction, and I shall save him
and (I shall) give glory to him; and (I shall) increase him in a
multitude of days, and (I shall) teach him of my salvation. This is, O
Lord, the explanation of the words which thou saidst. Hear therefore
that I may say them in boldness. The word therefore which [131^b] thy
power said by David, He who dwelleth under the help of him who is high,
will abide under the shadow of the God of the heaven, namely, that when
the Pistis Sophia had trusted unto the Light she abode under the light
of the effluence of Light. This which came from the Height through thee.
And the word which thy power said by David, I shall say to the Lord,
Thou art my accepter and my place of refuge, my God I trusted unto him.
That is the word with which hymned the Pistis Sophia, Thou art my
accepter and I am coming (close) to thee. And also the word which thy
power said, My God unto whom I am trusting, thou art [132^a] he who will
save me from the snare of the snarers, and from a word being cruel. That
is that which said the Pistis Sophia, O Light I am believing thee,
because thou art he who will deliver me from the emanations of the
Self-willed, and with those of the Adamas the tyrant. And thou also art
he who will deliver me from all their threats which are cruel. And also
the word which said thy power by David, He will make shadow unto thee
under his (thy, MS) breast, and thou wilt trust under his wing, namely,
that the Pistis Sophia became in the light of the effluence of Light,
this which came out of thee, and she remained confident of heart, for
the light which (is) on left of her [132^b] with that which (is) on
right of her, namely the wings of the effluence of Light. And the word
which thy power of light prophesied by David, The truth will surround
thee as armour (a weapon, MS), that is the light of the effluence of
Light, that which surrounded the Pistis Sophia on every side of her as
armour. And the word which thy power said, He will not fear for a fear
of night, namely, that the Pistis Sophia feared not for the fears with
the disturbances, these in which they planted her in the Chaos which is
the night. And the word which thy power said, He will not fear [133^a]
for an arrow flying in the day, namely, that the Pistis Sophia did not
fear for the power, this which the Self-willed dispatched out of the
Height at the last, this which came unto the Chaos, being as an arrow
flying, which thy power therefore of light said, Thou wilt not fear for
an arrow flying in the day. Because that power came out of the
thirteenth Aeon, that is (that) which is lord over the twelve Aeons, and
that is (that) which enlighteneth unto all the Aeons. Because of this
therefore he said, The day. And the word also which thy power said, He
will not fear [133^b] for a thing, walking in the darkness, namely, that
the Sophia did not fear for the emanation of face of lion (serpent, MS)
which was giving fear to the Pistis Sophia in the Chaos, namely, the
darkness. And the word which thy power said, He will not fear for an
accident with a demon of the hour of mid-day, namely, that the Pistis
Sophia did not fear for the emanation demonic of the Adamas, the tyrant,
this which thrust the Pistis Sophia down in great calamity, this which
came from Adamas out of the twelve Aeons. Because of this therefore said
thy power, He will not fear [134^a] for a calamity of demon of the time
of mid-day. The time of mid-day is because it came out of the twelve
Aeons, namely, the time of mid-day. And also Night, because it came out
of the Chaos, namely, the night, and it came out of the twelve Aeons,
which are between the two. Because of this thy power of light said, The
time of mid-day because the twelve Aeons are between the thirteenth Aeon
and between the Chaos. And the word also which thy power of light said
by David, There are thousand (who) will fall on left of him and a ten
thousand on right of him; and they will not approach him, namely,
[134^b] that when the emanations of the Self-willed One, these which are
numerous greatly, they having not been able to support the great light
of the effluence of Light, a multitude among them fell on left of the
Pistis Sophia. And a multitude fell on right of her. And they were not
being able to approach her to hurt her. And the word which thy power of
light said by David, Nevertheless thou wilt fill thy sight with them,
and thou wilt see the recompense of the sinners, because thou, O Lord,
art my helper, namely, the word that the Pistis Sophia filled her sight
with her enemies which are the emanations of the Self-willed, those all
of which fell (down) upon one another: [135^a] not only she filled her
sight with them in this, but thou also, my Lord, the First Mystery, thou
tookest away the power of light which becometh in the power of face of
lion, and also thou tookest away the power of all the emanations of the
Self-willed, and also thou heldest them down in Chaos for them to go
unto their Place from that hour. Because of this therefore the Pistis
Sophia filled her sight with her enemies, namely, the emanations of the
Self-willed in every thing, which prophesied David about the Pistis
Sophia, saying, Nevertheless thou wilt fill thy sight with them, and
thou wilt see the recompense of the sinners. Not only that she filled
her sight with them, they fell upon one another in the Chaos, but she
saw [135^b] also their recompense also this which they repaid to them:
according as the emanations of the Self-willed thought to take away the
light of the Pistis Sophia from her, thou repaidest to them, and thou
recompensed to them. And thou tookest away the power of light which (is)
in them instead of the light of the Sophia, this (one) who believed the
light of the Height. And according as thy power of light said by David,
Thou placedst him who is high for thee for place of refuge: there is not
evil (which) will be able to approach thee, and there is not scourge
(which) will approach in unto thy place of dwelling, namely, that when
the Pistis Sophia had believed (closely) in the Light, and when she had
been oppressed she hymned up unto him, were not able to do anything of
evil to her the emanations of the Self-willed, [136^a] nor were they
able to hurt her, and they were not able to approach her at all. And the
word which thy power of light said by David, He will order to his angels
concerning thee, that they should guard thee in all thy ways, and lift
thee upon their hands lest-at-any-time thou should dash against a stone
with thy foot. That also is the word that thou orderest to Gabriel with
Mikhael for them to steer the Pistis Sophia through all the Places of
the Chaos, until they brought her up and raised her in their hands, that
her feet should not touch the darkness below, and (should not) also lay
hold on her those of the darkness below. And the word which thy power of
light [136^b] said by David, Thou wilt trample upon a serpent with a
basilisk, and thou wilt trample upon a lion with a dragon. Because he
trusted unto me I shall save him and I shall make shadow unto him,
because he knew my name, namely, the word that when the Pistis Sophia
came, coming up from the Chaos, she trampled upon the emanations of the
Self-willed, she trampled upon those who have face of serpent, and upon
those who have face of basilisk of serpent having seven heads. And she
trampled upon the power of face of lion, with that which hath face of
dragon, because that she believed the Light she was delivered from them
all. This is, my Lord, the explanation of the words which thou saidst.

It happened therefore, the First [137^a] Mystery having heard these
words said he: Well (done) Iakkobos, the beloved, But added also in the
word the First Mystery, said he to the disciples, It happened, I having
brought the Pistis Sophia up from the Chaos, she cried out also saying,
I was delivered from the Chaos and I was loosed from the bonds of the
darkness. I came (close) to thee, O Light, because thou becamest light
on every side of me, thou art delivering me and thou art helping me: and
the emanations of the Self-willed, these which are fighting against me,
thou preventedst them by thy light, and they were not able to approach
in unto me, because thy light was becoming with me, and it is delivering
me by thy effluence of Light: because that [137^b] emanations of the
Self-willed oppressed me, they took away my power from me: they cast me
out in the Chaos there being not light in me. I became as a matter which
is heavy in comparison with them. And after these (things) a power of
effluence came to me from thee delivering me: it made light on left of
me and on right of me, and it was surrounding me on every side of me,
that should not any part of mine become being lightless. And thou
coveredst over me with the light of thy effluence. And thou purged out
of me all my matters evil. And I became above all my matters because of
thy light, and thine effluence of Light: that is (that) which exalted
me, and it took away from me the emanations of the Self-willed, these
which are wont [138^a] to afflict me. And I became being confident of
heart in thy light, and in the light which is purified by thy effluence.
And were distant away from me the emanations of the Self-willed, these
which were oppressing me, and I became light by thy great power, because
thou, thou art wont to deliver at every time. This is the Repentance
which said the Pistis Sophia, she having come up from the Chaos, and
having been loosened the bonds of the Chaos. Now therefore he who hath
ear to hear let him hear. It happened therefore, the First Mystery
having finished saying these words unto the disciples, came forward
Thomas, said he, My Lord, there is ear to my light-dweller and my
understanding understandeth the words [138^b] which thou saidst. Now
therefore command to me that I may utter the explanation of the words
clearly. But answered the First Mystery, said he to Thomas, I command to
thee for to utter the explanation of the hymn, that which hymned up
toward me the Pistis Sophia. But answered Thomas, said he, My Lord,
concerning the hymn which said the Pistis Sophia, because she was
delivered out of the Chaos, thy power of light prophesied about it once
by Solomon the son of David in his Odes, I was delivered out of the
bonds, I ran (close) up to thee, O Lord, because thou becamest to me on
right (hand), [139^a] thou art delivering me, and thou art helping me.
Thou preventedst those who fight against me, and they were not
manifested; because thy face was becoming with me, delivering me in thy
grace. I received insult in presence of a multitude, and they cast me
out, I became as lead before them. Happened to me a power from thee
helping me, because thou puttest torches on right of me and left of me,
that not any part of me should be being lightless. Thou shelteredst me
under the shadow of thy mercy, and I became above the coats of the skin.
Thy right (hand) is that which exalted me, and thou tookest the weakness
[139^b] away from me, I became prevailing in thy truthfulness, being
cleansed in thy righteousness. Were distant away from me those who fight
against me. And I was justified in thy kindness, because thy rest
becometh ever unto age of the age. This therefore, O my Lord, is the
explanation of the repentance which said the Pistis Sophia, having been
delivered from the Chaos. Hear therefore, that I may say in boldness.
The word therefore which thy power of light said by Solomon, I was
delivered out of the bonds I ran (close) to thee, O Lord. That is the
word which said the Pistis Sophia, I was loosened from the bonds of the
darkness, I came (close) to thee, O Light. [140^a] And the word which
said thy power, Thou becamest to me on (the) right, thou art delivering
me and thou art helping me. That also is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, Thou becamest light on every part of me, and thou art helping
me. And the word which thy power of light said, Thou preventedst those
who fight against me, and they were not manifested. That is the word
which said the Pistis Sophia. And the emanations of the Self-willed,
these which fight against me, thou preventedst them by thy light, and
they were not able to approach in unto me. And the word which thy power
said, Thy face was becoming with me in thy grace. That is the word which
said [140^b] the Pistis Sophia. Thy light was becoming with me
delivering me by thy effluence of Light. And the word which thy power
said, I was insulted before a multitude and they cast me out. That is
the word which said the Pistis Sophia. Oppressed me the emanations of
the Self-willed. And they took away my power from me, and I was despised
with them. And they cast me out in the Chaos there being not light in
me. And the word which thy power of light said, I became as lead before
them. That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, they having taken
away my light from me I became as matter being heavy with them [141^a].
And the word also which thy power said, And became to me a power from
thee, helping me. That also is the word which said the Pistis Sophia,
And after these (things) a power of light came to me from thee,
delivering me. And the word which thy power said, Thou puttest torches
on the right of me and on the left of me, that not anything about me
should become being lightless. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, Thy power made light on right of me and left of me and (was)
surrounding me on every part, that not anything about me should become
lightless. And the word which thy power said, Thou shelteredst me
[141^b] in the shadow of thy mercy. That also is the word which said the
Pistis Sophia. And thou coveredst over me with the light of thy
effluence. And the word which thy power said, I became above the coats
of skin. That also is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, And they
purged away from me all my matters evil. And I was exalted above them
through thy light. And the word which thy power said by Solomon, Thy
right (hand) is that which exalted me, and it took the weakness away
from me. That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, And thine
effluence of Light, that is that which exalted me by thy light, and it
took away from me the emanations of Self-willed [142^a], these which
were afflicting me. And the word which thy power said, I became
prevailing in thy truth, and cleansed in thy righteousness. That is the
word which said the Pistis Sophia, I became prevailing by thy light. And
I am becoming light which is purified by thy effluence. And the word
which thy power said, Were distant from me those who fight against me.
That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, Were distant from me the
emanations of the Self-willed, these which were oppressing me. And the
word which thy power of light said by Solomon, And I was justified in
thy kindness, because thy rest becometh [142^b] even unto age of age.
That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, I was delivered in thy
kindness, because thou, thou art wont to deliver every one. This
therefore, my Lord is all the explanation of the repentance which said
the Pistis Sophia, she having been delivered from the Chaos, and she was
loosened out of the bonds.

It happened therefore, the First Mystery having heard Thomas saying
these words, said he to him, Well (done and) fairly, Thomas, the happy:
this (is) the explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis Sophia. But
he added also the First Mystery, said he to the disciples, But [143^a]
added also the Pistis Sophia, she hymned up unto me saying, I hymn up
unto thee this, through thy precept; thou broughtest me from the Aeon
which is high, which (is) the upper part, and thou broughtest me down
unto the Places which (are) below. And also by thy precept thou
deliveredst me out of the Places which (are) below. And through thyself
thou tookest away the matter there which becometh in my powers of light,
and I saw it. And thou art he who scatterest away from me the emanations
of the Self-willed these which were oppressing me, and being enemies
unto me. And thou gavest to me the authority for to loosen [143^b] the
bonds of the emanations of the Adamas, and thou struckest the serpent of
basilisk, that of the seven heads: thou castest him out of my hands, and
thou madest me stand upon his matter, thou destroyedst it, that this
seed should not rise (up) from this hour. And thou art he who was being
with me, giving power to me in all these (things). And thy light
surrounded me in every Place. And through thyself thou madest all the
emanations of the Self-willed powerless: because thou tookest away the
power of their light from them. And thou directedst my way to bring me
out of the Chaos. And thou removedst me out of the material darkness,
and thou tookest away all my powers from them, [144^a] these (powers)
whose light they took away. Thou castest in unto them a light being
purified, and all my members, these in which there is not light, thou
gavest to them a light being purified out of the light of the Height.
And thou directedst the way for them. And the light of thy face, it
became to me manifest incorruptible. Thou broughtest me up to that which
is above the Chaos, the Place of the Chaos with the destruction, that
should be dissolved all the matters which (are) in it, these which
become in that Place and became new all my powers by thy light, and thy
light became in them all: thou puttest the light of thy effluence in me,
I became light being purified.

[144^b] This again is the second hymn which said the Pistis Sophia. He
who understandeth therefore this repentance, let him come forward and
say it. It happened therefore, the First Mystery having finished saying
these words, came forward Mathaios, said he, I understood the
explanation of the hymn, this which said the Pistis Sophia, now
therefore command to me that I may say it boldly. But answered the First
Mystery, said he, I command to thee Mathaios for to utter the
explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis Sophia. But answered
Mathaios, said he, Concerning the explanation of the hymn which said the
Pistis Sophia, thy power of light [145^a] prophesied about it once, the
Ode of Solomon. It is he who brought me down from the Places which are
high above, and he brought me up from the Places which are at the bottom
below. He who there took away the (things) which are in the Middle, and
he taught me them. He who scattered away mine enemies with my
adversaries. He who gave to me authority over bonds to loosen them. He
who struck the serpent which hath seven heads with my hands, He made me
stand upon his root, that I should blot out his seed. And thou wast
being with me, thou art helping me in every Place. Surrounded me thy
name. Thy right hand destroyed the poison of the evil [145^b] speaker.
Thy hand opened the road for thy faithful (ones). Thou redeemedst them
out of the tombs, and thou removedst them out of the midst of the
embalmed-corpses. Thou tookest bones being dead, thou clothedst them
with a body; and those which move not, thou gavest to them an energy of
life. Thy road became uncorruptness and with thy face. Thou broughtest
thine Aeon upon the corruption, that they should all be dissolved and
made new and thy light should be foundation to them all. Thou buildest
thy richness on them, and they became a dwelling being holy. This
therefore, my Lord, is the explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis
Sophia. Hear therefore, that I may say manifestly. The word which thy
power said by Solomon, [146^a] He who brought me down out of the Places
which are high above, and also thou broughtest me up from the places
which are in the bottom below. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, I hymn up unto thee, this through whose precept thou broughtest
me out of this Aeon which is high above, and thou broughtest me unto the
Places below. And also thou deliveredst me by thy precept, thou
broughtest me up from the Places which are below. And the word which thy
power said by Solomon, He who there took away those which are in the
Middle and he taught me them. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia. And also through thyself thou causedst to be purified the matter
which is in the midst of my power, and I saw [146^b] it. And also the
word which thy power said by Solomon, He who scattered away mine enemies
with mine adversaries. That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia,
And thou art he who scattered away from me all the emanations of the
Self-willed, these which were oppressing me, and these which were
becoming enemy unto me. And the word which thy power said, He who gave
to me his wisdom over bonds to loosen them. That is the word which said
the Pistis Sophia, And he gave to me his wisdom, for me to be loosened
from the bonds of those emanations. And the word which thy power said,
He who struck the serpent which hath seven heads with my hands, [147^a]
and he made me stand upon his root, that I should blot out his seed.
That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, And thou struckest the
serpent, he of the seven heads through my hands. And thou settest me up
upon his matter, thou destroyedst him that his seed should not rise up
from this hour. And the word which thy power said, And thou wast being
with me, and thou wast helping me. That is the word which said the
[147^b] Pistis Sophia, And thou wast being with me, thou art helping me
in all these (things). And the word which thy power said, And thy name
surrounded me in every Place. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, And thy light surrounded me in all their Places. And the word
which said thy power, And thy right (hand) destroyed the poison of the
evil speaker. That is the word which said the Pistis Sophia, And through
thee were made powerless the emanations of the Self-willed, because thou
tookest away the light of their power from them. And the word which thy
power said, Thy hand opened the road of thy faithful (ones). That is the
word which said the Pistis Sophia, Thou directedst my road to bring me
out of the Chaos, because I believed thee. And the word which thy power
said, Thou redeemedst them out of the tombs, and thou removedst them out
of the midst of the embalmed-corpses. That is the word which said
[148^a] the Pistis Sophia, And thou redeemedst me out of the Chaos, and
thou removedst me out of the material darkness, namely, the emanations
of darkness which (are) in the Chaos, these whose light thou tookest
away from them. And the word which thy power said, Thou tookest away
bones being dead, thou clothedst them with a body, and those which move
not, thou gavest to them an energy of life. That is the word which said
the Pistis Sophia, And thou tookest away all my powers, these in which
there is not light, thou puttest in unto them a light being purified.
And all my members in which there is not light moving, thou gavest to
them a light of life from thy Height. And the word which thy power said,
Thy road became uncorruptness, with thy face. [148^b] That is the word
which said the Pistis Sophia, And thou directedst thy road for me and
(with, MS) the light of thy face became to me a life indestructible. And
the word which thy power said, Thou broughtest thy Aeon upon the
destruction, that they should loosen all the bonds. That is the word
which said the Pistis Sophia, Thou broughtest me even me, thy power,
upon the Chaos and upon the destruction, that should be loosened all the
matter which becometh in that Place, and should be made new all my
powers by the light. And the word which thy power said, And thy light
maketh foundation for them all. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, And thy light became in them [149^a] all. And the word which thy
power of light said by Solomon, Thou puttest thy richness upon him. And
he made a dwelling being holy. That is the word which said the Pistis
Sophia, Thou strengthenest the light of thy effluence upon me, and I
became light, being purified. This therefore, my Lord, is the
explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis Sophia.

It happened therefore, the First Mystery having heard these words,
saying them Mathaios, said he, Well (done) Mathaios and fairly, the
beloved. This is the explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis
Sophia. But added also the First Mystery, said he, But added also the
Pistis Sophia in this hymn, said she, I [149^b] shall say, Thou art the
Light, that which is high, because thou deliveredst me; and thou
broughtest me (close) to thee; and thou causedst them not to take away
my light, even the emanations of the Self-willed, these which are enemy
unto me: O Light of the Lights I hymned up at thee, thou deliveredst me,
O Light, thou broughtest my power up from the Chaos. Thou deliveredst me
from those who went down unto the darkness. These words also said the
Pistis Sophia. Now therefore he whose mind became intelligent, having
understood the words which said the Pistis Sophia, let him come forward
and utter their explanation.

It happened therefore, the First Mystery having finished saying these
words unto the disciples, came forward Maria, said she, My Lord, my mind
intelligent is at every time, for me to come forward at every moment and
utter the explanation of the words which she said. But [150^a] I am
fearing Petros, because he is wont to threaten me, and he hateth our
sex. But these she having said them, said he to her the First Mystery,
Every one who will be filled with the spirit of light for to come
forward, and utter the explanation of the things which I say, there is
not anyone (who) will be able to prevent him. Now therefore, thou O
Maria, utter the explanation of the words, these which said the Pistis
Sophia. Answered therefore Maria, said she to the First Mystery in the
midst of the disciples, My Lord, concerning the explanation of the words
which said the Pistis Sophia, thy power of light prophesied them once by
David, I shall exalt thee, O Lord, because thou acceptedst me, and thou
didst not cause to rejoice my enemies over me. O Lord my God, I [150^b]
cried up unto thee and thou healedst me. O Lord, thou broughtest my soul
up from Amente, thou savedst me from those who went down unto the pit.
These having said them Maria, said he to her, the First Mystery, Well
(done and) fairly, Maria the happy. But he added also in the word, said
he to the disciples, Added also the Pistis Sophia in this hymn, said
she, The Light became to me for deliverer, and turned my darkness for me
unto light, and it rent asunder the Chaos, which surroundeth me, he
girded me with light. It happened therefore when the First Mystery
finished saying these words, came in front Martha, said she, My Lord thy
power prophesied once [151^a] by David concerning these words, The Lord
became to me helper, he turned my mourning for me unto joy, he rent
asunder my sackcloth he girded me with gladness. But it happened, the
First Mystery having finished hearing these words, saying them Martha,
said he, Well (done and) fairly, Martha.

But added also the First Mystery, said he to the disciples. Added also
in the hymn the Pistis Sophia and said she, My power hymn unto the
light, and forget not all the powers of the light, these which he gave
to thee; and all the powers which (are) in thee hymn unto the name of
his mystery which is holy. He who forgiveth all thy transgression. He
who delivereth thee [151^b] out of all their oppressions, those with
which afflicted thee the emanations of the Self-willed. He who delivered
thy light out of the emanations of the Self-willed, these which belonged
unto the destruction. He who gave a crown of light unto thy head in his
compassion until he delivered thee. He who filled thee with light being
purified; and thy beginning will become new as an Invisible of the
Height. These words the Pistis having hymned (with) them, because she
was delivered, and remembering all the things which I gave to her: it
happened therefore, the First Mystery having finished uttering these
words unto the disciples, said he to them, He who understandeth the
explanation of these words, let him come forward, and say them in
boldness.

[152^a] Came again forward Maria, said she, My Lord, concerning these
words with which hymned the Pistis Sophia, thy power of light prophesied
them by David, My soul, bless the Lord, all those which (are) in my
inward part bless his name which is holy. My soul, bless the Lord and
forget not all his recompenses: he who forgiveth all thy unlawfulness;
he who healeth all thy sicknesses. He who redeemeth thy life out of the
destruction. He who giveth a crown of mercy upon thy head and (of)
compassion. He who satiateth thy wish with good; thy youth (he) will
make new as that of an eagle, namely, that the Sophia will become as the
Invisibles which are at the Height: [152^b] having said therefore, As an
eagle, because that the dwelling of the eagles is being in the height,
and the Invisibles (are) also in the Height, namely, that the Sophia
will become light as the Invisibles, as she was from her beginning. It
happened therefore, the First Mystery having heard these words, saying
them Maria, said he, Well (done), O Maria the happy. It happened
therefore after these things added also in the word the First Mystery,
said he to the disciples, I took away the Pistis Sophia, I brought her
up unto a Place being below the thirteenth Aeon, and I gave to her a new
mystery of the light which is not that of her Aeon, the Place of the
Invisibles. And also I gave [153^a] to her a hymn of the light, that
should not be able to prevail against her from this hour the Rulers of
the Aeons. And I put her in that Place, until I come for her and take
her unto her Place which is at the Height. It happened therefore, I
having put her in that Place, she said also this hymn saying thus, In
faith I believed the Light, and he remembered me, he heard my hymn: he
brought my power up from the Chaos with the darkness below of all the
matter. And he brought me up, he put me in an Aeon being exalted, and
being firm. He put me on the road which goeth unto my Place, and he gave
to me a new mystery which not my Aeon is, and he gave to me [153^b] a
hymn of the light. Now therefore, O Light, all the Rulers will see the
(things) which thou diddest with me, and they (will) fear, and they
(will) believe the Light. This hymn therefore said the Pistis Sophia,
rejoicing because they brought her up from the Chaos. And they brought
her unto the Place which (is) below the thirteenth Aeon. Now therefore
he whose mind moveth him, understanding the explanation of the meaning
of the hymn, that which said the Pistis Sophia, let him come forward and
say it. Came forward Andreas, said he, My Lord, this is that which thy
power of light prophesied about it once by David: In patience I had
patience with the Lord, [154^a] he gave heed unto me, and he heard my
supplication. He brought my soul up from the pit of the misery with the
mire of the filth, he set my feet upon a rock, and he directed my
footsteps. He cast unto my mouth a new song, a blessing for our God.
There are many (who) will see and they (will) fear, and they (will) hope
in the Lord. It happened therefore, Andreas having uttered the meaning
of the Pistis Sophia, said he to him the First Mystery, Well (done)
Andrea the happy. But added also in the word, said he to the disciples,
These are all the words which happened to the Pistis Sophia. It happened
therefore, I having brought her unto the Place which is below of the
[154^b] thirteenth Aeon. I came being about to go unto the Light, and
cease (being) with her, said she to me, O Light of the Lights, being
thou about to go unto the Light and cease from being with me: and (is
about to) know the Adamas the tyrant, that thou ceasedst being with me,
and to know that becometh not he who will deliver me: he cometh also
unto me unto this Place, he with all his Rulers who hate me. And also
the Self-willed will give power to his emanation of face of lion, and
all (will) come and all oppress me at once, and (will) take away all my
light from me, and I (shall) become powerless. And also I (shall) become
lightless. Now therefore, O Light [155^a] and my Light, take away the
power of their light from them, that they may not be able to prevail to
oppress me from this hour. It happened therefore, I having heard these
words saying them the Pistis Sophia, I answered to her, saying, Not yet
did my Father command to me, he who emanated me out, for to take away
their light from them. But I shall seal (up) their Places of the
Self-willed with all his Rulers, these which hate thee, because thou
believedst the Light. And also I shall seal (up) the Places of the
Adamas with his Rulers, that they should not be able to war with thee,
until their time is fulfilled, and until [155^b] cometh the season, and
commandeth to me my Father, that I should take away their light from
them. But afterwards also said I to her. Hear and I (will) speak with
thee of their time in which these (things) will happen, namely, these
which I said to thee, They are about to happen whenever (the) three
times should be fulfilled. Answered the Pistis Sophia, said she to me, O
Light, whereby shall I know when (will) happen the three times, that I
might be glad and rejoice because approached the time for thee to lead
me unto my Place, and also I shall rejoice because came the time (when)
thou wilt take away the powers of light from all those who hate me,
because I [156^a] believed thy light? But I, I answered, said I to her,
Whenever thou wilt see the gate of the Treasury of the great Light, this
which is open unto the thirteenth Aeon, namely the Left, whenever they
should open that gate, then were fulfilled the three times. Answered
also the Sophia, said she, O Light, whereby shall I know, being in this
Place, that they opened that gate? But I, I answered, said I to her,
Whenever they open that gate, will know those who become in all the
Aeons, because of the great light which will become in all their Places:
nevertheless therefore, behold, I appointed that they should not dare
(to do) unto thee anything of evil, until were fulfilled [156^b] the
three times. But thou, thou shalt become having the authority to go up
unto their twelve Aeons at the time which thou wishest, and also thou
(wilt) return and come unto thy Place, this which is below the
thirteenth Aeon, this in which thou art becoming now. But thou wilt not
have authority to go in unto the gate of the Height, this which becometh
in the thirteenth Aeon, for thee to go in unto thy Place, this out of
which thou camest. Nevertheless therefore whenever should be fulfilled
the three times, will oppress thee the Self-willed with all his Rulers,
for them to take away thy light from thee, [157^a] he being angry with
thee, thinking that thou, thou restrained his power in the Chaos, and he
is thinking that thou, thou tookest away its light from it: he will be
exasperated against thee, for him to take away thy light from thee, that
he should send it unto the Chaos, and give it in unto his emanation
which is there, that it should be able to come up from the Chaos and
come unto his Place. But these will begin the Adamas. But I, I shall
take away all thy powers from him and give them to thee. And I shall
come and take them away. Now therefore whenever they should oppress thee
at that time, hymn up unto the Light, and I, I shall not fail thee for
to help thee. And I am coming (close) to thee quickly out of the Places
which are below. [157^b] And I am coming down unto their Places and take
away their light from them. I am coming unto this Place in which I put
thee, this which is below the thirteenth Aeon, until I lead thee unto
thy Place, this out of which thou camest.

It happened therefore, the Pistis Sophia having heard these words, I
saying them to her, she rejoiced in great joy. But I, I left her in the
Place which is below the thirteenth Aeon. I went unto the light, I
ceased from being with her. But all these words was the First Mystery
saying to the disciples, that they happened to the Pistis Sophia. And he
was sitting upon the hill of the Olives, saying all these words in the
midst of the disciples.

But he added also, said he to them, But it happened also [158^a] after
all these (things) while I am being in the World of the mankind, sitting
by the road which is this Place, which is the mountain of the Olives,
before that they dispatched my vesture, this which I left in the
twenty-fourth Mystery (reckoning) from within, but the First itself it
is (reckoning) from without, this which is that, the great
Uncontainable, this in which I shone, and before that I went unto the
Height to receive my other two vestures: sitting by you in this Place,
namely, the mountain of the Olives, was fulfilled the time which I said
to the Pistis Sophia, Will oppress thee the Adamas with all his Rulers.
It happened therefore, having happened that [158^b] time, but I, I was
becoming in the World of the mankind, sitting by you in this place which
is the mountain of the Olives, looked the Adamas out of the twelve
Aeons, he looked down unto the Place of the Chaos, he saw his power
demonic which (is) in the Chaos, in which there is not light at all,
because I had taken away its light from it: and he saw it being
darkness, and it was not possible to come unto his Place which is the
twelve Aeons. Remembered also the Adamas (about) the Pistis Sophia, and
he was angry with her greatly greatly, thinking that it (is) she who
restrained his power in the Chaos. [159^a] And thinking that it (is) she
who took away its light from it, and he was exasperated greatly, and he
added anger upon anger: he emanated out of him an emanation of darkness,
and with another cruel (power) of evil Chaos, that he might disturb the
Pistis Sophia with them.

And he fashioned a Place of darkness in his Place, that he should
oppress the Sophia with it. And he took multitudes of Rulers of his own,
they persecuted the Sophia, for to bring her unto the Chaos of darkness
which he fashioned. And for to oppress her in that Place. And for to
disturb her the two emanations of the darkness, these which emanated out
the Adamas, [159^b] until they took away all her light from her, and
until the Adamas took away the light of the Pistis Sophia, and gave it
to the two emanations which are cruel, and they took it unto the great
Chaos, which is below this which is dark, and they cast it in unto his
power of darkness which is chaotic, that perhaps it should be able to
come unto this Place: because that it had become dark greatly, because I
took away its power of light from it. It happened therefore, they having
persecuted the Pistis Sophia, she cried out also, she hymned up unto the
Light, since I said to her, Whenever they oppress thee and thou hymnest
up unto me I am coming quickly and I (will) help thee. It happened
therefore, they having oppressed her, but I, I was [160^a] sitting by
you in this place, which is the mountain of the Olives. She praised up
unto the Light, saying, O Light of the Lights, I believed thee. Deliver
me from these Rulers which are persecuting me, and help me
lest-at-anytime they may take away my light from me, as (did) the power
of face of lion. Because thy light becometh not with me, with thy
effluence of Light, for them to deliver me. Otherwise was angry with me
the Adamas, saying to me, Thou, thou restrainedst my power in the Chaos.
Now therefore, O Light of the Lights, if I did this (and) I restrained
it. If I did nothing of violence to that power. Or if I oppressed it as
it oppressed me, then (and, MS) shall take away my light from me, all
these [160^b] Rulers who persecute me, and they shall put me out, being
empty: and the enemy the Adamas shall persecute my power and seize it,
and he shall take away my light from me, and cast it in unto his power
of darkness, this which is in the Chaos: and he shall put my power in
the Chaos. Now therefore, O Light, seize me in thy anger, and exalt thy
power over my enemies, these who rose up against me at last. Speed,
vivify me according as thou saidst, I shall help thee.

It happened therefore, the First Mystery having finished saying these
words unto the disciples, said he, He who understood these words which I
said, let him come forward and utter their explanation. Came forward
Iakkobos said he, My Lord, [161^a] concerning this hymn, in which hymned
the Pistis Sophia, thy power of light prophesied them once by David in
the seventh psalm, O Lord, my God I trusted unto thee; save me from
those who persecute me and deliver me, lest-at-anytime he might carry
off my soul as a lion, there being not he who redeemeth and he who
delivereth. O Lord, my God, if I did this (thing) if there is violence
in my hands, if I repaid to those who repaid to me evil (things), may I
perish by my enemy, being empty: and may my enemies persecute my soul
and seize it: and trample my life down unto the earth and cause my glory
to become in the Chaos. Diapsalma. Rise (up), [161^b] O Lord, in thy
wrath: be exalted at the last to my enemies: rise up in the commandment
which thou orderedst.

It happened therefore, the First Mystery having heard these words,
saying them Iakkobos, said he, Well (done), Iakkobos the beloved. But
added also the First Mystery, said he to the disciples, It happened
therefore, the Pistis Sophia having finished saying the words of this
hymn she turned round to see, whether the Adamas turned backward with
his Rulers for to go unto their Aeon, and she saw (they saw, MS) them
running after her: she turned unto them, said she to them, Why do ye
persecute me saying, I have not help for him to deliver me from you. Now
therefore a judge of truth is [162^a] the Light and strong (he) is. But
he is compassionate until the time which he said to me, I am coming and
I (will) help thee, and he (will) not bring his wrath upon you at every
hour. And this is the time which he said to me. Now therefore if ye turn
not yourselves backward, and cease from persecuting me, the Light will
make ready his power, and he will make ready with all his powers, and he
made ready in his power for to take away your light which is in you, and
ye will become darkness: and his powers he fashioned them, for him to
take away your powers from you, and ye (will) perish. But these having
said them the Pistis Sophia, she looked unto the Place of the Adamas,
she saw the Place of dark [162^b] and of Chaos, this which he fashioned.
And also she saw the two emanations of darkness which (are) cruel
greatly, these which emanated them out the Adamas, that they should lay
hold on the Pistis Sophia, and should cast her down unto the Chaos,
which he fashioned, and should oppress her in that place, and should
disturb her, until they took away her light from her. It happened
therefore, the Pistis Sophia having seen those two emanations of
darkness and of the Place of darkness, these which fashioned the Adamas,
she feared and she cried up unto the Light saying, O Light, behold, was
angry the Adamas, the violent being, he fashioned an emanation of
darkness and [163^a] also he emanated out another (from) Chaos, and he
fashioned another dark and chaotic and he prepared it. Now therefore, O
Light, the Chaos which he fashioned for to cast me unto it, and (to)
take away my power of light from me, take away his from him; and the
thought which he thought for to take away my light, they will (take) his
from him; and the violence which he said for to take away my light from
me, take away all his (lights). These are the words which said the
Pistis Sophia in her hymn. Now therefore he who is sober in his spirit,
let him come forward and utter the explanation of the words (which said)
the Pistis Sophia in her hymn.

Came also forward Martha, said she, My Lord, I am sober [163^b] in my
spirit, and I understand the words which thou sayest: now therefore
command to me that I may utter their explanation in boldness. But
answered the First Mystery, said he to Martha, I command to thee Martha
for to utter the explanation of the words, these which said the Sophia
in her hymn. But answered Martha said she, My Lord, these are the words
which thy power of light prophesied once by David in the seventh psalm,
God is a judge of truth, strong, compassionate, being not wont to bring
his anger day by day: if ye turn not yourselves he will whet his sword,
he stretched his bow, he made (it) ready: he made ready in it [164^a]
weapons of death, his arrows he fashioned for those whom they will burn.
Behold, the violence travailed, he conceived trouble he brought forth
unlawfulness, he dug a pit, he excavated it, he will fall down unto the
hole which he fashioned, his trouble will turn upon his head and his
violence (is) coming upon the middle of his head. But these having said
them Martha, said he to her the First Mystery who looketh outwards, Well
(done and) fairly, Martha, the happy.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying unto his disciples
all the things which happened to the Pistis Sophia, being in the Chaos,
and with the manner (in) which she hymned up unto the Light, until he
delivered her and brought her up from the Chaos, [164^b] and brought her
in unto the twelve Aeon, and with the manner (in) which he delivered her
out of all her oppressions, with which oppressed her the Rulers of the
Chaoses, because that she lusted to go (close) to the Light.

Added again in the word Jesus, said he to his disciples, It happened
therefore after all these (things) I took away the Pistis Sophia, I
brought her in unto the thirteenth Aeon, I, shining greatly greatly,
there being not measure unto the light which was becoming from me, I
came in unto the Place of the twenty-four (fourth, MS) Invisibles, I,
shining greatly greatly; and they were disturbed with great disturbance:
they looked, they saw the Sophia who was being with me, they recognised
her. [165^a] But I, they recognised me not who I (was), but they were
thinking of me as of an emanation of the land of the Light. It happened
therefore, the Sophia having seen her fellow Invisibles, she rejoiced in
great joy, and she was delighted greatly; she wished to show to them the
wonders which I did with her below in the land of the mankind, until I
delivered her. She came up unto the midst of the Invisibles, she hymned
unto me in their midst, saying, I shall manifest to thee, O Light,
because thou art a Saviour, and thou art a redeemer at every time: I
shall hymn this hymn unto the Light because he delivered me: and he
delivered out of the hand of the Rulers [165^b] mine enemies. And thou
deliveredst me in all the Places, and thou deliveredst me from the
exaltation and the humiliation of the Chaoses, and from the Aeons of the
Rulers of the Sphere. And I having come out of the Height, I went astray
in Places, there being not light in them. I could not return into the
thirteenth Aeon my dwelling, because there is not light in me nor power,
my power was defective altogether, and the Light delivered me from all
my afflictions. I hymned up unto the Light, he heard me, they having
afflicted me. He guided me in the creation of the Aeons, for him to
bring me up unto the thirteenth Aeon, my dwelling. I shall manifest to
thee, O Light, because thou deliveredst me, and (for) thy wonders in the
race of [166^a] the mankind, I having become deficient of my power, thou
gavest power to me, and I having become deficient of my light, thou
filledst me with light being purified. I became in the darkness with the
shadow of the Chaos, being bound in the bonds being cruel of the Chaos,
there being not light in me: because I exasperated the precept of the
Light, I transgressed, I gave anger to the precept of the Light, because
I came out of my Place: and I having come down, I was deficient of my
power, and I became lightless, and there was not any to help me: and in
their afflicting me I hymned up unto the Light, and he delivered me out
of all my afflictions: and also he burst all my bonds: he brought me up
from the darkness with the oppression of the Chaos. I shall manifest
[166^b] to thee, O Light, because thou deliveredst me, and thy wonders
happened in the race of the mankind. And thou brokest-in-pieces the
gates which (are) high of the darkness, and with the bars which (are)
cruel of the Chaos, and thou madest me go down from the Place, from
which I transgressed: and also they took away my power because I
transgressed, and I ceased from the mysteries, I came down in the gates
of the Chaos: and they having afflicted me, I hymned up unto the Light,
he delivered me out of all my afflictions. Thou dispatchedst thine
effluence, it gave power to me, and it delivered me out of all my
oppressions. I shall manifest to thee, O Light, because thou deliveredst
me, and (for) thy wonders in [167^a] the race of the mankind. This
therefore is the hymn which said the Pistis Sophia, being in the midst
of the twenty-four Invisibles, wishing, for them all to know all the
wonders which I did with her, and wishing for them to know that I went
unto the World of the mankind. I gave to them the mysteries of the
Height. Now therefore he who is exalted in his understanding, let him
come forward, and say the explanation of the hymn which said the Pistis
Sophia. It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words,
came forward Philippos, said he, Jesus My Lord, exalted is my
understanding and I understand the explanation of the hymn which said
the Sophia: prophesied [167^b] also about it once David the prophet,
saying in the hundred and sixth psalm, Manifest to the Lord that he is
kind, because unto age is his mercy, let those whom the Lord redeemed
say, This is he, he redeemed them out of the hand of their enemies: he
gathered them in from their countries, out of the east with the west
with the north with the sea. They went astray in the wilderness in a
place in which there is not water; they found not the road to the city
of their dwelling. Being hungry being thirsty their soul failed in them.
He delivered them out of their necessity. They cried up unto the Lord,
he heard them being distressed: he guided them unto a road, being
straight [168^a] for them to go up unto the Place of their dwelling, Let
them manifest to the Lord in his mercies, and his wonders among the sons
of the men: because he satisfied a soul, being hungry, a soul being
hungry he filled it with good. Those who sit in the darkness with the
shadow of the death, those who are bound in a poverty with the iron;
because he exasperated the word of God, they irritated the counsel of
him who is exalted: their heart was humbled in their tribulations; they
became weak and there was not he who helped them. They cried up unto the
Lord in their being distressed; he delivered them out of their
necessity, he brought them out of the darkness with the shadow of the
death, and he burst their bonds. Let them manifest to the Lord in his
mercies, and his wonders for the sons [168^b] of the men: because he
broke gates of brass, he shattered bars of iron: he received them unto
him in the road of their unlawfulness; for they were humiliated because
of their unlawfulness: their heart abhorred every (kind) of meat, they
approached unto the gates of the death. They cried up unto the Lord in
their being distressed, he delivered them out of their necessity: he
sent his word, he healed them, and he saved them out of their
tribulation. Let them manifest to the Lord in his mercy and his wonders
among the sons of the men. This therefore, my Lord is the explanation of
the hymn which said the Sophia. Hear therefore, my Lord that I may say
it plainly. The word indeed which said David, Manifest [169^a] to the
Lord because he is kind, because an eternal is his mercy. That is the
word which said the Sophia, I shall manifest to thee, O Light, because
thou art a Saviour, and thou art a redeemer at every time. And the word
which said David, Let those whom the Lord redeemed say this, He redeemed
them out of the hand of their enemies. That is the word which said the
Sophia, I shall say this hymn unto the Light, He delivered me; and he
delivered me out of the hand of the Rulers mine enemies, with the rest
also of the psalm. This therefore, my Lord is the explanation of the
hymn which said the Sophia in the midst of the twenty-four Invisibles,
wishing for them to know [169^b] all the wonders which I did with her,
and she wished for them to know, that thou gavest thy mysteries of the
race of the mankind.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words, saying them
Philippos, said he, Well (done), O happy Philippos, this is the
explanation of the hymn which said the Sophia. It happened therefore
also after all these (things) came forward Mariham, she worshipped at
the feet of Jesus, said she, My Lord, be not angry with me seeking from
thee, because we are seeking after every thing in an exactness with a
certainty, for thou saidst unto us once, Seek that ye may find and knock
that they may open to you. For every one who seeketh will find, and
every one who knocketh [170^a] in, they will open to him. Now therefore,
my Lord, who is he whom I shall find, or who is he unto (whom) we shall
knock, or who, rather, is he for whom it is possible to say unto us the
answer to the words about which we shall seek (from) thee, or who,
rather, is he who knoweth the power of the words after which we shall
seek, because that in a mind thou gavest mind to us of the Light, and
thou gavest to us perception with a thought being exalted greatly?
Concerning this therefore there is not anyone becoming in the World of
the mankind, nor becoming in the Height of the Aeons, for whom it is
possible to say unto us the answer to the words which we seek after,
except thee alone, this who knoweth the Universe and who is complete in
the Universe. [170^b] Because that I was not seeking after the manner
(in) which seek the men of the World; but we are seeking indeed in the
knowledge of the Height, this which thou gavest to us, and we are
seeking also in the type of the search which is preferable, this which
thou taughtest us for to seek in it.

Now therefore, my Lord, be not angry with me, but reveal to me the word
about which I shall ask thee. It happened therefore, Jesus having heard
these words, saying them Maria, the Magdalene, answered then (but, MS)
Jesus, said he to her, Seek after that which thou wishest to seek after,
and I shall reveal it to thee in an exactness with a certainty, Amen,
amen I say to you, Rejoice in great joy and be [171^a] glad greatly
greatly, ye are seeking after every thing in an exactness, and I shall
be glad greatly greatly, because ye seek after every thing in an
exactness. And ye seek after the manner (in) which it is worthy to seek.
Now therefore, seek after that which thou seekest after, and I shall
reveal it to thee in joy. It happened therefore, Maria having heard
these words, saying them the Saviour, she rejoiced in great joy, and she
was glad for her greatly greatly. Said she to Jesus, My Lord and my
Saviour, then of what kind are the twenty-four Invisibles, and being,
also, of what type: or otherwise rather of what nature: or, then, being
of what nature is their light? But answered Jesus, said he [171^b] to
Maria, What is that which is in this World being like to them: or what,
rather, of Place which is in this World is that which is resembling unto
them? Now therefore unto what shall I compare them: or, rather, is that
which I shall say concerning them: for there is not any one in this
World unto whom I shall be able to compare them; and there is not any of
appearance in it unto whom I shall be able to liken them? Now therefore
there is not any in this World being of the nature of the heaven, Amen I
say to you, Each Invisible, is great(er) than the heaven with the Sphere
which is upon it, and with the twelve Aeons together nine times,
according as I finished saying to you another time. And there is not any
light in this World being preferable unto the light [172^a] of the sun.
Amen, amen I say to you: The twenty-four Invisibles are of light more
than the light of the sun which is in this World ten thousand times
according as I finished saying to you another time. Because that the
light of the sun in his truth of shape is not in this Place. Because
that his light passeth through many veils of Places. But the light of
the sun in his truth of shape, this which becometh in the Place of the
Virgin of the Light shineth more than the twenty-four Invisibles and
with the great Forefather invisible and with also the great
Triple-powered God a ten thousand times, according as I finished saying
to you another time. [172^b] Now therefore, Maria, there is not any
appearance in this world, nor is there light, nor is there shape
comparable to the twenty-four Invisibles, that I should compare them
unto them: but yet another little time, thou with thy brothers of
fellow-disciples, I shall take you unto all the Places of the Height,
and I shall take you unto the three Spaces of the First Mystery, until
the Places only of the Space of the Ineffable. And ye will see all their
shape in truth without comparison. And whenever I should take you unto
the Height, ye will see the glory of those of the Height. And ye will
become in a great wonder greatly greatly. And whenever I should take you
unto the Place of the (Rulers of the) Destiny [173^a] ye will see the
glory in which they become, and out of their great glory which is
preferable, ye will reckon this World with you as darkness of darkness:
and ye will look out upon all the World of the mankind, being about to
become the size of a speck of dust with you, from the great distance
which it is distant from it greatly greatly, with the great size which
it is great(er) than it greatly. And whenever I should take you unto the
twelve Aeons, ye will see the glory in which they become, and from the
great glory the Place of the Rulers of the Destiny will be reckoned with
you as the darkness of the darknesses; and it will become the size of a
speck of dust with you from the great distance which it is distant from
it greatly, with the great size in which it is great(er) than [173^b] it
greatly, according as I finished saying unto you another time. And again
whenever I should take you unto the thirteenth Aeon, and ye will see the
glory in which it becometh, the twelve Aeons will be reckoned with you
of the darkness of the darknesses: and ye will look out upon the twelve
Aeons being about to become the likeness of a speck of dust with you
from the great distance which it is distant from it greatly, with the
greatness of size in which it is great(er) than it greatly. And whenever
I should take you unto the Place of the Middle, ye will see the glory in
which they are, the thirteenth Aeon will be reckoned with you as the
darkness of the darknesses. And also ye will look upon the twelve Aeons
and with all the Destiny and all the arrangement, and with all the
Spheres [174^a] with all their arrays in which they become, they will be
the size of a speck of dust with you from the great distance which it is
distant from it, and the great size (in) which it is great(er) than it
greatly. And whenever I should take you unto the Place of those of the
Right (hand), ye will see the glory in which they become, the Place of
the Middle will be reckoned with you as the night which is in the World
of the mankind: and if ye should look out upon the Middle, it will
become the size of a speck of dust with you, from the great distance
which the Place of those of the Right (hand) are distant from it
greatly. And if I should take you unto the Land of the Light, namely,
the Treasury of the Light, and ye (will) see the glory in which it
becometh, [174^b] the Place of those of the Right (hand) will be
reckoned with you as the light of the hour of mid-day in the World of
the mankind, the sun being not out (of cloud): and if ye should look
upon the Place of those of the Right (hand), it will be the size of a
speck of dust with you, from the great distance which is distant from it
greatly, the Treasury of the Light. And whenever I should take you unto
the Place of those who received the Inheritance, of those who received
the mysteries of the Light, and ye (will) see the glory of the light in
which they become, the Land of the Light will be reckoned with you as
the light of the sun which is in the World of the mankind: and if ye
should look [175^a] upon the Land of the Light, it will be reckoned with
you as a speck of dust, from the great distance which is distant from
it, the Land of the Light, and from the greatness which it is great(er)
than it greatly.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, sprang up Maria the Magdalene, said she, My Lord, be not
angry with me, seeking (from) thee, because that we are seeking after
every thing in an exactness. But, answered Jesus, said he to Maria, Seek
after that which thou wishest to seek after, and I, I shall reveal it to
thee boldly without parable. And every thing which thou seekest after, I
shall say to thee in an exactness with a certainty, and I shall complete
you with every power [175^b] with every Pleroma, from the inward part of
the inward parts as far as the outward part of the outward parts, from
the Ineffable even unto the darkness of the darknesses, that they should
call of (against you, MS), the Pleromas which are complete in every
knowledge. Now therefore, Maria, seek that which thou art seeking after,
and I shall reveal it to thee in great joy with great delight. It
happened therefore, Maria having heard these words, speaking them the
Saviour, she rejoiced in great joy greatly and she was delighted, said
she, My Lord, then the men of the World, these who received the
mysteries of the Light, will they become preferable to the emanations of
the Treasury in thy kingdom? [176^a] Because that I heard thee saying,
Whenever I should take you unto the Place of those who receive the
Mysteries, the Place, the Land of the Light will be reckoned with you as
a speck of dust, from the great distance which it is distant from it,
and with the great glory in which it becometh, namely the Land of the
Light of the Treasury, the Place of the emanations, then therefore, my
Lord will the men who receive the mysteries become preferable to (those
who belong to) the Land of the Light, and become preferable to them in
the Kingdom of the Light? But answered Jesus, said he to Maria, Fairly,
however, at least thou seekest after everything in an exactness with a
certainty: but hear, Maria, that I may speak with thee upon the
Consummation of the Aeon with the catching-up [176^b] of the Universe.
It shall not happen thus, but I said unto you, Whenever I should take
you unto the Place of the Inheritance of those who receive the mystery
of the Light, the Treasury of the Light, the Place of the emanations, it
will be reckoned with you as a speck of dust, and as the light of the
sun of the day only. They said therefore, These will happen in the time
of the consummation of the catching-up of the Universe. The twelve
Saviours of the Treasury with the twelve arrays of each of them, namely,
the emanations of the seven Voices with the five Trees will become with
me in the Place of the Inheritances of the Light, being Kings with me:
each one of them being King [177^a] over his emanations: and also each
one of them is becoming King according to his glory: the great according
to his greatness, the small according to his smallness: and the Saviour
of the emanations of the first Voice, they will become in the Place of
the souls of those who received the First Mystery of the First Mystery
in my Kingdom: and the Saviour of the emanations of the second Voice
will become in the Place of the souls of those who received the Second
Mystery of the First Mystery. Likewise also the Saviour of the
emanations of the third Voice will become in the Place of the souls of
those who receive the Third Mystery of the First Mystery in the
Inheritances of the Light. And the Saviour of the emanations of the
fourth Voice of the Treasury of the Light [177^b] will become in the
Place of the souls of those who receive the Fourth Mystery of the First
Mystery in the Inheritances of the Light. And the fifth [_sic_] Saviour
of the fifth Voice of the Treasury of the Light will become in the Place
of the souls of those who receive the Fifth mystery of the First Mystery
in the Inheritances of the Light. And the sixth Saviour of the
emanations of the sixth Voice of the Treasury of the Light will become
in the Place of the souls of those who receive the Sixth mystery of the
First Mystery. And the seventh Saviour of the emanations of the seventh
Voice of the Treasury of the Light will become in the Place of the souls
[178^a] of those who receive the Seventh mystery of the First Mystery in
the Treasury of the Light. And the eighth Saviour, namely, the Saviour
of the emanations of the first Tree of the Treasury of the Light will
become in the Place of the souls of those who receive the Eighth mystery
of the First Mystery in the Inheritances of the Light. And the ninth
Saviour, namely, the Saviour of the emanations of the second Tree of the
Treasury of the Light will become in the Place of the souls of those who
receive the Ninth mystery of the First Mystery in the Inheritances of
the Light. And the tenth Saviour of the emanations of the third Tree of
the Treasury of the Light will [178^b] become in the Place of the souls
of those who receive the Tenth mystery of the First Mystery in the
Inheritances of the Light. Likewise also the eleventh Saviour, namely,
the Saviour of the fourth Tree of the Treasury of the Light will become
in the Place of the souls of those who receive the Eleventh mystery of
the First Mystery in the Inheritances of the Light. And the twelfth
Saviour, namely, the Saviour of the emanations of the fifth Tree of the
Treasury of the Light will become in the Place of the souls of those who
receive the Twelfth mystery of the First Mystery in the Inheritances of
the Light. And the seven (seventh, MS) Amens with the five (fifth, MS)
Trees with the three [179^a] Amens will become on right-hand of me being
King in the Inheritance of the Light. And the Twin-saviours, namely, the
child of the child and with the nine Guards, they indeed will remain
also on left of me being King in the Inheritance of the Light. And every
Saviour will be King over the arrays of his emanations in the
Inheritances of the Light, as also they are in the Treasury of the
Light. And the nine Guards of the Treasury of the Light will become,
being preferable unto the Saviours in the Inheritances of the Light. And
the Twin-saviours will become preferable unto the nine Guards in the
Kingdom. And [179^b] the three Amens will become preferable unto the
Twin-saviours in the Kingdom. And the five Trees will become preferable
unto the five Amens in the Inheritances of the Light. And Ieou with the
Guard of the Veil of the great Light with the Receivers of Light with
the great two Chief Captains with the great Sabaoth, the good, they will
become being King in the first Saviour of the first Voice of the
Treasury of the Light, this which will become in the Place of those who
receive the First Mystery of the First Mystery. Because that Ieou with
the Guard of the Place of those on Right (hand) with Melkhisedek the
great Receiver of the Light, with the great [180^a] two Chief Captains
who came out of the Light which is choice, which is pure, greatly, of
the First Tree even unto the fifth. Ieou indeed he is the Overseer of
the Light who came forth first from the pure light of the first Tree.
The Guard also of the Veil of those of (the) Right (hand) who came forth
out of the second Tree. And the two Chief Captains came forth also out
of the pure light choice greatly of the third Tree with the fourth in
the Treasury of the Light. But Melkhisedek also came forth out of the
fifth Tree. Sabaoth the great also (the) good, this whom I called, my
Father, [180^b] he came forth out of Ieou the Overseer of the Light.
These six therefore by the command of the First Mystery, the last Helper
caused to become in the Place of those of (the) Right (hand) for the
arrangement of the collection of the Light which is of the Height of the
Aeons of the Rulers, and in the World with every race which is in them.
These which I shall say unto you of the work of each over which they put
him in the Distribution of the Universe. Because of the height therefore
of the work in which he put him, they will become fellow-kings in the
First Mystery of the first Voice of the Treasury of the Light, this
which will become in the Place of the souls of those who receive the
First Mystery of the First Mystery. And the Virgin of the Light with the
great [181^a] Captain of the Middle, this who were wont the Rulers of
the Aeons to call, The great Iao, according to the name of a great Ruler
who (is) in their Place; he, with the Virgin of the Light, with his
twelve Deacons, this from whom ye received shape, and ye received the
power out of them, they will also all become Kings: with the first
Saviour of the first Voice in the Place of the souls of those who will
receive the First Mystery of the First Mystery in the Inheritances of
the Light. And with the fifteen Helpers of the seven Virgins of the
Light, these who become in the Middle will be distributed in the Places
of the twelve Saviours, [181^b] with the others also, Angels of the
Middle, each according to his glory, and (shall) be kings with me in the
Inheritances of the Light. And I, I shall rule over all of them in the
Inheritances of the Light.

These therefore, all which I said to you will not happen in this time,
but they are about to happen in the Consummation of the Aeon, namely,
the dissolution of the Universe. And that is the whole dissolution of
the numbering of the perfect souls of the Inheritances of the Light.
Before therefore the Consummation these (things) which I said to you
will not happen. But each will happen in his Place in which they put him
from at first, until they complete the numbering of the collection
[182^a] of the perfect souls. The seven (seventh, MS) Voices with the
five (fifth, MS) Trees, and with the three Amens, and with the
Twin-saviours with the nine Guards, and with the twelve Saviours, and
with those of the Place of those of the Right (hand), and with those of
the Place of the Middle, each will remain in the Place in which they put
them, until mount up all the numbering of the perfect of the souls of
the Inheritances of the Light. And all the Rulers also who repented,
they will remain also in the Place in which they put them, until mount
up all the numbering of the souls of the Light: they are coming all each
in their time in which she receives Mystery. And they will precede all
the Rulers who repented. [182^b] And they are coming unto the Place of
those of the Middle, and those of the Middle will baptise them (with)
the spiritual unction, and seal them with the seal of their mystery and
they will pass through in unto those of all Places of the Middle, and
they will pass through in to the Place of those of (the) Right (hand),
and the interior of the Place of the nine Guards, and the interior of
the Place of the Twin-saviours, and the interior of the Place of the
three Amens, with the twelve Saviours, and the interior of the five
Trees, with the seven Voices, each giving to them their seal of their
mysteries, and all (will) make their entry, and go unto the Place of the
Inheritances [183^a] of the Light: and each (will) remain in the Place
up to which he received mysteries in the Inheritances of the Light, in
one word, all the souls of the mankind, these who will receive the
mysteries of the Light will precede all the Rulers who repented, and
they will precede those of all the Places of those of the Middle, with
those of all the Places of those of (the) Right (hand), and they will
precede those of all the Place of the Treasury of the Light, in one
word, they will precede those of all the Places of the First precept,
and (will) all enter and go unto the Inheritances of the Light, even
unto the Place of their mystery, that each may remain in the Place unto
which they received mystery. [183^b] And those of the Place of the
Middle, with those of (the) Right (hand) and with those of all the Place
of the Treasury, each in the Place of the array in which they put him
from at first, until the Universe should be caught up: each of them will
complete his charge in which they put him, in regard to the collection
(gathering in) of the souls who received mystery, in regard to this
charge, that they should seal all the souls who will receive mysteries,
these who will pass through unto their inner (place) unto the
Inheritances of the Light. Now therefore, Maria, this is the word about
which thou seekest of me in an exactness with a certainty. As for the
rest therefore now, he who hath ear to hear let him hear.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words sprang
[184^a] up Maria the Magdalene, said she, My Lord, my Light-dweller,
hath ear, and I comprehend every word which thou sayest. Now therefore,
my Lord, concerning the word which thou sayest that all the souls of the
race of the mankind, these who will receive the mystery of the Light
will precede in unto the Inheritances of the Light before all the Rulers
who will repent, and before every Place of those of (the) Right (hand),
and before every Place of the Treasury of the Light. Concerning this
word therefore, my Lord, which thou saidst unto us once, The first will
be last and the last will be first, namely, all the race of the men who
will precede in unto the kingdom of the Light as [184^b] those of all
the Places of the Height, namely, the first. Concerning this therefore,
my Lord, thou saidst to us, He who hath ear to hear let him hear,
namely, thou wast wishing to know whether we grasp every word which thou
sayest. This, therefore, my Lord, is the word. It happened therefore,
when she (Jesus, MS) had finished saying these words, the Saviour
wondered greatly at the assertion of the words which she saith, because
that she had (MS) become spirit quite pure. Answered further Jesus, said
he to her, Well (done), O pure spiritual Maria, this is the explanation
of the word.

It happened therefore also after all these words, added Jesus in the
word, said he to his disciples, [185^a] Hear that I may speak with you
concerning the glory of those of the Height as they become, according as
I was speaking with you unto to-day. Now therefore whenever I should
take you unto the Place of the last Helper, this who surroundeth the
Treasury of the Light, and whenever I should take you unto the Place of
that last Helper, and ye (should) see the glory in which he is, the
Place of the Inheritance of the Light, (it) will be reckoned with you of
the size of a city only of the World from the greatness in which
becometh the last Helper, and with the great light in which it is: and
after these I shall speak with you also of the glory of the Helper who
is above the lesser [185^b] Helper, nor shall I speak with you of the
Place of these who are above all the Helpers, for there is not a kind of
word unto them in this World, for there is not likeness in this World
being like to them, that I should compare it unto them. Nor is there
size, nor is there light which is comparable unto them, that I should
speak of them. Not only in this World, but also they have not likeness
also in those of the Height of the Righteousness from their Place
downward. Because of this therefore in fact there is not the manner of
word for them in this World from the great glory of those of the Height,
and there is not the great and immeasurable size. Because of this
therefore there is not the manner of word for it in this World. It
happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward [186^a] Maria the Magdalene, said she to Jesus,
My Lord, Be not angry with me, seeking from thee, because that I molest
thee in a multitude of times. Now therefore, my Lord, be not angry with
me seeking after every thing in an exactness with a certainty, because
my brothers preach them in the race of the mankind, that they should
hear and repent and be delivered from the judgments which are cruel of
the wicked Rulers, and go unto the Height and inherit the kingdom of the
Light: because that, my Lord, not only are we compassionate of
ourselves, but we are compassionate of all the race of the mankind, that
they should be delivered from all the judgments which are cruel. Now
therefore, my Lord, concerning this we are seeking after everything in
[186^b] an exactness, because my brothers preach them to all the race of
the men that they should not come unto hands of the Rulers which are
cruel, of the Darkness, and that they should be delivered from the hands
of the Receivers which are cruel of the Darkness which is without. It
happened, Jesus having heard these words, saying them Maria, answered
the Saviour becoming in great mercy in unto her. Said he to her, Seek
after that which thou wishest to seek after it, and I shall reveal to
thee in an exactness and a certainty without parable. It happened
therefore, Maria having heard these words, saying them the Saviour, she
rejoiced in great joy, and she delighted greatly, said she to Jesus, My
Lord, then the second [187^a] Helper is great(er) than the first Helper?
About how much of size, and he is distant from him about how much
distance, or otherwise he is shining more than he about how many times?
Answered Jesus, said he to Maria in the midst of the disciples, Amen,
amen I say to you, The second Helper is distant from the first Helper in
a great distance immeasurable in reference to the height above and
beneath, in reference to the depth and in reference to the length with
the breadth: for he is being distant from him greatly greatly in a great
(amount) immeasurable by the Angels with the Archangels and by the Gods
with all the Invisibles: and greater he is than him greatly greatly
[187^b] immeasurable by the angels with the archangels and by (the) Gods
with all the Invisibles, and he shineth more than him immeasurable
greatly greatly there not being measure unto the light which becometh
from him, being immeasurable by the Angels with the Archangels and by
the Gods with all the Invisibles as I finished saying to you another
time. Likewise also the third Helper with the fourth with the fifth, one
being great(er) than one infinitely, and he shineth more than him, and
he is distant from him in a great distance immeasurable by the Angels
with the Archangels with the Gods with all the Invisibles, according as
[188^a] I finished saying to you another time. And also I shall say unto
you the type of each in their Distribution. It happened therefore, Jesus
having finished saying these words unto his disciples, came again
forward Maria the Magdalene, she added, said she to Jesus, My Lord, then
those who receive the mystery of the Light will become in what type in
the midst of the last Helper? But answered Jesus, said he to Maria in
the midst of the disciples. Those who received the mysteries of the
Light, whenever they should come out of the body of the matter of the
Rulers, each according to the mysteries which he received, being about
to become in his array. Those who receive mystery also which is high,
they will remain in the array which is high. Those who receive also the
mysteries which are lower they will become in the array which is lower,
in one word [188^b] the Place (in) which each received mystery, even
unto it will he remain in his array in the Inheritance of the Light.
Because of this therefore I said unto you once. The Place (in) which
your heart is about to become, there your treasure; namely, that the
Place (in) which each received mystery even unto it is about to become
there.

It happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Iohan(nes), said he to Jesus, My Lord and my
Saviour, command to me also, that I may speak in thy presence, and be
not angry with me seeking after everything in an exactness with a
certainty, because that, my Lord, in a promise thou promisedst to me to
reveal everything which I shall seek from thee. Now therefore my Lord,
hide not anything from us at all in [189^a] the thing which we shall
seek from thee.

But answered Jesus in great mercy, said he to Iohannes, Thou also, the
happy Iohannes and the beloved, I command to thee for to say the word
which thou willest, and I shall reveal to thee in face against face
without parable, and I shall say to thee every thing which thou wilt
seek after (them) in an exactness with a certainty. Answered Iohannes,
said he to Jesus, My Lord, then the Place in which each received the
mystery even unto it he is about to remain, and he hath not authority to
go in unto another array which (is) above him, nor hath he authority to
come unto the arrays which (are) below him. Answered Jesus, said he to
Iohannes, Fairly (done) however at least because ye seek after
everything in an exactness with a certainty. [189^b] But now therefore,
Johannes hear, that I may speak with thee, Every one who receiveth
mystery of the Light, the Place unto which each receiveth mystery he is
about to remain in it, and he hath not the authority for to come unto
the Height unto the array which is above him, so that he who receive
mystery in the First precept hath the authority for to come unto the
arrays which (are) below him, namely, all the arrays of the third Space.
But he hath not the authority for to come unto the Height, unto the
arrays which are above him. And he who will receive the mysteries of the
First Mystery, namely, the twenty-fourth Mystery (reckoning) outwards,
and that is the head of the first Space which (is) outside. And he hath
the authority for to come unto all the arrays which (are) outside of
him; but he hath not the authority for to come unto the Places which
(are) above him, [190^a] or for to move about in them. And those who
receive mystery in the arrays of the twenty-fourth Mystery, the Place in
which each received mystery, he is about to go even unto it, and he will
become having the authority to move about in all the arrays with the
Spaces which (are) outside him. But he hath not the authority for to go
unto the arrays which (are) above him, or for to move about in them. And
he who received mystery in the arrays of the First Mystery which (is) in
the third Space, hath the authority for to come unto all the arrays
which (are) below him, and for to move about in all of them; but he hath
not indeed the authority for to go unto the Places which (are) above
him, or for to move about in them. And he who receiveth mystery in the
first Triple spirit, this who ruleth over the twenty-four [190^b]
Mysteries all together, these which rule over the Space of the First
mystery, these whose Place I shall say unto you in the Distribution of
the Universe. He who will receive, therefore, the mystery of that Triple
spirit hath the authority for to come below unto all the arrays, which
(are) below him, but he hath not the authority for to go unto the
Height, unto the arrays above him, namely, all the arrays of the Space
of the Ineffable. And he who received the mystery of the second Triple
spirit is having the authority for to come unto all the arrays of the
first Triple spirit, and to move about in them all with all their arrays
in which they become; but he hath not the authority for to go unto the
arrays [191^a] of the third Triple spirit (which are higher). And he who
received the mystery of the third Triple spirit, this who ruleth over
the three (third, MS) Triple spirits with the three Spaces all together
of the First Mystery, (hath authority to go unto all the Places below
him) but he hath not the authority for to go unto the Height, unto the
arrays which are above him, namely, the arrays of the Space of the
Ineffable. And he who received the absolute Mystery of the First Mystery
of the Ineffable, namely, the twelve Mysteries all together of the First
Mystery, these which rule over all the Spaces of the First Mystery. He
who will receive, therefore, that mystery hath the authority for to move
about in all the arrays of the Spaces of the three Triple spirits and
with the three [191^b] Spaces of the First Mystery, and with all their
arrays. And he hath the authority for to move about in all the arrays of
the Inheritances of the Light, for to move about in them from without
out unto within and from within in unto without and from above unto
below and from below unto above, and from the height unto the depth, and
from the depth unto the height, and from the length unto the breadth,
and from the breadth unto the length, in one word, he hath the authority
to move about in all the Places of the Inheritances of the Light. And he
hath the authority for to remain in the Place which he willeth in the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of the Light. And Amen I say unto you that
man in the dissolution of the World will become [192^a] reigning over
all the arrays of the Inheritance. And he who will receive the Mystery
of the Ineffable, that one which is I. That Mystery, indeed, is that
which knoweth because of what the Darkness became, and because of what
became the Light. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what the Darkness of the Darknesses became, and because of what the
Light of the Lights became. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what the Chaoses became, and because of what became
the Treasury of the Light. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what the Judgments became, and because of what became the
Land of the Light with the Place of the Inheritances of the Light. And
that Mystery indeed is that which [192^b] knoweth because of what the
Punishments of the sinners became, and because of what became the Repose
of the Kingdom of the Light. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what the sinners became, and because of what became
the Inheritances of the Light. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the impious, and because of what became
the good.

And that Mystery is that which knoweth because of what the Judgments of
the Punishments became, and because of what became all the emanations of
the Light.

And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what the Sin
became, and because of what became the Baptisms with the Mystery of the
Light. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the fire of the Punishment, and because of what [193^a] became
the Seals of the Light, that the Fire should not hurt them. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the Anger,
and because of what became the Peace. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what the Blasphemy became, and because of what
became the Hymns of the light. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what the Prayers of the Light became. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what the Curse became,
and because of what became the Blessing. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what the Wickedness became, and because of what
became the Deceit. And that Mystery indeed is that which [193^b] knoweth
because of what the Murder became, and because of what became Vivifying
of the souls. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the Adultery with the Fornication, and because of what
became the Purity. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what became the Intercourse, and because of what became the
Continence. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the Pride with the Boasting, and because of what became the
Humility with the Meekness. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what the Weeping became, and because of what became
the Laughter. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what the Slander became, and because of what the Word which is good
[194^a] became: and that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what the Obedience became, and because of what the Disregard of man
became. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
the Murmuring became, and because of what became the Innocence with the
humility.

And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of that became the
Sinfulness, and because of what became the Purity. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the Strength, and
because of what became the Weakness. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Movement of the body, and
because of what became its usefulness. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Poverty, and because of what
became [194^b] the Wealth. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Wealth of the World, and because of what
became the Slavery. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Death, and because of what became the Life.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples they rejoiced in great joy and they were delighted, hearing
Jesus saying these words. Added also Jesus in the word, said he to them:
Yet therefore my disciples, hear now that I may speak with you
concerning all the knowledge of the Mystery of the Ineffable, because
the Mystery of that Ineffable indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the Mercilessness, and because of what became the Mercy. And
that Mystery [195^a] indeed is that which knoweth because of what became
the Destruction, and because of what became the Always eternal. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the creeping
things, and because of what they will be dissolved. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what will become the Wild-beasts
and because of what they will be dissolved. And that Mystery indeed is
that which knoweth because of what became the Beasts, and because of
what became the Birds. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Mountains, and because of what became the
Precious stones which (are) in them. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Matter of the Gold, and because
of what became the Matter of the Silver. And that Mystery [195^b] indeed
is that which knoweth because of what became the Matter of the Brass,
and because of what became also the Matter of the Iron with the Steel.
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Matter of the Tin, and because of what became the Matter of the Lead.
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Matter of the Glass, and because of what became the Matter of the Wax.
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Grass, namely, the Vegetables. And because of what became all the
Matters. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the Waters of the earth and every thing which (is) in them, and
because of what the Earth also became. And that Mystery indeed is that
[196^a] which knoweth the Seas became because of what, with the Waters,
and because of what became the Wild-beasts in the Sea. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the Matter of the
World, and because of what it will be dissolved altogether. And added
also Jesus, said he to his disciples, Yet therefore my Disciples and my
friends and my brothers, let each be sober of the spirit which (is) in
him that ye may listen and understand every word which I shall say to
you, because from now I shall begin to speak with you concerning all the
knowledge of the Ineffable, because that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of [196^b] what became the West and because of what
became the East. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what became the South, and because of what became the North. Yet
therefore also my disciples, hear and continue and be sober and hear all
the knowledge of the Mystery of the Ineffable, because that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the demons and
because of what became the mankind. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Heat, and because of what
became the Air which is wholesome. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the Stars [197^a], and because of what
became the Clouds. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what the earth became Deep, and because of what the Water came over
it. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what the
earth dried up and the water of rain came upon it. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the Famines, and
because of what became the Abundance. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Frost, and because of what
became the Dew which is good. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the Dust, and because of what became the
Cooling which is sweet. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Hail, and [197^b] because of what became the
Snow which is wholesome. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Wind of the West, and because of what became
the Wind of the East. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Fire of the height, and because of what
became also the Waters. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Wind of West, and because of what became the
Wind of East. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the Wind of South, and because of what became the Wind of
North. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the Stars of the heaven and with the Disks of the phoster
(planets) and because of what became the [198^a] Firmament with all its
Veils. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the Rulers of the Spheres, and because of what became the Sphere
with all its types. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Rulers of the Aeons, and because of what
became the Aeons with their Veils. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the Rulers of the tyrant Aeons, and
because of what became the Rulers who repented. And that Mystery indeed
is that which knoweth because of what became the Ministers and because
of what became the Dekans. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of [198^b] what became the Angels, and because of what became
the Archangels. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the Lords, and because of what became the Gods. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what also the Jealousy
became in the height, and because of what also became the Absence of
Jealousy. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the Hate, and because of what became the Love. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what the Dissension became, and
because of what became the Reconciliation. And that Mystery indeed is
that which knoweth because of what became the Covetousness, and because
of what all the Renunciation of the all became, [199^a] and because of
what became the love of Wealth. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what the Love of self became, and because of what
became the Satiety.

And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Partners, and because of what became the Separated Partners. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Godlessness (added in margin), and because of what became the Love of
God (in lower margin). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Phoster (Planets) and because of what became
the Sparks (Fixed Stars). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Triple powers, and because of what became the
Invisibles. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth [199^b]
because of what became the Forefather, and because of what became the
Pure (Lights). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what became the great Self-willed, and because of what became his
Believers. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
became the great Triple powered, and because of what became the great
Forefather invisible. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Thirteenth Aeon, and because of what became
the Place of the Middle (plural, MS). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Receiver of the Middle, and
because of what became the Virgins of the Light. And that Mystery indeed
is that which knoweth because of [200^a] what became the Deacons of the
Middle, and because of what became the Angels of the Middle. And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the Land of
the Light, and because of what became the great Receiver of the Light.
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what became the
Guards of the Place of those of the Righthand, and because of what
became the Chief Captains of these. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Gate of the life, and because
of what became Sabaoth the good. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the Place of those of the Righthand, and
because of what became the Land of the Light, namely, the Treasury of
the Light: and that Mystery [200^b] indeed is that which knoweth because
of what became the emanations of the Light, and because of what became
the twelve Saviours. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Three Gates of the Treasury of the Light, and
because of what became the nine Guards. And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what became the Twin-saviours, and because of
what became the three Amens. And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of what became the five Trees, and because of what
became the seven Amens. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth
because of what became the Confusion [201^a] which becometh not, and
because of what was purified.

Added Jesus, said he to his disciples, Yet my disciples, be sober and
let each one (added in lower margin) of you bring the power of the
perception of the Light in front of him, and listen out of an exactness:
for from now I am about to speak with you of the whole Place of the
truth, of the Ineffable, and with the manner of which it is (being). It
happened therefore, the disciples having heard these words which said
Jesus, they drew back and they were silent altogether. Came forward
Maria the Magdalene, she prostrated at the feet of Jesus, she worshipped
unto them, she cried out, she wept, said she, Have mercy on me, my Lord,
or did my brothers hear and they were silent [201^b] at the words which
thou sayest. Now therefore, my Lord concerning the knowing of all these
words which thou saidst, becoming in the Mystery of the Ineffable; but I
heard thee saying, From now I am about to begin speaking with you of all
the knowledge of the Mystery of the Ineffable, This word therefore which
thou sayst, didst not thou, then, approach unto completing the word?
Because of this therefore my brothers heard, they were silent, they
ceased perceiving how thou art speaking with them concerning the words
which thou sayest to them. Now therefore, my Lord, if the knowledge of
all these (things) is becoming in that Mystery, then who is the man who
(is) in the World who [202^a] is able to understand that Mystery with
all his knowledges, and the type of all these words concerning which
thou saidst them.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words which said Maria,
he knew that having heard the disciples, they began to be silent, he
encouraged them, said he to them, Grieve not therefore, my disciples,
concerning the Mystery of the Ineffable, which ye think that ye will not
understand. Amen I say to you, Yours is that Mystery, and that of every
one who will hearken to you and renounce all the World with all the
matter which (is) in it, and renounce all evil thoughts which become in
them, and renounce all the cares of [202^b] this Aeon.

Now therefore I say to you, Every one who will renounce all the World
with all the (things) which (are) in it, and submit to the Godhead, that
Mystery is easy for them more than all the Mysteries of the kingdom of
the Light, and is fit to understand more than all of them, and is light
(_levis_) more than all of them. He who will come in unto the knowledge
of that Mystery is wont to renounce all this World with all the cares
which (are) in it. Because of this therefore I said unto you once, Every
one who is under care, and who toileth under his burden, come ye (close)
to me that I may give rest to you, for light is my burden [203^a] and
gentle is my yoke. Now therefore he who will receive that Mystery is
wont to renounce all the World and with the care of all the matter which
(is) in it. Because of this therefore my disciples grieve not at your
thoughts that that Mystery ye will not understand.

Amen I say to you, That Mystery is fit to understand more than all the
Mysteries: and Amen I say to you that that Mystery is yours with every
one who will renounce all the World with all the matter which (is) in
it. Now therefore hear, my disciples, and my friends and my brothers
that I may urge you unto the knowledge of the Mystery of the Ineffable.
These (things) I speak with you [203^b], because I have come to say unto
you the whole knowledge about the Distribution of the Universe, because
the Distribution is (his) knowledge. But now therefore hear that I may
speak with you in advance concerning the knowledge of that Mystery:
because that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
despoiled themselves the five Helpers, and because of what they
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled himself him the great Light of
the Lights, and because of what he (they, MS) proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones), and that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what despoiled himself the First precept, and because of what he
separated the seven Mysteries, and because of what also they called it
(him, MS), the First [204^a] precept. And because of what he (they, MS)
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled himself the great Light of the
Marks of Light, and because of what he stood (up) without emanation, and
because of what he (they, MS) proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones).
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
himself the First Mystery, namely, the twenty-fourth Mystery (reckoning)
outward, and because of what he counterfeits within him the twelve
Mysteries according to the number of the numbering of the Boundless
Uncontainable (ones), and because of what he proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what despoiled themselves the twelve [204^b] Immoveable (ones), and
because of what indeed they set them up with all their arrays, and
because of what they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
themselves the Unshakeable (ones), and because of what they set them up
divided unto twelve arrays, and because of what they proceeded out of
the Fatherless (ones) these which belong unto (the) arrays of the Space
of the Ineffable. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what they despoiled them the Inconceivable (ones) which belong (to)
the second (two, MS) Space of the Ineffable, and because of what they
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled [205^a] themselves the twelve
Undesignated (ones), and because of what they set them up after all
their arrays of the Unrevealed (ones), namely also, some Uncontainable
(ones) of the Boundless (ones), and because of what indeed they
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the Unrevealed (ones)
these which did not reveal themselves, nor brought they them unto that
which manifesteth according to the arrangement of the Only One, the
Ineffable, and because of what they proceeded out of the Fatherless
(ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what
despoiled themselves the Most profound (ones), and because of what they
distributed them being one only array, and because of what they [205^b]
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the twelve arrays of
the Unspeakable (ones), and because of what indeed they separated them,
being three Parts, and because of what indeed they proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones).

And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
themselves all that Incorruptible (ones), being twelve Places, and
because of what they placed them being distributed one after another in
one only array, and because of what also they separated them and they
made them diverse arrays, being themselves Uncontainable (ones) and
Boundless (ones), and because of what they proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery [206^a] indeed is that which knoweth
because of what despoiled themselves the Boundless (ones) and because of
what they set them up being twelve Boundless Spaces, and they placed
them being three arrays of Spaces according to the arrangement of the
Only One, the Ineffable, and because of what they proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what despoiled themselves the twelve Uncontainable (ones) these which
belong to (the) arrays of the Only One, the Ineffable One, and because
of what indeed they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones), until they
bring them indeed unto the Space of the First Mystery, namely, the
second Space. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of
what despoiled themselves [206^b] the twenty-four ten thousand of
hymners, and because of what indeed they distributed them outside of the
Veil of the First Mystery, namely, the twin Mysteries of the Only One,
the Ineffable, that (One) which looketh inward and that (One) which
looketh outward, and because of what indeed they proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what despoiled themselves all the Uncontainable (ones), these whom I
finished saying, these which (are) in the Places of the second Space of
the Ineffable, namely, the Space of the First Mystery, and because of
what those Uncontainable (ones) with those Boundless (ones) proceeded
out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which
knoweth because of [207^a] what despoiled themselves, the twenty-four
Mysteries of the first Triple spirit, and because of what they called
them, The twenty-four Spaces of the first Triple spirit, and because of
what they proceeded out of the second Triple spirit. And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the
twenty-four Mysteries of the second Triple spirit, and because of what
they proceeded out of the third Triple spirit. And that Mystery indeed
is that which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the
twenty-four Mysteries of the third Triple spirit, namely, the
twenty-four Spaces of the third Triple spirit, and [207^b] because of
what they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery
indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the
five Trees of the first Triple spirit, and because of what they
distributed them standing one after another, and also being bound in
unto one another, with all their arrays, and because of what they
proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what despoiled themselves the five Trees of the
second Triple spirit, and because of what they proceeded out of the
Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because
of what despoiled themselves the five Trees of the third Triple spirit,
and because of what they proceeded [208^a] out of the Fatherless (ones).
And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
themselves the Pre-Uncontainable (ones) of the first Triple spirit, and
because of what they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
themselves the Pre-Uncontainable (ones) of the second Triple spirit, and
because of what they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And that
Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
themselves all the Pre-Uncontainable (ones) of the third Triple spirit,
and because of what they proceeded out of the Fatherless (ones). And
that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth because of what despoiled
himself [208^b] the first Triple spirit from below this, which belongeth
to the arrays of the Only One, the Ineffable, and because of what they
proceeded out of the second Triple spirit. And that Mystery indeed is
that which knoweth because of what despoiled himself the third Triple
spirit, namely, the first Triple spirit from the Height, and because of
what he proceeded out of the twelfth Triple spirit, this which (is) the
last Place of the Fatherless (ones). And that Mystery indeed is that
which knoweth because of what were distributed all the Places, which
(are) in the Space of the Ineffable, and with those who are in them all,
and because of what they proceeded out of the last member [209^a] of the
Ineffable One. And that Mystery indeed is that which knoweth his own
self, because of what he despoiled himself, for him to proceed out of
the Ineffable who is he who ruleth over all of them, and it is he who
distributed all of them according to their arrays. These therefore all I
shall say unto you in the Distribution of the Universe, in one word, all
the (things) which I said unto you, those which will happen, with those
which will come, these which emanate and which proceed, and with those
which (are) outside of them, and with those which are implanted in them,
these which will contain the Place (coptic) of the First Mystery, and
with those which (are) in the Space of the Ineffable, these which I
shall say unto you, because that I shall reveal them to you, and I shall
say them unto [209^b] you according to Places and according to arrays in
the Distribution of the Universe. And I shall reveal to you all their
mysteries which rule over them all, with their pre-triple spirits, with
their hyper-triple spirits, these which rule over their mysteries with
their arrays. Now therefore the Mystery of the Ineffable is he who
knoweth because of what all these became, of those which I said, and in
boldness, because of which all these became. And he is the Mystery which
(is) in all these, and he is all their coming out, and he is all their
catching up, and he is all their setting up. And the Mystery of the
Ineffable, he is the Mystery which is in all these, which I said unto
[210^a] you, and with those which I shall say unto you in the
Distribution of the Universe, and he is the Mystery which is in all
these: and he is the only Mystery of the Ineffable, and the knowledge of
all these (things) which I said to you, and with those which I shall say
unto you: with those which I said not unto you, all these I shall say
unto you in the Distribution of the Universe, with all their knowledge
one upon another, because of what they became. That is the one word of
the Ineffable. And I shall say unto you the Distribution of all their
mysteries, with the type of each of them, with the manner of their
completing in all their figures, and I shall say unto you the mystery of
the Only One [210^b], the Ineffable, with all its (his, MS thus again)
types, with all its figures; and with all its arrangements, because of
what indeed it proceeded out of the last limb of the Ineffable, because
that mystery is all their setting up. And that mystery of the Ineffable
is also (the) one only word which also becometh in the language of the
Ineffable, and that is the arrangement of the explanation of every word
which I said unto you. And he who will receive the one word of that
mystery, this which I shall say unto you now with all its (his, MS thus
again) types with all its figures, with the manner of completing its
mystery: because that ye are the perfect of all-perfect. And ye are that
which will complete all knowledge [211^a] of that mystery with all its
arrangement with its...: because ye are those to whom they entrusted
every mystery. Hear therefore now, that I may say unto you that mystery
which is this, He who will receive therefore the one word of the
mystery, this which I said unto you, whenever he should come out the
body of the matter of the Rulers, and should come the Receivers of
Contentious (ones), and they should loosen him out of the body of the
matter of the Rulers of the Receivers of Contentious (ones), namely,
they are wont to loosen every soul which cometh out of the body. If
therefore the Receivers of Contentious (ones) should loosen the soul
which received this one mystery of the Ineffable this which I finished
saying unto you now [211^b] and in the hour they will loosen it from the
body of the matter it will become a great effluence of light in the
middle of those Receivers and will fear greatly the Receivers before the
light of that soul, and will be weakened the Receivers and fall and be
silent altogether, out of the fear of the great light which they saw.
And the soul which receiveth this mystery of the Ineffable will fly unto
the Height becoming a great effluence of light. And will not seize it
the Receivers, and they will not know what is the road in which it will
go, because that it became a great Beam of light, and it flieth unto the
Height: and not [212^a] any power is wont to be able to hold it down at
all, nor indeed shall they be able to approach it at all; but it is wont
to pass through all the Places of the Rulers, with all the Places of the
emanations of the Light, and it is not wont to give answer in any Place,
nor is it wont to give defence, nor is it wont to give symbol: for not
even shall any power of the Rulers be able, nor shall any power of the
emanations of the Light, they shall not be able to approach that soul,
but all the Places of the Rulers, with all the Places of the emanations
of the Light are wont each to hymn unto it in their Places, being in
fear before the Light of the effluence which envelopeth the soul, even
until [212^b] it passeth through them all, and goeth unto the Place of
the Inheritance of the mystery which it received, namely, the mystery of
the Only One, the Ineffable and it becometh joined in unto his members.
Amen I say to you, It will become in all the Places in the time of a man
shooting an arrow. Now therefore also, Amen I say to you, Every man who
will receive that Mystery of the Ineffable and is complete or fulfilleth
(it) in all its types with all its figures, is a man being in the World,
but he excelleth all Angels and he will excel more than they all, he is
a man being upon the World, but he excelleth all the Archangels, and he
will excel more than they all. [213^a] He is a man being upon the World,
but he excelleth all the Tyrants, and he will be exalted over them all.
He is a man being upon the World, but he excelleth all the Lords, and he
will be exalted over them all. He is a man being upon the World, but he
excelleth all the Gods, and he will be exalted over them all. He is a
man being upon the World, but he excelleth all the luminaries (phoster),
and he will be exalted over them all. He is a man being upon the World,
but he excelleth all the pure (lights), and he will be exalted over them
all. He is a man being upon the World, but he excelleth all the Triple
powers, and he will be exalted over them all. He is a man being upon the
World, but he excelleth all the Forefathers, and he will be exalted
[213^b] over them all. He is a man being upon the World, but he
excelleth all the Invisibles, and he will be exalted over them all. He
is a man being upon the World, but he excelleth the great Forefather
invisible, and he will also be exalted over him. He is a man being upon
the World, but he excelleth all those of the Middle, and he will be
exalted over them all. He is a man being upon the World, but he
excelleth the emanations of the Treasury of the Light, and he will be
exalted over them all. He is a man being upon the World, but he
excelleth the Confusion, and he will be exalted over all of it. He is a
man being upon the World, but he excelleth the whole Place of the
Treasury, and he will be exalted over all of it. He is a man being upon
the World, but he will become King with me in my kingdom. He is a man
[214^a] being upon the World, but he becometh King in the Light. He is a
man being upon the World, but not one (out) of the World is he, and Amen
I say to you, That man is I and I am that man: and in the dissolution of
the World, namely, whenever the Universe should be caught-up and
whenever should be caught-up all the number of the perfect souls, and I
become ruling in the midst of the last Helpers, ruling over all the
emanations of the Light, and ruling over the seven Amens, with the five
Trees, with the three Amens, with the nine Guards, and ruling over the
child of the child, namely the [214^b] Twin-saviours, and ruling over
the twelve Saviours, with all the number of the perfect souls, these
which will receive the mystery of the Light. And every man who will
receive the mystery in the Ineffable will become fellow-King with me,
they will sit on my right (hand) and on my left in my kingdom. And Amen
I say to you, Those men are I, and I am those. Because of this therefore
I said unto you once, Ye will sit upon your thrones on my right (hand)
and on my left in my Kingdom and ye will reign with me. Because of this
therefore I did not spare, nor was I ashamed, calling you, My brothers
and my [215^a] friends, because that ye will become fellow-Kings with me
in my kingdom.

These therefore I am saying them unto you, I am knowing that I shall
give to you the Mystery of the Ineffable, which Mystery is I, and I am
that Mystery. Now therefore not only ye will reign with me, but every
man who will receive the Mystery of the Ineffable, they will become
ruling with me in my kingdom, and I am them, and they are I: but my
throne will become more excellent than they, because that ye will suffer
in the World beyond every man, even until ye preach every word which I
shall say unto you: but your thrones will become fastened unto mine in
my kingdom. Because of this I said [215^b] unto you once, The place in
which I shall become, will become with me also my twelve Deacons: but
Maria the Magdalene with Iohannes the Virgin will become excelling all
my disciples. And every man who will receive Mystery of the Ineffable,
they will become on my left and on my right, and I am they and they are
I. And they will be equal with you in every thing. But nevertheless your
thrones will become excelling theirs, and my throne even mine will
become excelling yours. And every man who will find the word of the
Ineffable, Amen I say unto you, The men will know that word, they will
know the knowledge of all these words which I said unto you, those of
the depth and those of the height, those of the length with those of
[216^a] the breadth, in one word, they will know the knowledge of all
these words which I said unto you, and those which I said not unto you,
these I shall say unto you according to Place and according to array in
the Distribution of the Universe. And Amen I say unto you, They will
know in what sort the World is placed, and they will know in what type
all the things of the Height are placed, and they will know because of
what thing the Universe became.

These therefore having said them the Saviour, sprang up Maria the
Magdalene, said she, My Lord bear with me, and be not angry with me
seeking after every thing in an exactness with a certainty. Now
therefore, my Lord, then is one the word of the Mystery of the Ineffable
and one the word of the knowledge of the Universe [216^b]? Answered the
Saviour, said he, Yea one (is) the Mystery of the Ineffable and one is
the word the knowledge of the Universe. But also answered Maria, said
she to the Saviour, My Lord, bear with me, seeking from thee, and be not
angry with me. Now therefore, my Lord, except we live and know all the
word of the Ineffable, shall we not be able to inherit the kingdom of
the Light? But answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Yea, for every
one who will receive the Mystery of the kingdom of the Light, each will
go and inherit even unto the Place unto which he received mystery; but
he will not know the knowledge of the Universe because of what all these
(things) became, except he should know the one word of the Ineffable
namely, the knowledge of the Universe. And also openly [217^a] I am the
knowledge of the Universe. And also it is impossible to know the one
word of the knowledge, except forsooth he receive the First Mystery of
the Ineffable: but every man who will receive mystery in the Light will
go each and inherit unto the Place unto which he received mystery.
Because of this I said unto you once, He who believeth a prophet will
receive the reward of a prophet, and he who believeth a righteous (man)
will receive the reward of a righteous man, namely, even unto the Place
which each receiveth mystery he will go unto it. He who receiveth, being
prepared is going to inherit the mystery which is less, and he who will
receive mystery being more excellent he is going to inherit the Places
which are exalted. And each will remain in his Place in the Light of my
kingdom. And each will be the authority unto the array which is below
him; but [217^b] he will not be the authority to go unto the array which
is above him, but he is going to remain in the Place of the Inheritance
of the Light of my kingdom, becoming in a great light for which there is
not measure by the Gods with all the Invisibles, and he (will) become in
great joy with great delight.

Now therefore also hear that I may speak with you concerning the glory
of those who will also receive the mystery of the First Mystery. He who
will receive therefore the mystery of that First Mystery, will become at
the time (at) which he cometh out of the body of the matter of the
Rulers, come the Receivers of the Contentious (ones), and bring the soul
of that man out of the body; and that soul will become a great overflow
of light among the Receivers of Contentious (ones): and those Receivers
will fear before [218^a] the light of that soul, and that soul will go
unto the Height, and pass through all the Places of the Rulers, with all
the Places of the emanations of the Light: and it will not give answer
nor defence nor symbol in any Place of the Light, nor in any Place of
the Rulers; but it will pass through in all the Places and it will
surpass all, and go and reign over all the Places of the First Saviour.
Likewise also he who will receive the second mystery of the First
Mystery with the third with the fourth even until he receive the twelfth
mystery of the First Mystery, whenever he should become in the time (at)
which they come out of the body of the matter of the Rulers, come the
Receivers [218^b] of Contentious (ones) and bring the soul of that man
out of the body of the matter, and those souls will become a great
overflow of light among the Receivers of Contentious (ones). And those
Receivers will fear before the light of that soul, and they will be
weakened and fall upon their face. And those souls will fly unto the
Height at the hour and pass over all the Places of the Rulers, and in
all the Places of the emanations of the Light, and they will not give
answer nor defence in any Place nor symbol: but it will pass through in
all the Places and they surpass all within, and they will reign over all
the Places of the twelve Saviours, so that those who receive the second
[219^a] mystery of the First Mystery will reign over all the Places of
the second Saviour in the Inheritances of the Light. Likewise also those
who receive the third mystery of the First Mystery with the fourth with
the fifth with the sixth even until the twelfth, each will reign over
all the Places of the Saviour, who received the mystery unto him. And he
who will receive twelve (twelfth, MS) mysteries one after (upon, MS)
another of the First Mystery, namely, the absolute Mystery, this
concerning which I speak with you. And he who will receive therefore
those twelve (twelfth, MS) mysteries these which are reckoned unto the
First Mystery, whenever he should come out of the World, he will pass
through all the Places of the Rulers, with all the Places of the Light,
being with a great effluence of the Light [219^b]. And also he will
reign over all the Places of the twelve Saviours. But they will not be
equal with those who receive the one Mystery of the Ineffable, but he
who will receive that Mystery will remain in those arrays, because that
they surpass, and he will remain in the arrays of the twelve Saviours.

It happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Maria the Magdalene, she kissed the feet of
Jesus, said she, My Lord, bear with me, and be not angry with me,
seeking from thee, but have mercy on us, my Lord, and reveal to us every
thing which we shall seek after. Now therefore, my Lord, how hath the
First Mystery the twelve mysteries; the Ineffable (only) one mystery is
that which it hath? Answered Jesus said he to her, One (only) mystery
however at least is that which [220^a] it hath, but that mystery doeth
three mysteries being the one (only) mystery, but different type (is) of
each of them. And also it is wont to do five mysteries, being yet one
only, but different (is) the type of each: so that the five mysteries
are equal with one another in the mystery of the kingdom in the
Inheritances of the Light. But different (is) the type of each of them,
and their kingdom excelleth and is being exalted above the whole kingdom
of the twelve mysteries one after (upon, MS) another of the First
Mystery: but they are not equal in the kingdom with the one (first, MS)
mystery of the First Mystery in the kingdom of the Light. Likewise again
the three mysteries are not equal also in the kingdom which (is) in the
Light, but different (is) the type of each of them. And they also again
are not equal in the kingdom [220^b] with the one (only) mystery of the
First Mystery in the kingdom of the Light. And different is the type
also of each of them three, and the type of the figures of each of them
varieth from one to another. The first indeed if thou shouldest complete
its mystery throughout, and stand and complete it well in all its
figures, until thou comest out of the body of the present, and become a
great overflow of light of effluence, and pass (i.e. the soul) through
every Place of the Rulers with all the Place of the Light, all fearing
before the light of that soul, even until it goeth unto the Places of
its kingdom. Also the second mystery of the First Mystery, if thou
shouldst complete its mystery well in all its figures, the man therefore
who will complete [221^a] its mystery, whenever he should say that
mystery over the head of every man who cometh out of the body, and he
(should) say it unto his two ears. If indeed the man who cometh out of
the body of matter having received the mystery another time, and is made
partaker in unto the word of the truth. Amen I say unto you, That man
whenever he should come out of the body of the matter, his soul will
become a great effluence of Light and (will) pass through every Place,
even until it go unto the kingdom of that mystery. But if he, that man
did not receive mystery and (was) not made partaker unto the words of
the truth, he who completeth that mystery, whenever he should say that
mystery over the head of the man who cometh out of the body, this who
did not receive mystery of the Light, and [221^b] who communicated not
in the word of the truth. Amen I say unto you, That man whenever he
should come out of the body, they are not wont to judge him in any Place
of the Rulers, nor will they be able to punish him in any Place, nor the
fire will touch him through the great mystery of the Ineffable, which
becometh with him: and they will hasten quickly, and deliver him up to
one another, and steer him along (from Place to Place) and from array to
array, even until they take him (close) to the Virgin of the Light, all
the Places fearing before the mystery with the sign of the kingdom of
the Ineffable, this which becometh with him: and whenever they should
take it (close) to the Virgin of the Light, the Virgin will see the sign
of the mystery of the kingdom [222^a] of the Ineffable, becoming with
him, is wont to wonder the Virgin of the Light, and she is wont to prove
him. But she is not wont to cause them to take him unto the Light, until
he completeth all the duties (politia) of the Light of that mystery,
which are these the purifications of the renunciation of the World and
with all the matter which is in it. The Virgin of the Light is wont to
seal him with a seal more excellent, which is this, (the form of the
seal is not given), and to cause them to cast him in any month in which
he came out of the body of the matter unto a body being about to become
righteous, this being about to find the Godhead of the truth, with the
mysteries which are high, and (to) inherit them, and (to) inherit the
Light unto age, namely, the free-gifts of the second mystery of the
First Mystery of the Ineffable.

The third [222^b] Mystery also of that Ineffable, the man indeed who
will complete that mystery, not only because whenever he should come out
of the body being about to inherit the kingdom of the mystery, but
whenever he should perform and complete it with all its figures, which
is this, that whenever he should do that mystery and complete it well,
and mention by name that mystery over a man coming out of the body,
having known that mystery, this (man) who having delayed, or rather did
not delay this (man) who becometh in the punishments which are cruel of
the Rulers, and with their judgments which are cruel with their fires
which are various: Amen I say to you, The man who cometh out of the
body, whenever they should name this mystery for his sake, they will
hasten quickly and remove him and deliver [223^a] him up to one another,
even until they take him (close) to the Virgin of the Light, and the
Virgin of the Light will seal him with a seal being more excellent,
which is this (the form of the seal is not given): and in any month she
will cause them to cast him unto the body of (a) righteous (man), this
who will find the Godhead of the truth with the mystery which is more
excellent, and he (will) inherit the kingdom of the Light. This
therefore is the free-gift of the third mystery of the Ineffable. Now
therefore every one who will receive (one) out of the five mysteries of
the Ineffable, this whenever he should come out of the body and inherit
unto the Place of that mystery (and the kingdom of those five
mysteries)[114] [223^b] they are equal with one another in their
kingdom, but they are not equal with the three mysteries of the
Ineffable. He who also receiveth out of the three mysteries of the
Ineffable, whenever also he should come out of body he will inherit unto
the kingdom of that mystery, and those three mysteries are equal with
one another, they are in the kingdom and they are more excellent and
they are higher than the five Mysteries of the Ineffable in the kingdom.
But they are not equal with the one (only) mystery of the Ineffable. He
who receiveth also the one (only) mystery of the Ineffable will inherit
the Place of the whole kingdom, according as I finished saying unto you
all his glory another time. And every one who will receive the mystery,
which is in the Space of the Universe of the Ineffable with all the
other mysteries, which are joined in the members of the Ineffable
[224^a], these concerning which I did not yet speak with you with their
distribution with the manner in which they stand, and with the type of
each as it is, and because of what they called him, The Ineffable, or
because of what he stood being distributed with all his members, and how
many members there are becoming in him, with all his arrangements, these
which I shall not say unto you now, but whenever I should be about (to
say) unto you the Distribution of the Universe, I shall say unto you all
one after another, indeed his distributions with his form of words
(speaking of himself) as he is with the joining of all his members,
belonging to the arrangement of the only one God of the truth,
inaccessible.

The Place therefore unto which each will receive mystery in the Space of
the Ineffable, he will inherit unto [224^b] the Place which he received.
And those of the whole Place of the Space of the Ineffable are not wont
to give answer at every Place, nor are they wont to give defence nor are
they wont to give symbol for ones without symbol are they; and they have
not Receiver, but they are wont to pass through all the Places, until
they go unto the Place of the kingdom of the mystery which they
received. Likewise also those who will receive mystery in the second
Space have not answer nor defence, for ones without symbol they are in
that World, that is the Space of the first mystery of the First Mystery:
and those of the third Space also which is the outside, namely, the
third Space also from the outside, each Place hath in that Space its
Receivers with its answer [225^a] with its defence with its symbol,
these which I shall say unto you in the time (in) which I shall say unto
you that mystery, namely, whenever I should finish saying unto you the
Distribution of the Universe. Nevertheless in the dissolution of the
Universe, namely, whenever should be completed the number of the perfect
souls, and (should) be completed the mystery this (through) which the
Universe entirely became, I shall spend (a) thousand years according to
the years of the Light reigning over all the emanations of the Light
with all the number of the perfect souls, these which received all the
mysteries.

It happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Maria the Magdalene, said she, My Lord, how many
years in the years of this World is a year of the Light? Answered Jesus,
said he to Maria [225^b], A day of the light is ten hundred years of the
World, so that thirty-six ten thousand years with another half ten
thousand years of the World is (only) one year of the Light. I shall
spend therefore ten hundred years of the Light, reigning in the midst of
the last Helper, reigning over all the emanations of the Light and over
all the number of the perfect souls, these which received the mysteries
of the Light. And ye, my disciples, with every one who will receive the
mysteries of the Ineffable will remain with me on my right (hand) and on
my left reigning with me in my kingdom. And those also who receive the
three mysteries of the five mysteries of that Ineffable will be
fellow-Kings with you in the kingdom of the Light. And they [226^a] will
not be equal with you, (but) ye with those who receive the mystery of
the Ineffable are about to remain also after you reigning. And those who
receive the five mysteries of the Ineffable are about to remain also
after (those who receive) the three mysteries, reigning also. And also
those who receive the twelve (twelfth, MS) mysteries of the First
Mystery are about to remain also further after (those who receive) the
five mysteries of the Ineffable and reigning also according to the array
of each of them. And all those who receive the mysteries in all the
Places of the Space of the Ineffable, will reign also and remain also
within those who receive also the mysteries of the First Mystery, being
distributed according to the glory of each of them. So that those who
receive the mystery which is (more) excellent will remain in the Place
which is more excellent. Those who receive the mystery which is lower,
they will remain in the Place which is lower, [226^b] reigning in the
Light of my kingdom.

These only are the lots of the kingdom of the first Space of the
Ineffable, those who receive also all the mysteries of the second Space,
namely, the Space of the First Mystery, they will remain also in the
Light of my kingdom, being distributed according to the glory of each of
them, each of them becoming in the (Place of the) mystery unto which he
received. And those who receive the mysteries which are more excellent
will remain also in the Place which is high, and those who receive the
mysteries which are lower, being about to remain in the Place which is
lower in the Light of my kingdom. This is the lot of the second kingdom
(King, MS) of those who receive the mystery of the second Space of the
First Mystery. Those who receive also the mysteries of the second Space,
[227^a] (of the First Mystery) namely, the first Space (reckoning) from
without, those also, they will remain after the second kingdom (King,
MS) being distributed also in the Light of my kingdom according to the
glory of each of them, (they) will remain in the Place unto which they
received mysteries so that those who receive the mysteries which are
high, will remain also in the Places which are high, And those who
receive the Mysteries which are lower, they will remain also in the
Places which are lower. These are the three lots of the kingdom of the
Light, the mysteries of these three lots of the Light they are numerous
greatly greatly: ye will find them in the great two books of Ieou, but I
shall give to you, and I shall say unto you the great mysteries of each
lot, these which are more excellent than each Place, namely, the heads
in every [227^b] Place and in every array, these which will take the
whole race of the mankind in unto the Places which are high according to
the Space of the Inheritance. The remainder therefore of the Mysteries
which are lower ye need them not, but ye will find them in the two books
of Ieou, these which wrote Enokh, while I was speaking with him out of
the Tree of the Knowledge, and out of the Tree of the Life in the
paradisos of Adam. Now therefore whenever I should finish distributing
to you the Distribution of the Universe, I shall give to you and I shall
say unto you the great mysteries of the three lots of my kingdom,
namely, the heads of the mysteries which I shall give to you, and which
I shall say unto you in all their figures with all their types with all
their tickets (pebble, MS) with the seals of the last [228^a] Space,
namely, the first Space (reckoning) from without. And I shall say unto
you the answers with the defences with the symbols of that Space. (As
for) the second Space however (reckoning) inwards they have not answer
nor defence nor symbol nor ticket nor seal, but only types are they with
figures, those which they have. All these having finished saying them
the Saviour unto his disciples, came forward Andreas, said he, My Lord,
Be not angry with me, but have pity upon me, and reveal to me the
mystery of the word of which I seek (from) thee: otherwise it became
hard for me and I understood it not.

Answered the Saviour, said he to him, Seek after that which thou [228^b]
wishedst, and I shall reveal it to thee face to face without parable.
But answered Andreas, said he, My Lord I am wondering and I am
marvelling greatly, that the men who are in the World, who are in the
body of this matter, how, whenever they should come out of this World,
they will pass over these firmaments, with all these Rulers, with all
the Lords, with all the Gods, with all these great Invisibles, with all
those of the Place of those of the Middle, and with those of the whole
Place of those of (the) Right (hand) with all the great emanations of
the Light and all make their entrance and inherit the kingdom of the
Light. This thing therefore, my Lord, is difficult for me. These
therefore having said them Andreas, this spirit of the Saviour moved in
him he cried out, [229^a] said he, How long am I to bear with you, how
long am I to suffer you, if thus far also ye understood not, and ye are
without knowledge. Then ye know not, ye, and ye understand not that ye
with all the Angels with all the Archangels, with the Gods, with the
Lords, with all the Rulers, with all the great Invisibles, with all
those of the Middle, with those of the whole Place of those of (the)
Right (hand), and with all the great emanations of the Light, with all
their glory, ye all one with another are out of the same lump with the
same matter, with the same substance, and ye are out of the same
Confusion all of you: and by the command of the First Mystery was the
Confusion compelled (to be) until should be [229^b] purified all the
great emanations of the Light with all their glory, and until they
should be purified from the Confusion. And they were not purified
through their own selves, but they were purified under compulsion
according to the arrangement of the one only, the Ineffable. And they,
they did not suffer at all, and they did not transfer them from the
Places, nor did they despoil them at all, nor did they melt them down
into bodies, various, nor did they become in any affliction. Yea, verily
therefore ye are the dregs of the Treasury, and ye are the dregs of the
Place of those of (the) Right (hand), and ye are the dregs of the Place
of those of the Middle, and ye are the dregs of all the Invisibles, with
all the Rulers, in one word [230^a], ye are the dregs of all these. And
ye became in great tribulations with great afflictions in the change in
bodies various of the World. And after all these tribulations through
your own selves ye agonised and ye fought having renounced all the World
with all the matter which is in it: and ye did not cease from seeking,
even until ye found all the mysteries of the kingdom of the Light, these
which purified you, they made you pure light, purified greatly; and ye
became light purified. Because of this therefore I said unto you once,
Seek that ye may find the (things) which I said unto you. I said unto
you, Ye shall seek after [230^b] the mysteries of the Light, these which
are wont to purify the body of the matter, and make it pure light,
purified greatly. Amen I say unto you, Because of the race of the
mankind, because they are material I despoiled myself I brought all the
mysteries to them of the Light, that I should purify them, because they
are the dregs of all the matter of their matter. Otherwise not any soul
in all the race of the mankind would be saved. And they would not
inherit the kingdom of the Light, except that I brought to them the
mysteries of purification. For the emanations of the Light need not the
mysteries, for they are purified, but the race of the mankind, they
(are) those who need them, because that they are all material dregs.
Because of this therefore I said unto you once, [231^a] Those who are at
ease need not the physician, but those who become badly, namely, Those
of the Light need not the mysteries, because they are light being
purified: but the race of the mankind, they are those who need them,
because material dregs they are. Because of this therefore, preach to
all the race of the mankind, Desist not from seeking in the day with the
night, even until ye should find the mysteries of purification. And say
to the race of the mankind, Renounce all the World with all the matter
which is in it: otherwise he who receiveth and he who giveth in the
World and who eateth and who drinketh in his matter and who liveth in
all his cares with all his life (politia, MS) gathering in for himself
matters (close) to [231^b] his other matter: because that all this World
with all the (things) which are in it with all its life (politia, MS)
are material dregs, and they will ask them each concerning their
cleansing. Because of this therefore I said unto you once, Renounce all
the World with all the matter which is in it, that ye should not gather
in for you other matter unto your other matter which is in them. Because
of this therefore, preach to all the race of the mankind, Renounce all
the World with all its life (politia, MS), that ye should not gather in
for you other matter unto your other matter which is in you. And say
unto them, Desist not seeking in the day with the night and renew (your
seeking) not yourselves, until ye [232^a] find the mysteries of
purification, these which will purify you and make you pure light; and
ye (will) go unto the Height, and ye (will) inherit the Light of my
kingdom.

Now therefore, thou also, Andreas with all thy brothers, thy
fellow-disciples, concerning your renunciations with all your
tribulations which ye received from Place to Place, and with your
changes in bodies various, and with all your afflictions, and after all
these ye received the mysteries of purification, ye became pure light
purified greatly. Because of this therefore ye will go unto the Height
and make entrance to all the Places of (the) emanations of the Light;
and ye [232^b] (will) become being Kings in the kingdom of the Light
unto age. This is the answer of the words after which ye seek.

Now therefore also, Andreas, yet art thou being in unbelief and with
ignorance? But whenever ye should come out of the body and go unto the
Height, and arrive at the Place of the Rulers, all the Rulers will take
shame before you; because ye are the dregs of their matter, and ye
became Light purified more than they all. And whenever ye should arrive
at the Place of the great Invisibles with the Place of those of the
Middle, with those of (the) Right (hand), with the Place of all the
great emanations of the Light, ye will take glory together with them
all, because ye are the dregs of their matter, and ye became [233^a]
light excellent more than they all. And all the Places will hymn before
you, even until ye go unto the Places of the kingdom.

These therefore saying them the Saviour, knew Andreas clearly not only
he, but knew all the disciples in directness that they will inherit the
kingdom of the Light. They prostrated all one after (upon, MS) another
at the feet of Jesus, they cried out, they wept, they besought the
Saviour, saying, O Lord, forgive the sin of the ignorance of our
brother. Answered the Saviour, said he, I forgive and I shall forgive.
Because of this therefore dispatched me the First Mystery for me to
forgive the sins of everyone.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Half this last line is ornament: more ornament follows, and the title
of the Third Document finishes the column.]

Footnote 114:

  Legge adds: excelleth the kingdom of the twelve mysteries of the First
  Mystery and excelleth any mystery whichever, which is below them. But
  these five mysteries of the Ineffable are equal etc.




                           THE THIRD DOCUMENT
                   A PART OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR
                      [_The Interposed Fragment_]


[233^b] and those who are worthy of the Mysteries which dwell in the
Ineffable, namely, which did not proceed out: these become before the
First Mystery and according to resemblance and (with, MS) equality with
the word, that ye may understand it, so that they are the Members of the
Ineffable: and each according to the honour of his glory, the head
according to the honour of the head, and the eye according to the honour
of the eyes, and the ear according to the honour of the ears, and (so
with) the rest of the Members. So that the thing (is) manifest, that
many members are, but one body it is. This indeed I am saying in an
example with an equality with a comparison, but in truth not of form,
nor did I manifest the word in truth, but the Mystery of the Ineffable,
and every member [234^a] which (is) in him, according to the word (with)
which I compared it, namely, those who dwell unto the Mystery of the
Ineffable with those who dwell in him, and the three Spaces which (are)
after them, according to the Mysteries in one of all of these in truth.
I am the Treasury of them all, this beside which there is not other
Treasury, this which hath not his own upon the World. But yet there are
words becoming, and there are mysteries and there are Places. Now
therefore happy is he who brought the Mysteries unto the outward: and a
God is he who found these words of the Mysteries of the second Space
which is in the Middle. And a Saviour he is, and uncontainable is he who
found the words of the mysteries, with the words of the third Space
which is on the inward: and he excelleth the Universe, and he is
acceptable to those who become in that third Space, [234^b] because that
the Mystery, in which they become, with that in which they stand,
receiveth him. Because of this therefore he is equal unto them. He who
found also the words of the mysteries, these which I wrote to you
according to a comparison, because they are the members of the
Ineffable. Amen I say to you, He who found the words of those mysteries
in truth of the God, that that man, he is the first in truth, and he is
equal unto him, because of those words with the mysteries. And the
Universe also stood because of that First (One). Because of this he who
found the words of those mysteries is equal with the First (One). For
the knowledge of the comprehension of the Ineffable (is that) in which I
spake (it) with you to-day.

[235^a] Continued also Jesus in the word, said he to his disciples,
Whenever I should go unto the Light, preach ye to all the World, say
unto them, Desist not in the day with the night seeking, and hold not
yourselves back (in lower margin) even until ye find the mysteries of
the kingdom of the Light, these which will purify you and make you pure
light, and take you unto the kingdom of the Light. Say unto them,
Renounce all this World with all the matter which (is) in it, and with
all its cares, and with all its sins, in one word, with all its life
(politeia, MS), which (are) in it, that ye may be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from all the punishments which
(are) in the judgments. Say unto them, Renounce the murmuring, that ye
may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the
fire of the face [235^b] of a dog. Say unto them, Renounce the listening
that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light (Schm. supplies
this), and be delivered from the judgments of the face of a dog. Say
unto them, Renounce litigiousness, and be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light, and be delivered from the punishments of Ariel. Say unto them,
Renounce the false calumny, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light, and be delivered from the rivers of fire of the face of a
dog. Say unto them, Renounce the false witnessings, and be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light, that ye may escape, that ye may be delivered
from the river of fire of the face of a dog. Say unto them, Renounce the
boastings with the prides, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light, and be delivered from the pits of fire of Ariel. Say unto them,
Renounce the gluttony (self-lovings, MS) that ye may be [236^a] worthy
of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the judgments of
Amente. Say unto them, Renounce the garrulity that ye may be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the fire of Amente.
Say unto them, Renounce the wiles which are evil, and be worthy of the
mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the punishments which
(are) in Amente. Say unto them, Renounce the lovings of the greater
portion, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be
delivered from the rivers of flame of the face of a dog. Say unto them,
Renounce the lovings of the world that ye may be worthy of the mysteries
of the Light, and be delivered from the vesture of pitch and fire of the
face of a dog. Say unto them, Renounce the robberies, that ye may be
worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be delivered from the rivers
[236^b] of flame of Ariel. Say unto them, Renounce the words which are
evil, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be
delivered from the punishments of the rivers of flame. Say unto them,
Renounce the wickednesses, and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light,
and be delivered from the seas of fire of Ariel. Say unto them, Renounce
the unmercifulnesses, and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and
be delivered from the judgments of the faces of the dragon. Say unto
them, Renounce the angers, and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light,
and be delivered from the rivers of flame of the faces of the dragons.
Say unto them, Renounce the curse, and be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light, and be delivered from the fire of the seas of the faces of the
dragons. Say unto them, Renounce the blasphemy, and be worthy [237^a] of
the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the seas which boil of
the faces of the dragons. Say unto them, Renounce the thievings, and be
worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from Ialtabaoth.
Say unto them, Renounce the slander, and be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light, and be delivered from the rivers of fire of the face of lion.
Say unto them, Renounce the fightings and the quarrellings, and be
worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the rivers
which are boiling of Ialtabaoth. Say unto them, Renounce the ignorance,
and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be delivered from the
ministers of Ialtabaoth, with the fires of the seas. Say unto them,
Renounce the villainies, and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light,
and be delivered from all the [237^b] demons of Ialtabaoth with all his
punishments. Say unto them, Renounce the senselessness, and be worthy of
the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the seas of pitch of
Ialtabaoth which are boiling. Say unto them, Renounce the adulteries,
and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the
seas of sulphur and pitch of the face of lion. Say unto them, Renounce
the murders, and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be
delivered from the Ruler of face of crocodile, this who (is) in the
cold, the first chamber which is in the Darkness which is outer. Say
unto them, Renounce the unmercifulnesses with the impiousnesses, and be
worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from the Rulers
of the Darkness which is outer. Say unto them, Renounce the
godlessnesses [238^a] and be worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and
be delivered from the weeping with the gnashing of the teeth. Say unto
them, Renounce the witchcraft, and be worthy of the mysteries of the
Light, and be delivered from the great cold with the hail of the
Darkness which is outer. Say unto them, Renounce the blaspheming, and be
worthy of the mysteries of the Light, and be delivered from all the
punishments of the great dragon of the Darkness which is outer. Say unto
them, Renounce the teaching of error, and be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light, and be delivered from all the punishments of the great dragon
of the Darkness which is outer. Say unto those who teach in the
teachings of error, with every one who learneth through them, Woe to
you, ye, because if ye do not repent and forsake [238^b] your error, ye
will go unto the punishments of the great dragon with the Darkness which
is outer, this which is cruel greatly, and they will not cast you unto
the World for unto age, but ye will become existenceless outside. Say
unto those who will forsake the teaching of the truth of the First
Mystery, Woe to you, ye, because your punishment is evil beyond (that
of) all men. For ye will remain in the great cold, the ice with the hail
in the midst of the dragon with the Darkness which is outer, and they
will not cast you unto the World from this hour unto age, but ye will
become petrified at that place. And in the dissolution of the Universe
ye will be wasted away, and ye will become without existence unto age.

Say also further unto the men [239^a] of the World, Be quiet and receive
the mysteries of the Light and go unto the Height of the kingdom of the
Light. Say unto them, Do love of man, and be worthy of the mysteries of
the Light, and go unto the Height of the kingdom of the Light. Say unto
them, Be meek and receive the mysteries of the Light, and go unto the
Height unto the kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Be peaceable and
receive the mysteries of the Light, and go unto the Height unto the
kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Be merciful and receive the
mysteries of the Light, and go unto the Height unto the kingdom of the
Light. Say unto them, Do alms and receive the mysteries of the Light,
and go unto the Height unto the kingdom of the Light. Say unto them,
[239^b] Minister unto the poor with those who are sick, with those who
are paralysed, and receive the mysteries of the Light, and go unto the
Height unto the kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Do love of God and
receive the mysteries of the Light, and go unto the Height unto the
kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Be righteous and receive the
mysteries, and go unto the Height unto the kingdom of the Light. Say
unto them, Be good and receive the mysteries, and go unto the Height
unto the kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Renounce the Universe, and
receive the mysteries of the Light, and go unto the Height unto the
kingdom of the Light.

These are all the limits of the roads for those who are worthy of the
mysteries of the Light. These therefore of this kind who renounced this
renunciation, give to them [240^a] the mysteries of the Light, and hide
them not from them at all, even if they are sinners and they became in
every sin with every unlawfulness, all which I said unto you of the
World, that they should turn and repent and should become in the
submission which I say to you now, Give to them the mysteries of the
kingdom of the Light, do not hide them from them at all, for because of
the sinfulness I (we, MS) brought the mysteries unto the World, that I
should forgive all their sins which they did from the first. Because of
this therefore I said unto you once, I came not to invite the righteous.
Now therefore I brought the mysteries, that they should forgive the sins
of every one, and take them unto the kingdom of the Light: for the
mysteries, they [240^b] are the free-gift of the First Mystery, for him
to blot out the sins with the unlawfulness of all the sinners.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Maria, said she to the Saviour, My Lord, then
there is man righteous, being complete in all the righteousness, and
that man having not any sin at all.—Such a one they will torment him in
the punishments with the judgments, or otherwise? Or otherwise rather,
that man they will take away in unto the kingdom of the heavens, or not?
Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, A man righteous, this being
complete in all the righteousness, and he did not any sin [241^a] ever,
and such a one having not received any mystery of the Light ever,
whenever should happen the time (of his) coming out of the body,
immediately are wont to come the Receivers of the one of the great
Triple powers, these in whom there is a great (one), and they (will)
carry off the soul of that man from the Receivers of Contentious (ones),
and spend three days moving round with it in all creations of the World.
After the three days they are wont to take it down unto the Chaos, and
take it through in all the punishments of the judgments, and send it
unto all the judgments. And the fires of the Chaos are not wont to
molest it greatly, but [241^b] in part they are wont to molest it for a
little time: and in haste quickly they are wont to have mercy on it and
bring it up from the Chaoses, and take it on the road of the Middle
through all those Rulers. And they are not wont to punish it in their
judgments which (are) cruel, but the fires of their Places are wont to
molest it in part: and whenever they should take it unto the Place of
Iakhthanabas the unmerciful, they are not wont to be able to punish it,
indeed at least in his evil judgments, but he is wont to hold it down
for a little time, while the fire of his punishments molesteth it in
part. And also speedily they are wont to have mercy on it in those their
Places. [242^a] And they are not wont to take it out of the Aeons, that
the Rulers of their Aeon should not take it away in the firmaments, but
they are wont to take it through the road of the light of the sun and
take it up (close) to the Virgin of the Light, until she should prove it
and find it free from sin, and she is not wont to cause them to take it
unto the Light, because the sign of the kingdom of the Mystery is not
becoming with it, but she is wont to seal it in a seal which is
excellent, and cause them to cast it unto the body among the Aeons of
the righteousness: this body which is about to become good, and find the
sign of the mysteries of the Light and inherit the kingdom of the Light
unto age. If that (one) sinneth once or twice or thrice, this, also,
they will reject unto the World according to the type of the sins which
he did, these of which I shall say their types unto you, [242^b]
whenever I should finish saying unto you the Distribution of the
Universe. But Amen, amen I say unto you, Even if a man (is) righteous
having not done any sin at all, it is impossible for them to take him
unto the kingdom of the Light, because that the sign of the kingdom, of
the mysteries is not becoming with him, in one word, it is impossible to
take the soul unto the Light without the mysteries of the kingdom of the
Light.

It happened therefore, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, came forward Iohannes, said he, My Lord, then if a man,
sinner, lawbreaker, being complete in every unlawfulness; and he ceased
from all of them, because of the kingdom of the heavens, and he
renounced all the World with all its matter which (is) in it; and we
give to him from the beginning the mysteries [243^a] of the Light, these
which (are) in the first Space from without (the outward part, MS); and
whenever he should receive the mysteries, after a little more time he
turned and transgressed, and also after these he turned and ceased from
every sin; and he turned and renounced all the World with all the matter
which is in it, and cometh also, and becometh in a great repentance; and
we know in truth that he wisheth for God; and we give to him the second
mystery of the first Space, these which are on the outward part:
likewise also again he turned and transgressed, and became also in the
sins of the World; and also after these he turned and ceased from the
sins of the World, and further he renounced all the World with all the
matter which is in it; and further he became in a great repentance; and
we knew in an exactness, and [243^b] not being hypocritical; and we
turned and gave to him the mysteries of the beginning, these (which)
become in the first Space from without (the outward part, MS). Likewise
also he turned and sinned and became in every type (type type, MS),
wishest thou for us to forgive him until as far as seven times, and we
(should) give to him the mysteries, these which are in the first Space
from within (the inward part, MS) until as far as seven times, or
otherwise. Answered also the Saviour, said he to Iohannes, Not only
forgive to him as far as seven times, but Amen I say to you, Forgive him
as far as seven times of a multitude of times: and give to him every
time the mysteries from the beginning, these which are in the first
Space from without (the outward part, MS): perhaps indeed ye will gain
the soul of that brother, and he (will) inherit the kingdom of the
Light. Because of this when ye had asked me once, saying, Whenever
[244^a] our brother should sin against us, wishest thou for us to
forgive to him as far as seven times? I answered, I said to you in a
parable, saying, Not only as far as seven times, but as far as seven of
seventy times. Now therefore forgive to him a multitude of times, and
give to him every time the mysteries which (are) on the outward part,
these which are in the first Space: perhaps indeed ye (will) gain the
soul of that brother, and he (will) inherit the kingdom of the Light.
Amen, amen I say to you, He who will vivify one soul, and deliver it,
beside the glory which he hath in the kingdom of the Light he will
receive other glory on account of the soul which he delivered: so that
he who will deliver a multitude of souls, beside the glory which he hath
in (the kingdom of the Light) [244^b] he will receive other multitude of
glory on account of the souls which he delivered. These therefore having
said them the Saviour, sprang up Iohannes said he, My Lord, bear with
me, seeking from thee, for from now I am about to begin to seek from
thee concerning everything, concerning the manner in which we are to
preach to the mankind. If therefore that brother, whenever I should give
to him a mystery among the mysteries of the beginning, these which
become in the first Space from without (the outward part, MS), whenever
I should give to him a multitude of mysteries, and he doeth not that
which is worthy of the kingdom of the heavens, wishest thou for us to
pass him on in unto the mysteries of the second Space, perhaps we
(shall) gain the soul of that brother, and he (will) turn and repent and
inherit the kingdom of the Light? Wishest thou for us to pass him on in
[245^a] unto the mysteries or otherwise, these which (are) in the second
Space? But answered the Saviour said he to Iohannes, If a brother is
being not hypocritical, but wisheth for God in truth, ye having given to
him a multitude of times the mysteries of the beginning, and this
because of the compulsion of the elements of the Destiny, he having not
done that which is worthy of the mysteries of the kingdom of the Light,
forgive to him, pass him on in, give to him the first mystery which is
in the second Space: perhaps indeed ye (will) gain the soul of that
brother. And if, having not done that which is worthy of the mysteries
of the Light, and he did the transgression with every sin (the sins the
sins, MS) and also after these he turned, he became in a great
repentance, and he renounced all the World, and he ceased from all the
sins of the World, and ye knew in an exactness that [245^b] he was not
being hypocritical, but wishing for God in truth, turn again, forgive to
him, pass him on inwards, give to him the second mystery in the second
Space of the First Mystery: perhaps indeed ye (will) gain the soul of
that brother and he (will) inherit the kingdom of the Light. And also if
he did not do that which is worthy of the mysteries, and he became in
the transgression with every sin (the sins the sins, MS) and also after
these he turned, he became in a great repentance, he renounced all the
World with all its matter which is in it, and he ceased from the sins of
the World, and ye know truly that he was not being hypocritical but
wishing for God of the truth, turn ye again forgive to him, (and receive
from him his repentance, M) because a compassion of mercy is the First
Mystery: pass on, also, that man inwards, give [246^a] to him the three
mysteries one after (upon, MS) another in the second Space of the First
Mystery. If that man should transgress and become in every sin (the sins
the sins, MS) ye shall not forgive to him from this hour, nor shall ye
receive from him his repentances, but let him become among you as a
scandal and as transgressor: for Amen I say to you, Those three
mysteries will become to him witness unto his last repentance, and he
hath not repentance from that hour. Amen I say unto you, That man they
have not cast back his soul unto the World which is on the Height from
this hour, but it will become in the dwelling place of the dragon of the
Darkness which is outer. [246^b] For concerning the souls of these men
of this kind, I said unto you once in a parable saying, Whenever thy
brother sinneth against thee reprove him (thee, MS) between thee and him
alone. If he should hearken unto thee, thou wilt gain thy brother. If he
should not hearken unto thee, take with thee another, if he should not
hearken unto thee with the other, bring him unto the ecclesia, if he
should not hearken unto the others, let him become with you as a
scandal, [and] which is this, if he should not be profitable in the
first mystery, give to him the second; and if he should not be
profitable in the second, give to him the three one after another,
namely, the ecclesia, and if he should not be profitable in the third
mystery, [247^a] let him become with you as scandal and as transgressor.
And the word which I said unto you once, that upon witness two, as far
as three witnesses, every word shall stand, namely, those three
mysteries will be witness unto his last repentance: and Amen I say unto
you, Whenever that man should repent, having not any mystery (to)
forgive to him his sins, nor have they received his repentance from him,
nor have they heard him at all from any of the mysteries except from the
first mystery of the First Mystery with the mystery of the Ineffable.
These only are those which will receive the repentance of that man from
him, and they will forgive his sins, because that compassions of mercy
are those Mysteries, forgiving at every time. These therefore [247^b]
having said them the Saviour, continued Iohannes, said he to the
Saviour, My Lord, then if a brother, sinner greatly, having renounced
all the World with the matter which is in it, with all its sins, and
with all its cares and we proved him and knew that he (was) not becoming
in guile with hypocrisy but he is wishing to become in verity with
truth, and ye know that he was worthy of the mysteries of the second
Space or the third, wishest thou once for us to give to him out of the
mysteries of the second Space or the third, he having not yet received
mystery at all of the kingdom of the Light, wishest thou for us to give
to him, or otherwise? But answered the Saviour, said he to Iohannes in
the midst of the disciples, [248^a] Whenever ye know in an exactness
that that man renounced all the World with all its cares with all its
life (politeia, MS) with all its sins, and ye know in truth that he
becometh not in guile nor was he becoming in hypocrisy, nor was he
becoming curious that he should know the (things) of the mysteries that
they are being of what kind; but he is wishing for God in truth, this of
this kind, hide them not from him, but give to him out of the mysteries
of the second Space with the third. And ye also (shall) prove that he is
worthy of which mystery: and that which he is worthy of, give to him and
hide not from him: (for) otherwise whenever ye should hide (them) from
him, ye are guilty of a great offence. [248^b] If ye should give to him
once in the second Space or in the third, and he (should) turn also and
do sin, ye shall continue also the second time until as far as the third
time. If also he should sin, ye shall not continue to give to him,
because those three mysteries will become to him witness in his last
repentance, and Amen I say unto you, He who will give mystery to that
man again in the second Space or in the third, he is guilty of a great
offence. But let him become with you as transgressor and as scandal. And
Amen I say unto you, That man they have not to cast back his soul unto
the World from this hour, but his [249^a] dwelling place is in the midst
of the mouth of the dragon of the Darkness which is outer, the place of
the weeping with the gnashing of the teeth. And in the dissolution of
the World his soul will become petrified and consumed by the cold which
is cruel with the fire which is cruel greatly, and it will become
non-existent unto age. But if also yet whenever he should turn and
renounce all the World with all its cares with all its sins, and become
in a great life (politeia, MS) with a great repentance, no mystery
having been received from his repentance, nor they having heard of it,
for them to have mercy on him and receive from him his repentance and
forgive to him his sins, except the mystery of the First Mystery, and
with the mystery of the Ineffable. These only are they who will receive
the repentance of that man [249^b] from him and will forgive his sins,
because that compassions of mercy are those Mysteries, and they are
forgivenesses of sin at every time. But these having said them the
Saviour, continued also Iohannes, said he, My Lord, suffer me seeking
from thee, and be not angry with me, for I am seeking after every thing
in an exactness with a certainty, concerning the manner (in) which we
shall preach to the men of the World. But answered the Saviour, said he
to Iohannes, Seek after every thing which thou seekest after, and I
shall reveal to thee more and more in boldness without parable, or in an
exactness. But answered Iohannes, said he, My Lord, whenever we should
come preaching and (should) go into a city or a village, and (should)
come out in front of us [250^a] the men of that city, and we know not
what they are, being in great guile with great hypocrisy, and they
(should) receive us unto them, and take us in unto their house wishing
to make trial of the mysteries of the kingdom of the Light; and become
playing the hypocrite with us in the subjection, and we should think
that they are wishing for God; and we (should) give to them the
mysteries of the kingdom of the Light, and after these (things) we
(should) know that they did not that which is worthy of the mystery, and
we (should) know that they played the hypocrite with us, and they became
with guile toward us, and the mysteries also they did them in derision
from place to place, trying us and also our mysteries, then what is the
thing which will happen to these of this kind? But answered the Saviour,
said he to [250^b] Iohannes, Whenever ye should go into a city or a
village, the house unto which ye will go in, and they receive you unto
them, give to them a mystery: if they are worthy then ye will gain their
souls and they (will) inherit the kingdom of the Light. But if they
should not be worthy, but being with guile unto you, and should do the
mysteries also in derision, trying you with the mysteries also, then cry
up unto the first mystery of the First Mystery, this which is wont to
have mercy on every one: say, Even, the mystery which we gave to these
souls impious and lawbreaking, having not done that which is worthy of
the mystery even, but they made us for derision, return the mystery unto
us, and make them alien to the mystery of thy kingdom unto age. And
shake off the dust [251^a] of your feet unto a witness to them, saying
to them, Your souls shall become as the dust of your house. And Amen I
say to you, In that hour will return to you every mystery which ye gave
to them, and they will take them away from them every word with every
mystery of the Place unto which they received figure. Concerning the men
therefore of this kind I said unto you in a parable once, saying, The
house unto which ye go in and they receive you unto it, say to them, The
peace to you. And if they are worthy, let your peace come upon them, and
if they are not worthy, let it return unto you your peace, namely, if
those men do that which is worthy of the mysteries [251^b] and wishing
for God of the truth, then give to them the mysteries of the kingdom of
the Light. But if rather they are playing the hypocrite with you, and
they are being with guile unto you, ye having not known, and ye gave to
them the mysteries of the kingdom of the Light; and also after these
(things) they did the mysteries in derision, and they made trial also of
you with the mysteries also, do the first mystery of the First Mystery
and he will make return unto you every mystery which ye gave to them
(him, MS). And he will make them alien to the mysteries of the Light
unto age. And these men of this kind, [and] they will not cast them back
unto the World from this hour: but Amen I say unto you, Their dwelling
place shall (be) in the midst of the mouth of the dragon of the Darkness
which is outer. But if yet in a time of repentance they should renounce
[252^a] all the World, with all the matter which is in it, with all the
sins of the world, and they (are they) who become in all the subjection
to the mysteries of the Light, not any Mystery heard them, nor have they
forgiven their sins except by the one mystery of the Ineffable, this
which is wont to be merciful to every one and forgiveth the sins of
every one.

It happened, Jesus having finished saying these words unto his
disciples, worshipped Maria unto the feet of Jesus, she kissed them said
she, Maria, My Lord suffer me seeking from thee, and be not angry with
me. Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Seek after that which thou
wishest to seek after, and I shall reveal it to thee boldly. But
answered Mariham, said she, My Lord, [252^b] then if a brother good
(agathos) and who is good (coptic word), we having filled him with all
mysteries of the Light, and that brother having a brother or a kinsman,
in one word, being a man anyhow, and this (one) being a sinner and being
impious, or otherwise, he being not a sinner, and this one of this kind
came out of the body, and the heart of the brother good, being pained
and being grieved for him because he becometh in judgments with
punishments. Now therefore, my Lord, what is that which we shall do
until they remove him out of the punishments with the judgments which
(are) cruel? But answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Because of this
word therefore I said unto you at another time, but hear therefore that
I may say in answer that ye may become, [253^a] (that) ye should fulfil
every mystery, that they should call of [against] you, Those who are
completed with every mystery. Now therefore every man sinner, or
otherwise being not sinners, not only that whenever ye should wish for
them to take them from the judgments with the punishments which (are)
cruel, but (also) for them to remove them unto a righteous body, this
which will find the mysteries of the Godhead, and go unto the Height and
inherit the kingdom of the Light, do the third mystery of the Ineffable
and say ye, Take away the soul of these manhoods, this (man) which we
think of in our heart, take him out of every punishment of the Rulers,
and hasten quickly, and take it (close) to the Virgin of the Light: and
in the same month, the Virgin of the Light (will) seal [253^b] him with
a seal more excellent, and in the same month, let the Virgin of the
Light cast him unto a body about to become righteous and become good,
and he (will) go unto the Height and inherit the kingdom of the Light.
But these whenever ye should say them, Amen I say unto you, They are
wont to hasten all those who work in all the array of the judgments of
the Rulers, and give that soul unto hands of one another, even until
they take it up to the Virgin of the Light, and the Virgin of the Light
is wont to seal it with a sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable, and is
wont to give it to her Receivers, and the Receivers to cast it unto a
body being about to be righteous, and he being about to find the
mysteries of the Light and become good, and go unto the Height [254^a]
and inherit the kingdom of the Light. Behold, this is (that) which ye
ask me of. Answered Maria, said she, Now therefore, my Lord, then thou
didst not bring Mysteries indeed unto the World, that the man should not
die by the death which is reckoned unto him by the Rulers of the
Destiny: because if it is being reckoned unto one for to die by the
sword, or for to die by the waters or in torture with torment with
violence which (are) in the laws, or by other evil deaths, then thou
didst not bring mystery unto the world, that the man should not die
among them by the Rulers of the Destiny, but that he should die in a
death sudden, that he should not suffer any tribulation by these deaths
of this kind: because that, we, very many are those who are pursuing us
[254^b] because of thee, and we, many are those who persecute us because
of thy name, that whenever they should torment us we should say the
mysteries and come out of the body immediately having not suffered any
tribulation. Answered the Saviour, said he to all his disciples, Because
of this word which ye ask me of, I said to you at another time: but hear
also that I may say unto you at another time: not only ye but every man
who will complete the first mystery (of the First Mystery of the
Ineffable, he who will do therefore that Mystery, M), and (will)
complete it (in) its figures with all its types with its positions,
doing indeed it and coming not out of body, but after completing that
mystery with its figure with all its type, afterwards therefore, every
time at which he will name that mystery, [255^a] he will be delivered
from all those which are reckoned unto him by the Rulers of the Destiny,
and at that hour he cometh out of the body of the matter of the Rulers,
and his soul will become a great effluence of Light, and (will) fly unto
the Height, and (will) pass through every Place of the Rulers with every
Place of the Light, until it should go unto the Place of its Kingdom:
neither is it wont to give answer nor defence in any Place, for it is
one without symbol.

These therefore having said them Jesus, added Maria, she prostrated at
the feet of Jesus, she kissed them, said she, My Lord, yet I shall seek
from thee, Reveal to us and hide not from us. Answered Jesus, said he to
Maria, Seek after that which ye seek after, [255^b] and I shall reveal
to you in boldness without parable. Answered Maria, said she, My Lord,
then thou didst not bring mystery unto the world because of the poverty
with the riches and because of the weakness with the strength, and
because of the diseased with the bodies which are sound, in one word,
because of all these kinds, that whenever we should go in the places of
the country, and they should not believe us, and they should not hearken
unto our words, and we should do a mystery of this kind in those places,
that they should know truth truly that we are preaching the words of
(the Lord of) the Universe? Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria in
the midst of the disciples, Concerning this mystery of which ye seek
from me, I gave [256^a] it to you at another time, but I shall repeat
also and say unto you the word. Now therefore Maria, not only ye but
every man who will complete the mystery of the raising of the dead, this
is wont to cure the demons with every pain, with every sickness, and
with the blind, and with the lame, with the maimed, with the dumb, with
the deaf, this I gave to you once. He who taketh up a mystery and
completeth it, afterwards therefore whenever he should ask any (every)
thing, poverty and riches, weakness and strength, disease and sound
body, with every healing of the body, and with the raising of the dead,
and to cure the lame with the blind with the deaf with the dumb, with
every sickness with every pain, in one word, he who will complete that
mystery and ask (every) thing which I said, it will [256^b] happen to
him instantly.

These therefore having said them the Saviour, came forward the
disciples, they cried out all one after (upon, MS) another, saying, O
Saviour, thou distracted us greatly with the greatnesses which thou
sayest to us, and because thou tookest away our souls, and they became
compelled to come out of us in unto thee, (for) because that ones out of
thee they are. Now therefore because of these greatnesses were
distracted our souls these which thou sayest unto us, and they were
pressed greatly greatly unto a wishing to come out of us unto the Height
unto the Place of thy kingdom. These therefore having said them the
disciples, added also the Saviour, said he to his disciples, Whenever ye
should go to cities or kingdoms or countries, preach to them at first,
saying, Seek at every hour, and [257^a] leave not off even until ye find
the mysteries of the Light, these which will take you in unto the
kingdom of the Light. Say unto them, Take heed unto you of the teachings
of error, otherwise there are a multitude coming in my name saying, I
am, being not I, and they will deceive a multitude. Now therefore every
man who cometh (close) to you and believe you, and hearken unto your
words, and do that (which is) worthy of the mysteries of the Light, then
give to them the mysteries of the Light, and hide not them from them:
and he who is worthy of the mysteries which are high, give them to him,
and he who is worthy of the mysteries which are lower, give them to him,
and hide not any from any. The mystery indeed of the raising the dead
and curing the sicknesses, give it not to any, nor teach in it: because
that mystery is the (mystery) of the Rulers, it with all its namings.
Because of this therefore [257^b] give it not to any, nor teach in it,
even until ye establish the faith in all the World: that whenever ye
should come into cities or countries and they do not receive you unto
them, and they believe you not and they hearken not unto your words, and
ye should raise dead (ones) in those places, and cure the lame with the
blind with the sicknesses which are various in those places: and through
you all these of this kind they will believe you, that ye are preaching
the God of the Universe, and they (will) believe every word from you:
because of this therefore I gave to you that mystery, even until ye
establish the faith in all the World. These therefore having said them
the Saviour, he added also in the word, said he to Maria, Now therefore
hear, Maria, concerning [258^a] the word of which thou sought from me,
What it is which compelleth the man even until he doeth sin. Now
therefore they are wont to bear the child, the power in him being small,
and being small in him the soul, and being small in him the counterfeit
spirit also in one word, being small the three together: having not any
of them any perception of thing whether good or evil, from the weight of
the heedlessness which weigheth greatly: and also being small the body
also: and the child is wont to eat out of the meats of the world of the
Rulers; and is wont the power to attract to it(self) from the particle
of the power which is in the meats, and is wont the soul to attract to
it(self) from the particle of the soul which is in the meats, and is
wont the counterfeit spirit to attract to it(self) from the particle of
the evil which is in [258^b] the meats with its lusts, and is wont the
body also to attract to itself the matter, which perceiveth not which is
in the meats. The Fate, indeed is not wont to receive out of the meats,
because that it is not mixed up with them (the others), but in the
condition in which it is wont to come unto the World it is wont to go
also in it: and gradually (by little, little, MS) are wont the power
with the soul with the counterfeit spirit to become great, and each of
them is wont to perceive according to his nature. The power indeed is
wont to perceive to seek after the Light of the Height, the soul also is
wont to perceive to seek after the Place of the righteousness this which
is mixed, namely the Place of the Confusion, the counterfeit spirit also
is wont to seek after all evil with the lusts with every sin, the body
also is not wont to perceive anything, except it taketh up power out of
the matter. [259^a] And then they are wont to perceive, each of the
three, according to his nature. And the Contentious ones also are wont
to tell to the Ministers (that) they should follow them, and become
witness to every sin which they do, concerning the manner in which they
will punish them in the judgments, and after these also, the counterfeit
spirit is wont to take notice and perceive all the sins with the evil,
which order unto the soul the Rulers of the great Destiny; and it maketh
them of the soul. And is wont the power which is within to move the
soul, for it to seek after the Place of the Light, and of all the
Godhead: and is wont the counterfeit spirit to turn aside the soul, and
it is wont to compel it and cause it to do all his unlawfulnesses and
with all his passions with all its sins persevering (in them). And is
wont [259^b] to remain imparting to the soul, and becoming enemy unto
it, causing it to do all these evils with all these sins. And he is wont
to instigate the Contentious ministers that they should become witness
against her in every sin which it will cause her to do: still also
coming, she being about to rest herself in the night (and) in the day,
it is wont to move her in dreams or in lusts of the World. And it is
wont to cause her to lust after everything of the World, in one word, it
is wont to urge her unto all things which order to it the Rulers. And it
is wont to become enemy with the soul causing her to do the (things)
which she would not. Now therefore Maria, then this is the enemy of the
soul, and this is that which compelleth her, even until she doeth every
sin. Now therefore whenever should become completed the time of that
man, at first indeed is wont to come out the Fate and lead the man
[260^a] in unto the death by the Rulers with their bonds, these in which
they were bound by the Destiny: and afterwards are wont to come the
Contentious Receivers, and bring that soul out of the body, and
afterwards are wont the Contentious Receivers they are wont to spend
three days going about with that soul in all the Places, sending it unto
all the Aeons of the World: (while) followeth after that soul the
counterfeit spirit with the Fate, and is wont the power to withdraw
(close) to the Virgin of the Light. And after the three days are wont
the Contentious Receivers they are wont to bring that soul down down
unto Amente of the Chaos. And whenever they should bring her down unto
the Chaos they are wont to deliver her to those who punish. And are wont
the [260^b] Receivers to withdraw unto their Places according to the
arrangement of the works of the Rulers, because of the coming out of the
souls. And is wont the counterfeit spirit, it is wont to become Receiver
of the soul, allotting her, convicting her according to the punishment,
because of the sins which it caused her to do. And it is wont to become
in a great enmity towards the soul, and whenever the soul should
complete the punishments in the Chaoses according to the sins which she
did, is wont the counterfeit to bring her up from the Chaoses allotting
her, convicting her from Place to Place because of the sins which she
did. And is wont to bring her out on the road of the Rulers of the
Middle. And whenever he should reach them, they are wont to seek from
her the mysteries of the Fate. And if she did not find them, they are
wont to seek from their Fate. And are wont those Rulers, they are wont
to punish that soul [261^a] according to the sins for which she is
worthy (to be punished). These I shall say unto you, viz.: the type of
their punishment in the Distribution of the Universe. Whenever therefore
it should happen, whenever should be completed the time of the
punishment of that soul in the judgments of the Rulers of the Middle, is
wont the counterfeit spirit, it is wont to bring the soul up from all
the Places of the Rulers of the Middle, it is wont to take her up before
the light of the sun according to the commandment of the first man Ieou:
and it is wont to take her (close) to the judge the Virgin of the Light.
She is wont to prove that soul, and find it being a sinful soul. And she
is wont to cast her power of light in unto her, because of setting up
the soul and the body and the sharing of the perception. These I shall
say, viz.: their type, unto you in the Distribution of the Universe.
[261^b] And is wont the Virgin of the Light, she is wont to seal that
soul and lay her on one of her Receivers, and causeth them to cast her
(him, MS) into a body worthy of the sins which she did: and Amen I say
unto you that she shall not release that soul from the changes of the
body, having not given her last cycle (of changes) according to the
(things) which are worthy (for her). These all therefore I shall say
their type unto you with the type of the bodies unto which they shall
cast them according to the sins of every soul, these I shall say unto
you all (of them), whenever I should finish saying to you the
Distribution of the Universe. Added also Jesus in the word, said he, If
also a soul is which is not wont to hearken unto the counterfeit spirit
(in) all his works, and this (soul) became good, she received the
mysteries of the Light, these which (are) in the second Space, or indeed
these [262^a] which (are) in the third Space, these which (are) from
within (on the inward part, MS): whenever should be completed the time
of that soul (of coming) out of the body; and is wont the counterfeit
spirit, it is wont to follow that soul, it with the Fate, it is wont to
follow in the road by which it will go unto the Height. And having not
yet been distant from the Height, she is wont to say the mystery of the
loosing of her seals, with all the bonds of the counterfeit spirit,
these with which the Rulers bound it in unto the soul. And whenever they
should say them, are wont to be loosed the bonds of the counterfeit
spirit, and it is (wont) to cease coming in unto that soul, and it is
wont to release the soul according to the commands which ordered unto it
the Rulers of the great Destiny, saying to it, Release not this soul
except she say unto thee the mystery of the loosing of every seal, these
in which we bound thee in unto [262^b] the soul. Whenever it should
happen therefore, whenever the soul, whenever she should say the mystery
of the loosing of the seals with all the bonds of the counterfeit
spirit, and (whenever) it ceaseth coming in unto the soul, and ceaseth
being bound in unto her, and in that hour it is wont to say a mystery
and dismiss the Fate unto her Place (close) to the Rulers which (are) in
the road of the Middle. And she is wont to say the mystery, and dismiss
the counterfeit spirit (close) to the Rulers of the Destiny unto the
Place in which they bound it unto her. And in that hour she is wont to
become a great effluence of light, becoming of light greatly greatly,
and are wont the Contentious Receivers, these which brought her out of
the body, they are wont to fear before the light of that soul, and fall
down upon their face. And in that hour is wont that soul, she is wont to
become a great effluence of light, and she is wont to [263^a] become
wing of light all of her, and to pass through every Place of the Rulers
with all the arrays of the Light, even until she goeth unto the Place of
her kingdom unto which she received mystery. If also it is a soul,
having received mystery in the first Space, reckoning from without
(which is from without, MS), and after receiving the mysteries and
completing them, and turned (not M) and committed sin again, after the
completion of the mysteries; and also if should be completed the time of
the coming out of that soul, are wont to come the Contentious Receivers
and bring that soul out of the body: and is wont the Fate with the
counterfeit spirit, they are wont to follow that soul because that the
counterfeit spirit is being bound in unto her with the seals and the
bonds of the Rulers, it is wont to follow after that soul walking on the
roads of the counterfeit spirit: she is wont to say the mystery of the
loosening [263^b] of all the bonds and all the seals with which the
Rulers bound the counterfeit spirit in unto the soul. And whenever
should the soul say the mystery of the loosening of the seals,
immediately are wont to be loosened the bonds of the seals, these which
bound the counterfeit spirit in unto the soul. And whenever the soul,
whenever she should say the mystery of the loosening of the seals, and
immediately is wont to be loosened the counterfeit spirit; and it is
wont to cease coming in against the soul, and it ceaseth from allotting
the soul. And immediately is wont to say a mystery, the soul, and hold
down the counterfeit spirit with the Fate and dismiss them from
following her. But there is not any of them being in their (own)
authority: but she is being in her (their, MS) authority: and
immediately are wont the Receiver of that soul and the mysteries which
she received, they are wont to come and snatch away that soul from
[264^a] the Contentious Receiver. And are wont the Receivers, they are
wont to withdraw unto the works of the Rulers in regard to the
arrangement for the bringing out of the souls. And are wont the
Receivers also of that soul, these which belong unto the Light, they are
wont to become wing of light unto that soul, and she becometh vesture of
light unto her(self). And they are not wont to take her out of the
Chaoses, because it is not right to take a soul having received mystery
out of the Chaoses, but they are wont to take her by the road of the
Rulers of the Middle: and whenever she should arrive at the Rulers of
the Middle, are wont to come out to meet the soul those Rulers, becoming
in a great fear with a flame which is fierce with varied faces, in one
word, being in a great fear, there being not measure unto it. And
immediately is wont the soul, she is wont to say the mystery of their
defence. And they are wont to fear greatly and (to) fall upon their face
being in fear [264^b] before the mystery which she said, and before her
defence. And is wont that soul, she is wont to dismiss them to their
Fate, saying to them, Receive to you your Fate. I am not coming unto
your Place from this hour. I became strange unto you unto age, being
about to go unto the Place of mine inheritance. But these whenever
should finish saying them the soul, are wont the Receivers of the Light,
they are wont to fly with her unto the Height, and they are wont to take
her out of the Aeons of the Destiny, she giving the defence of the Place
to it with its seal, these which I shall say unto you in the
Distribution of the mysteries. And she is wont to give to the Rulers the
counterfeit spirit, and she is wont to say unto them the mystery of the
bonds with which they bound it in unto her (him, MS). And she is wont to
say to them, Come (take) your counterfeit spirit. I am not coming unto
your Place from this hour, I became strange unto you unto age. And she
is wont to give the seal of each [265^a] to him with his defence. But
these whenever should finish saying the soul, are wont the Receivers of
the Light, they are wont to fly with her unto the Height, and they are
wont to take her out of the Aeons of the Destiny, and they are wont to
take her up in all the Aeons, she giving the defence of each Place to
it, with the defence of all the Places, with the seals of (with, MS) the
Tyrants of the King the Adamas. And she is wont to give the defence to
all the Rulers of all the Places of the Left, these which I shall say
unto you all their defences with their seals, at the time (in) which I
shall say unto you at the Distribution of the mysteries. And also are
wont these Receivers, they are wont to take that soul up to the Virgin
of the Light, and also is wont that soul, she is wont to give to the
Virgin of the Light the seals with the glory of the hymn. And is wont
[265^b] the Virgin of the Light and with the other seven Virgins of the
Light, they are all wont to prove that soul, and all to find their signs
in her, with their seals with their baptisms with their chrisms. And is
wont the Virgin of the Light, she is wont to seal that soul; and the
Receivers of the Light are wont to baptise that soul, and give to her
the chrism spiritual. And are wont each of the Virgins of the Light,
they are wont to seal her with their seals, and also are wont the
Receivers of the Light, they are wont to deliver her up to the great
Sabaoth the good, this who (is) at the gate of the Life in the Place of
those of the Right (hand), this whom they are wont to call, The Father.
And is wont that soul, she is wont to give the glory of the hymn with
his seals with his defences. And [266^a] is wont Sabaoth the great,
good, he is wont to seal her with his seals. And is wont the soul, she
is wont to give her knowledge with the glory of the hymns with the seals
of every Place of those of the Right (hand), they are all wont to seal
her with their seals. And is wont Melkhisedek the great Receiver of the
Light, this who (is) in the Place of those of the Right (hand), he is
wont to seal that soul. And are wont the Receivers of Melkhisedek, they
are wont to seal that soul, and to receive her unto the Treasury of the
Light. And she is wont to give the glory with the honour with the
respect of the hymns with all the seals of all the Places of the Light.
And are wont those of all the Places of the Treasury of the Light, they
are wont to seal her with their seals. And she is wont to go unto the
Place of her inheritance. [266^b] These therefore the Saviour having
said them unto his disciples, said he to them, Understand ye in what
manner I am speaking with you? Sprang up again Maria, said she, Yea, my
Lord, I understand in what manner thou art speaking with me, and I shall
comprehend all of them. Now therefore concerning these words which thou
sayest my understanding maketh four meanings in me, and my
Light-dweller, it led and it was glad, it boiled in me wishing to come
out of me and to go in unto thee. Now therefore, My Lord, hear that I
may say unto thee the four meanings which became in me. The first
meaning indeed which happened in me (is) concerning the word which thou
saidst, Now therefore is wont the soul, she is wont to give the defence
with the seal to all the Rulers who (are) in the Place of the King, the
Adamas, and she is wont to give the defence [267^a] with the honour with
the glory of all their seals with the hymn of the Places of the Light.
Concerning this word therefore which thou saidst unto us once, they
having brought to thee the stater, thou sawest it being of silver and
brass, thou soughtest, That of whom is this image? Said they, That of
the King it is. But thou having seen it, that it was mixed in silver and
brass, saidst thou, Give the part, that of the King to the King. And
that of the God to the God, namely, whenever the soul should receive
mystery she is wont to give the defence to all the Rulers with the Place
of the King, the Adamas. And the soul is wont to give the honour with
the glory to those of all the Places of the Light. And the word, It
shone when thou hadst seen it, being of silver and brass. That is the
type of this, the power of the Light being in it, namely, the silver
[267^b] which is choice. And being in her the counterfeit spirit,
namely, the material brass. Then this, my Lord, is the first meaning.
The second meaning also which thou finishedst saying to us now
concerning the soul which receiveth mystery, whenever it should come
unto the Place of the Rulers of the road of the Middle, and they are
wont to come out before her in a great fear greatly greatly, and is wont
the soul, she is wont to give to them (him, MS) the mystery of the fear.
And they (she, MS) are wont to fear before her, and she is wont to give
the Fate unto her Place, and she is wont to give the counterfeit spirit
unto its Place, and she is wont to give the defence with the seals to
each of the Rulers who (are) upon the roads, and she is wont to give the
honour with the glory with the respect of the seals with the hymns to
those of all the Places of the Light. Concerning this word, my Lord,
[268^a] which thou saidst by the mouth of Paulos our brother once, Give
the tribute to him of the tribute, and give the fear to him of the fear,
give the custom to him of the custom, and give the honour to him of the
honour, and give the respect to him of the respect, and do not owe
anything to anyone. Which (is) this My Lord, The soul who receiveth
mystery is wont to give the defence to all the Places, This is, my Lord,
the second meaning. The third meaning also concerning the word which
thou saidst unto us once, The counterfeit spirit is wont to become enemy
unto the soul, causing it to do all the sins and all the passions, and
it is wont to convict her in the punishment concerning all the sins
which it caused her to do, in one word, it is wont to be enemy unto the
soul in every form. Concerning this word therefore which thou saidst
unto us once, The enemies of the man are his domestics [268^b] namely
the domestics of the soul are the counterfeit spirit with the Fate,
these which are enemy unto the soul at every time causing her to do
every sin with every wickedness. Then this, my Lord, is the third
meaning. The fourth meaning also concerning the word which thou saidst,
If the soul should come out of the body, and walk in the road of the
counterfeit spirit, and whenever it should not find the mystery of the
loosening of all the bonds with the seals, these which are bound to the
counterfeit spirit, and (yet) it should cease to be allotted unto her.
If therefore she should not find it, is wont the counterfeit spirit, it
is wont to take the soul (close) to the Virgin of the Light, the judge:
and is wont the judge, the Virgin of the Light, she is wont to prove the
soul and find about her, she having done sin; and having not also found
the mysteries of the Light with her. And she is wont to give [269^a] her
to one of her Receivers, and is wont her Receiver, he is wont to bring
her and cast her unto the body, and she is not wont to come out of the
changes with the body, having not given the last Cycle. Concerning this
word therefore my Lord, which thou saidst unto us once, (Become) being
reconciled with thine enemy while thou art on the road with him,
lest-haply thine enemy should give thee to the judge, and the judge
should give thee to the officer and the officer should cast thee unto
the prison, and thou shalt not come out of that place, having not given
the last smallest coin (lypton, MS), namely, the word (said) plainly,
Every soul which cometh out of the body, and walketh on the road with
the counterfeit spirit, and findeth not the mystery of the loosening of
all the seals, with all the bonds, and (yet) is loosened from the
counterfeit spirit, which is bound unto her; then that soul having
[269^b] not received mystery of (in, MS) the Light, having not found the
mysteries of the loosening of the counterfeit spirit, which is bound
unto her. She therefore finding it not, is wont the counterfeit spirit,
it is wont to take that soul (close) to the Virgin of the Light; and is
wont the Virgin of the Light, and that judge, she is wont to deliver
that soul unto one of her Receivers, and is wont her Receiver, he is
wont to cast her unto the Sphere of Aeons, and she is not wont to come
out of the changes of the body, having not given the last Cycle which is
reckoned unto her. This therefore my Lord, is the fourth meaning.

It happened therefore, Jesus having heard these words, saying them
Maria, said he, Well (done) O happy Maria, the spiritual. These are the
explanations of the words which I said. Answered Maria, said she, My
Lord, yet I seek from thee [270^a] because that from now I am about to
begin to seek thee of everything in an exactness. Because of this
therefore My Lord, be long suffering with us, and reveal to us
everything, about which we shall seek thee, concerning the manner also
in which my brothers will preach to the race of all the mankind. But
these she having said them to the Saviour, answered also the Saviour,
said he to her becoming in a great mercy in unto her, Amen I say to you,
Not only shall I reveal to you every thing ye will seek after, but from
now also I shall reveal to you these other (things) which ye understood
not to seek after them; these mounted not upon the heart of the men,
these which knew not all the Gods also who (are) among the men. Now
therefore, thou Maria, seek after that which thou art seeking after,
[270^b] and I shall reveal it to thee face to face, without parable. But
answered Maria, said she, My Lord, then in what type are wont the
baptisms to forgive sin? I heard thee saying, Are wont the Contentious
Ministers, they are wont to follow after the soul, being witness unto
her of every sin which she did, that they should convict her in the
judgments. Now therefore, My Lord, are wont the mysteries of the
baptisms, are they wont to blot out the sins, which are with the
Contentious Ministers, because they indeed are wont to make their
forgetfulness? Now therefore My Lord, say unto us the type (by) which
they are wont to forgive sin, but we wish to know them in an exactness.
But answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Fairly indeed thou saidst,
the Ministers however at least they are not (those) who are wont to bear
witness of every sin, but [271^a] they are wont to remain also among the
judgments holding on to the souls, convicting all the souls of the
sinners, these who received not mystery, and they are wont to hold them
down in the Chaoses punishing them. And are not wont those Contentious
(ones) they are not wont to prevail to pass through the Chaoses, for
them to come unto the arrays which are above the Chaoses, and convict
the souls which come out of those Places. Now therefore the souls which
receive mysteries, it is not allowed for them to overpower them, and
take them out of the Chaos, that should convict them the Contentious
Ministers, but are wont the Contentious Ministers, they are wont to
convict the souls of the sinners, and lay hold on these which received
not mysteries, these which are wont to bring from the Chaoses. The souls
however who receive mysteries have not (any) work (for which) to convict
them, because they are not wont to come out of their Places. [271^b] And
also whenever they should come, they are not able to prevail to stand up
before them, nevertheless indeed they are not wont to be able to take
them in those Chaoses.

Hear, also, that I may say unto you the word in truth in what type is
wont the mystery of the baptism to forgive sin. Now therefore whenever
the souls should do sin, yet being upon the World are wont to come
however at least the Contentious Ministers, and bear witness to all the
sins which the soul did, lest haply indeed they should come out of the
Place of the Chaos, that they should convict her in the judgments, these
which are out(side) of the Chaoses. And is wont the counterfeit spirit,
it is wont to bear witness of all the sins which did the soul, that also
he should convict her in the judgments, these which are out(side) of the
Chaoses. And not only because it beareth witness of them, but every sin
of the souls it is wont to seal [272^a] the sins, and affix them in unto
the soul, that all the Rulers of the judgments of the sinners should
recognise her, that she is a sinful soul, and that they should know the
number of the sins which she did from the seals which affixed unto her
the counterfeit spirit, that they should punish her according to the
number of the sins which she did. This is the manner in which they are
wont to do to every soul of sinner. Now therefore he who will receive
the mysteries of the baptisms, are wont the mysteries of those, they are
(it is, MS) wont to become in a great fire being fierce greatly (and)
wise, and it burneth the sins: and they are wont to go in unto the soul
in concealment, and it eateth in after all the sins, these which affixed
in unto it the counterfeit spirit, they are wont to go also [272^b] in
unto the body in concealment, and pursue all the pursuers in
concealment, and separate them on each side of the body; for it is wont
to pursue the counterfeit spirit and (with, MS) the Fate, and separate
them outside the power and (with, MS) the soul, and them on (one) side
of the body, so that the counterfeit spirit with the Fate with the body
it is wont to separate them unto one part: the soul also with the power
it is wont to separate them unto another part. The mystery also of the
baptism is wont to remain in the midst of the two, and remain separating
them from one another, that it should cleanse them and purify them, that
they should not be defiled by the matter. Now therefore Maria, this is
the manner in which are wont the mysteries of the baptisms to forgive
sin and with every unlawfulness. These then having said them the
Saviour, said he to his disciples, Understand ye in what manner I am
speaking with you? Sprang up Maria, said she [273^a]: Yea, My Lord,
truly I fully take in every word which thou sayest. Concerning the word
therefore of the forgiveness of the sins which thou saidst unto us once
in a parable, saying, I came to cast fire upon the earth; and also, What
is that which I wish, except that it should be kindled: and also thou
separatedst plainly, saying, I have a baptism to be baptised in it; and
how shall I endure, until it should be completed? Ye are thinking that I
came to cast peace upon the earth? Nay but a division is that which I
shall send. For from now there are five (who) will become in one house,
there are three (who) will be upon two and two upon three. This, my
Lord, is the word which thou saidst plainly. The word indeed which thou
saidst, I came to cast a fire upon the earth and what is that which
[273^b] I wish, except that it should be kindled, which (is) this, my
Lord, that thou broughtest the mysteries of the baptisms unto the world?
And what is that which thou willest, except that it should eat in after
all the sins of the soul and purify them. And also afterwards thou
separatedst plainly saying, I have a baptism to be baptised in it, and
how shall I endure, even until it should be completed, namely, that thou
wilt not remain in the World, even until the baptisms should be
completed, and purify the perfect souls. And also the word which thou
saidst unto us once, Ye are thinking that I came to cast peace upon the
earth? nay, but division is that which I came to cast: because from now
there are five (who) will become in one house; there are three (who)
will be divided upon two and two upon three, namely, the mysteries of
the baptisms [274^a] which thou broughtest unto the World, it having
made a division in the bodies of the World: because that the counterfeit
spirit with the body with the Fate, it separated them unto one part, the
soul also with the power it separated them unto another part, namely,
that there are three who will be divided upon two and two upon three.
But these having said them Maria, said he the Saviour, Well (done), O
spiritual (one) of pure Light, Maria, this is the explanation of the
word. Answered also Maria, said she, My Lord yet also I am about to add
in seeking from thee. Now therefore, my Lord, bear with me seeking from
thee. Behold indeed in boldness we knew the type (in) which are wont the
baptisms to forgive sin: now also the mystery of these (this, MS) three
Spaces with the mysteries of this First Mystery with the mysteries of
the Ineffable, in what type are they wont to forgive sin [274^b]? Are
they wont to forgive in the type of the baptism, or otherwise? Answered
also the Saviour, said he, Otherwise but all the mysteries of the three
Spaces are wont to forgive to (in, MS) the soul in (dative, MS) all the
Places of the Rulers all the sins which did the soul from at first; they
are wont to forgive to her, and further they are wont to forgive, those
which she will do after these, even until the time unto which each of
the mysteries will dominate: these I shall say unto you in the
Distribution of the Universe viz.: the time up to which each of the
mysteries will dominate. And also the mystery of the First Mystery with
the mysteries of the Ineffable they are wont to forgive to the soul in
all the Places of the Rulers, every sin with every unlawfulness which
did the soul. And also that (not only) are they wont to forgive all of
them to her, [275^a] but they are not wont to reckon sin unto her from
this hour, even until unto age of age, because of the free-gift of that
great mystery with its (their, MS) glory which is much, greatly greatly.
These therefore having said them the Saviour, said he to his disciples,
Understand ye in what manner I am speaking with you? Answered also
Maria, said she, Yea, my Lord, I finished carrying off every word which
thou sayest. Now therefore my Lord, concerning the word which thou
sayest, Are wont all the mysteries of the three Spaces they are wont to
forgive sin and cover over their unlawfulness which prophesied once
about this word David the prophet, saying: Happy are those whose sin
they forgave with those whose unlawfulness they covered over. He
prophesied [275^b] about this word once, and the word which thou saidst,
The mystery of the First Mystery with the mystery of the Ineffable, that
every man who will receive those mysteries, not only that they are wont
to forgive the sins, which they did from at first, but also they are not
wont to make the reckoning indeed of them from that time unto age.
Because of this word also prophesied about it once David saying, Happy
are they unto whom the Lord the God will not reckon sin, namely, they
will not reckon sin unto him from this time (viz.) those who receive the
mysteries of the First Mystery with those who receive the mysteries of
the Ineffable. Said he: Well (done), the spiritual of pure Light Maria,
this is the explanation of the word. Added also Maria, said she, My
Lord, Then whenever the man shall receive mystery in the mysteries of
the First Mystery, [276^a] and also should turn (away) and do sin and
transgress. And also, after these should turn and repent and pray in his
mystery (after) his mystery, will they forgive to him or otherwise?
Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen amen I say to you, Every
one who will receive the mysteries of the First Mystery, and also
turneth (away) and transgresseth twelve times and also repenteth twelve
times praying in the mysteries of the First Mystery they will forgive to
him. And also should he (they, MS) transgress after the twelve times,
and turn (away) and transgress they will not forgive to him unto age,
for him to turn unto his mystery (after) his mystery, and this (one)
hath not repentance except he should receive the mysteries of the
Ineffable, that which is wont to be merciful at every time, and, also,
he forgiveth at every time. Added also Maria, said she, My Lord, but if
however those who receive the mysteries of the First Mystery, and they
should turn (away) and transgress and come out [276^b] of (the) body,
having not repented, will they inherit the kingdom or otherwise? Because
they received indeed the free-gift of the First Mystery? Answered the
Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen amen I say to you, Every man who
receiveth mystery in the First Mystery, having transgressed the first
time with the second with the third, and this (one) should come out of
body, having not repented, his judgment surpasseth much beyond every
judgment. For his dwelling place is in the midst of the mouth of the
dragon of the Darkness which is outer, and at end of all these he will
be petrified in the punishments, and he will be consumed unto age,
because he received in the free-gift of the First Mystery, he remained
not in it. Answered Maria, said she, My Lord, then every man who will
receive the mystery of the Ineffable, and they transgress, they cease
from their faith, and also after these yet living, they turned, they
repented, will they forgive to them [277^a] how many times? Answered the
Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen amen I say to you, Every man who will
receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, not only whenever he should
transgress once and also turn and repent will they forgive to him, but
whenever he should transgress at every time, and, also, yet living and
turn and repent, not becoming in an hypocrisy, and also should turn and
repent, and he should pray in his mysteries (after) his mysteries, they
will forgive to him at every time? Because that he received out of the
free-gift of the mysteries of the Ineffable. And also because that
merciful are all those mysteries and forgiving are they at every time.
Answered also Maria, said she to Jesus, My Lord, then those who receive
the mysteries of the Ineffable, and also they turned (away) they
transgressed, they ceased from their faith, and also they came [277^b]
out of (the) body having not repented, what also is that which will
happen to these of this kind? But answered the Saviour, said he to
Maria, Amen amen I say to you, Every man who will receive from the
mysteries of the Ineffable, happy (ones) are they however at least, the
souls which will receive from those mysteries, but whenever they turn
(away) and transgress and come out of (the) body having not repented,
those men, their judgment is worse than every judgment, and great is
greatly greatly: even if those souls are new (ones), and it being their
first time of coming unto the World; and they will not return unto the
changes of the bodily World from this hour. And they are not wont to be
able to do any work; but they are wont to cast them unto outside unto
the Darkness which is outer, and they will be consumed and will be
without existence unto age. But these having said them the Saviour
[278^a], said he to his disciples, Understand ye in what manner I am
speaking with you? Answered Maria, said she, Yea, my Lord. I carried off
the words which thou saidst. Now therefore, my Lord, this is the word
which thou saidst, Those who will receive the mysteries of the Ineffable
happy (ones) however at least are those souls; but whenever they should
turn (away) and transgress and cease from their faith, and they should
come out of body having not repented, they are not wont to be profitable
any longer from this hour to return them unto the changes of the body,
nor (for) any work, but they are wont to cast them unto the outside unto
the Darkness which is outer, they will consume them in that Place, and
they will be without existence unto age. Because of the word which thou
saidst unto us once saying, Good is the salt, whenever the salt insipid
becometh in what are they about to salt it? [278^b] It is not wont to be
profitable unto dunghill nor unto the land, but they are wont to cast it
out, namely, happy is every soul who will receive from the mysteries of
the Ineffable, but whenever they should transgress once, they are not
able to be profitable for return unto the body from this hour, nor unto
any work, but they are wont to cast them unto the Darkness which is
outer, and they will consume away in that place. But these she having
said them to the Saviour, said he, Well (done) the pure spiritual Maria,
this is the explanation of the word. Added also Maria, said she, My
Lord, then every man who received the mysteries of the First Mystery
with the mysteries of the Ineffable, these having not transgressed, but
their faith in the mysteries (is) in a directness without hypocrisy,
these therefore through the compulsion of the Destiny, and also they did
sin, and also they turned, they repented and also [279^a] they prayed in
their mysteries, (after) their mysteries, will they forgive to them for
about how many times? But answered the Saviour, said he to Maria in the
midst of the disciples, Amen amen I say unto you, Every man who will
receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, and also with the mysteries of
the First Mystery, these by the compulsion of the Destiny did sin every
time, and yet being alive they turn and they repent and also they remain
in their mystery, they will forgive to them every time, because those
mysteries are merciful, forgivers they are at every time. Because of
this therefore I said unto you once, Those mysteries not only that they
will forgive to them their sins which they did from at first, but (and,
MS) they are not wont to reckon them unto him from that hour, those whom
I said unto you that they are wont to take repentance at every time.
[279^b] And they will forgive also the sins which they are wont to do
repeatedly. If however those who receive mystery in the mysteries of the
Ineffable with the mysteries of the First Mystery, and they (should)
turn (away) and do sin, and they (should) come out of body having not
repented, they also are about to become also as those who transgressed
(and) they repented not. Their dwelling place indeed also is the midst
of the mouth of the dragon in the Darkness which is outer, and they will
consume away and become without existence unto age. Because of this I
said to you, Every man who will receive the mysteries, if they knew the
time in which they are coming out of the body, they would govern
them(selves) and not do sin, that they should inherit the kingdom of the
Light unto age. These therefore having said them the Saviour unto his
disciples, said he to them, Understand ye in what manner I am speaking
with you? [280^a] Answered Maria, said she, Yea, my Lord, In an
exactness I exact every word which thou sayest. Concerning this word
therefore which thou saidst unto us once, If had known the lord of the
house in what hour the thief would come in the night to dig through the
house he would have kept vigil also, and not have let man dig through
his house. This therefore having said Maria, said he, the Saviour: Well
(done), the spiritual Maria, this is the word. Added also the Saviour
said he to his disciples, Now therefore, preach to every man who will
receive mystery in the Light: say to them, saying, Take heed to
your(selves), do not sin, lest at any time ye cast an evil after an evil
and ye come out of the body having not repented, and ye be alien unto
the kingdom of the Light unto age. These [280^b] having said them the
Saviour, answered Maria, said she, My Lord, Much is the mercifulness of
these mysteries which forgive sin at every time. Answered the Saviour,
said he to Maria in the midst of the disciples, If a king to-day being a
man of this World giveth a free-gift to the men of his manner, and
forgiveth also the murderers with the sleepers with male with the rest
also of the sins which are grievous greatly, these being worthy of the
death. But if it is proper for him being man of the World having done
this, very much more therefore the Ineffable with the First Mystery,
these who are lord over the Universe are having the authority in
everything to do that which they will, for them to forgive everyone who
receiveth mystery? Or otherwise indeed if a king to-day putteth vesture
of king upon a soldier, and sendeth him unto other places, and he doeth
[281^a] murders with sins which are grievous being worthy of the death,
and they are not wont to be able to do anything evil to him because the
vesture of the king put upon him, very much more therefore those who
wear the mysteries of the vestures of the Ineffable with those of the
First Mystery, these which are lord over all those of the Height with
all those of the Depth.

After these (things) Jesus saw a woman having come to repent, he
baptised her three times, and she did not do that which is worthy of the
baptism. And the Saviour wished to tempt Petros to see if he became
merciful and forgiving according as he ordered unto them, said he toward
Petros, Behold three times I baptised this soul, and in these (this, MS)
three times she did not that which is worthy of the mysteries of the
Light. Because of what therefore [281^b] doth she render useless also
the body? Now therefore Petros, perform the mystery of the Light, this
which is wont to cut away the souls from the inheritance of the Light.
Perform that mystery, and cut away the soul of this woman from the
inheritances of the Light. These therefore having said them the Saviour
he tempted to see whether he became merciful and forgiving. These
therefore having said them the Saviour, said he, Petros, My Lord, leave
her this time also, that we may give to her the mysteries which are
high, and whenever she should become profitable thou lettest her, she
inherited the kingdom of the Light, but if she should not become
profitable, thou cuttest her away from the kingdom of the Light. These
therefore having said them Petros, knew the Saviour that Petros became
merciful (like) his manner and forgiving. All these therefore having
happened, said he the Saviour [282^a] to his disciples, Understand ye
all these words with the type of this woman? Answered Maria, said she,
My Lord, I understand the mysteries of the words which happened to this
woman. Concerning the words therefore which happened to her, which thou
saidst unto us once in a parable, saying, A man had a fig-tree in his
vineyard, but he came seeking after his fruit, and he found not any on
it. Said he to his gardener, Behold, three years I come, I seek after
fruit in this fig-tree, and I find not any in it, cut it (down),
therefore, because of what rendereth it useless also the ground. But he
answered, said he to him, My Lord, bear with it this year also, until I
shall dig around it, and put dung to it. But if it should send forth
another year, thou lettest it (be), but if thou findest not any, thou
cuttest it (down). Behold [282^b] this, my Lord, is the explanation of
the word. Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Well (done) O
spiritual (one) this is the word. Added also Maria, said she to the
Saviour, My Lord, then a man who received mystery, and did not that
which is worthy of the mysteries, but turned (away), he did sin: after
these (things) also he repented and he became in a great repentance, is
it lawful also, my brothers, to repeat the mystery which he received, or
otherwise indeed to give to him a mystery among the mysteries which are
below him. Is it lawful therefore or otherwise. But answered the
Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen amen I say to you, Neither the mystery
which he received nor that which is below him are wont to hear him to
forgive his sins, but the mysteries which are high(er) than those which
he received, they are those which are wont to hear him, and they forgive
his sins. Now therefore Maria [283^a] let thy brothers give to him the
mystery which is high(er) than that which he received, and they will
receive his repentance from him, and they will forgive his sins. That
(one) indeed because he received another time, and the others because he
surpassed them above. This indeed is not wont to hear him to forgive his
sins, but the mystery which is high(er) than that which he received,
that is that which is wont to forgive his sins. But if he, having
received three mysteries in the two Spaces or in the third (reckoning
from) within, and this (one) turned (away) he transgressed, is (are, MS)
wont not any mystery to hear him, for to help him in his repentance,
neither those which are high, nor those which are below him, except the
mystery of the First Mystery with the mystery of the Ineffable: they are
those which are wont to hear him and receive from him his repentance.
Answered Maria, said she, My Lord, then a man, having received mystery
up to two or up to three in [283^b] the second Space or the third Space,
and this (one) turned (away) and transgressed, but yet being in his
faith in directness and without hypocrisy. (shall he continue to
receive?) Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Every man who received
mystery in the second Space and in the third, and also he did not
transgress, but yet being in his faith without hypocrisy, it is lawful
for these of this kind to receive mystery in the Space which he willeth
from at first, even until to last, because that he (they, MS) did not
transgress.

Added also Maria, said she, My Lord, then a man having known the
Godhead, and he received from the mysteries of the Light, and he turned
(away) he transgressed he lawless became, he did not turn unto
repentance: and a man also who found not the Godhead nor knew it, and
that man being a sinner, and also impious [284^a] is, and they came out
of body both, which of them is he who will receive (tribulation, M) more
the judgments?

Answered also the Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen amen I say unto thee,
The man who knew the Godhead, this who received the mysteries of the
Light, and he did sin, not having turned to repent, he will receive
tribulation in the punishments of the judgments in great tribulations
with judgments manifold, greatly greatly beyond the impious man and
lawbreaker, this who knew not the Godhead. Now therefore he who hath ear
to hear let him hear. These therefore having said them the Saviour,
sprang up forward Maria, said she, My Lord, there is ear of my
Light-dweller, and I understood all the word which thou saidst:
concerning this word therefore which thou saidst unto us once in a
parable [284^b], The servant who knew the wish of his lord and prepared
not, nor did the wish of his lord, he will receive great stripes, but he
who knew not and did not, he will be worthy of little (stripes): because
every one to whom they entrusted more they will seek after more from
him, and unto whom they committed many (things) they will require of him
many, namely, my Lord, he who knoweth the Deity and he found the mystery
of the Light, (and) he transgressed, they will punish him in a great
judgment more than him who knew not the Godhead. This my Lord is the
explanation of the word. Added also Maria, said she to the Saviour, My
Lord, if the faith with the mysteries come to manifestation, now
therefore whenever souls, whenever they should come unto the world for
many of cycles, and they neglect to [285^a] receive mystery, trusting
that whenever they should come unto the world for another cycle they
will receive them, then indeed do they not run risk of not attaining to
receive the mysteries? Answered the Saviour, said he to his disciples,
Preach to all the world, saying to the men, strive that ye receive the
mysteries of the Light at this time which is troublous and go in unto
the kingdom of the Light. Do not cast a day in unto a day or a cycle in
unto a cycle, and trust that ye attain unto receiving the mysteries,
whenever we should come unto the world for another cycle: and these know
not when is about to become the number of the perfect souls, for
whenever should become the number of the perfect souls I shall shut
therefore the gate of the Light. And there is not any (who) will go in
from this hour, nor is there any (who) cometh out afterwards. [285^b]
Because that was completed the number of the perfect souls, and was
completed the mystery of the First Mystery, this because of which the
Universe became, which is I, that Mystery. And from this hour there is
not any (who) will go in unto the Light, and there is not any who will
be able to come out: because in the completion of the time of the number
of the perfect souls, before that I put forth the fire unto the World
for to purify the Aeons with the veils with the firmaments with all the
earth all the other matter which (is) upon it, yet also are becoming the
mankind. In that time therefore will be more manifested the faith with
the mysteries in those days: and there are many souls coming by the
cycle of the change of the body, and they are coming unto the World,
some of them being in this present [286^a] time, having heard me
teaching: in the completion of the number of the perfect souls they will
find the mysteries of the Light and receive them: and they (will) come
up to the gate of the Light and find it, having been completed the
number of the perfect souls, namely, the completion of the First
Mystery, and that is the knowing of the Universe. And they will find it,
I having shut up the gate of the Light. And it is not possible for any
to come in, or for any to come out from this hour. These souls therefore
will knock in unto the gate of the Light, saying, Lord open to us. I
shall answer that I may say to them, I know you not whence ye are. And
they will say to me, We received out of thy mysteries, and we completed
all thy teaching, and thou [286^b] taughtest to us in the highways. And
I shall answer that I may say to them, I know not you who ye are, those
who work the unlawfulness with the evil, even until now. Because of this
go unto the Darkness which is outer. And in that hour they will go unto
the Darkness which is outer, the Place in which is the weeping with the
gnashing of the teeth. Because of this therefore preach to all the
World, say unto them: Strive, renounce all the World with all the matter
which is in it, and receive the mysteries of the Light, before that was
completed the number of the perfect souls, that they should not put you
at the door of the gate of the Light, and betake you unto the Darkness
which is outer. Now therefore he who hath ear to hear, let him hear.
These therefore having said them the Saviour, sprang up also forward
[287^a] Maria, said she, My Lord not only (is it) that hath ear my
Light-dweller, but heard my soul and understood every word which thou
sayest. Now therefore, my Lord, concerning the words which thou saidst,
Preach to the men of the World say unto them, Strive, receive the
mysteries of the Light in this time which is troublous, that ye should
inherit the kingdom of the Light.

Added also Maria, said she to Jesus, My Lord, then the Darkness which is
outer of what type is it being, or otherwise rather, there are how many
Places of punishment in it? But answered Jesus, said he to Maria, The
Darkness which is outer is a great dragon, with his tail within his
mouth, being outside all the World and going round all the WORLD with a
multitude of places of judgment within it, being of twelve [287^b]
chambers of the punishments cruel, with a Ruler in every chamber (the
chamber the chamber, MS) with the faces of the Rulers different from one
another. But the first Ruler who becometh in the first (hath) a face of
crocodile, with his tail within his mouth: with all ice coming out of
his mouth of the dragon, with at every time with all cold with all
sicknesses which are various, this (one) they are wont to call his
original name in his Place, Enkhthonin: and the Ruler who becometh in
the second chamber, a face of cat is his original face. This they are
wont to call him in their Place Kharakhar. And the Ruler who becometh in
the third chamber, a face of a dog is his original face. This they are
wont to call him in their Place, Arkharokh. [288^a] And the Ruler who
becometh in the fourth chamber, a face of snake is his original face,
this (one) they are wont to call him in their Place, Akhrokhar. And the
Ruler who becometh in the fifth chamber, a face of black calf is his
original face, this (one) they are wont to call him in their Place,
Markhour. And the Ruler who becometh in the sixth chamber, a face of sow
of mountain is his original face, this (one) they call him in their
Place, Lamkhamor. And the Ruler of the seventh chamber, a face of bear
is his original face, this (one) they are wont to call him in his
original name in their Place, Lukhar. And the Ruler of the eighth
chamber a face of a gryphus is his original face, this (one) they are
wont to call his name in their Place, Laraokh. And the Ruler of the
ninth [288^b] chamber a face of a basilisk is his original face, this
(one) they are wont to call his name in their Place, Arkheokh. And the
tenth chamber there are many Rulers in it seven heads of dragon to each
of them in their original face, and he who is over them all they are
wont to call his name in their Place, Xarmarokh. And eleventh chamber,
there are many Rulers of that Place (coptic word, MS) with seven heads
of cat to each of them in their original face, and the great (one) who
is over them, they are wont to call him in his Place, Rokhar. And the
twelfth chamber there are many Rulers in it, they being many
exceedingly, with seven heads of face of a dog to each of them in their
original face. And the great (one) who is over them they are wont to
call him in [289^a] their Place, Khremaor. These Rulers therefore of
these twelve chambers being within the dragon of the Darkness which is
outer, and each of them having a name according to hour. And is wont
each of them to change his face according to hour. And these twelve
chambers have each of them a door open unto the Height, so that the
dragon of the Darkness which is outer hath twelve chambers of Darkness,
there being a door to every chamber (the chamber the chamber, MS) open
unto the Height. And there is an Angel of the Height being vigilant unto
each of the doors of the chambers. These who Ieou the first man, the
overseer of the Light, the Legate of the First precept, he is he who put
them being vigilant unto the dragon that he should not be disorderly
with all the Rulers of his chambers which are in him.

[289^b] These therefore having said them the Saviour, answered Maria the
Magdalene, said she, My Lord, then the souls indeed which they take unto
that Place are they not indeed wont to take them through these twelve
doors of the chambers, each according to the judgment of which it is
worthy? Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, They are not wont to
take any soul in unto the dragon through these doors, but the soul of
the blasphemers, and those who become with teaching of error, with every
one who giveth teaching in the error, and with the sleepers with male,
and with the (soul) of the men who are polluted, and with the impious,
with every man atheist, and the murderers, with the adulterers, and with
the sorcerers. All the souls therefore of this kind whenever they should
not repent, yet being alive, but remaining in their sin steadfast, with
all the souls also, these [290^a] who were left outside of this, namely,
who received their number of cycles which is reckoned unto them in the
Sphere, they having not repented, but in their last cycle they will take
those souls, those with all the souls which I finished saying them, they
will take them through the mouth of the tail of the dragon in unto the
chambers of the Darkness which is outer. And whenever they should finish
taking the souls in unto the Darkness which is outer in the mouth of his
tail, he is wont to bring round again his tail in unto his own mouth and
shut them (in). This is the manner (in) which they will take the souls
in unto the Darkness which is outer. And the dragon of the Darkness,
which is outer, hath twelve original names, these which (are) in his
mouths, a name according to each of the doors of the chambers. And these
(this, MS) [290^b] twelve names are various with one another, but being
with (in, MS) one another twelve, so that he who will say one of the
names is saying all the names. This therefore I shall say unto you in
the Distribution of (the) Universe. This therefore is the manner which
becometh the Darkness which is outer, namely the dragon. These therefore
having said them the Saviour, answered Maria, said she to the Saviour,
My Lord, then the punishment of that dragon (is) cruel greatly, beyond
the punishment of all the judgment. Answered the Saviour, said he to
Maria, Not only also that they are painful beyond all the punishments of
the judgments; but every soul which they will take unto the Place they
will numb it in the cold which is cruel, and with the hails and with the
fire which is cruel greatly: these [291^a] which become in that Place.
But in the dissolution of the World, namely, in the catching up of the
Universe, those souls will be wasted away by the cold which is cruel,
and with the fire which is cruel greatly, and they will be without
existence unto age. Answered Maria, said she, Then woe to the souls of
the sinners. Now therefore my Lord, the flame which (is) in the place of
the mankind is being hot or the fire which (is) in Amente is hot?
Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Amen I say to thee, Hot is being
the fire which (is) in Amente more than the fire which is in mankind
nine times. And the fire which is in the punishment of the great Chaos
is cruel, more than that which (is) in Amente nine times: and the fire
which (is) in the judgment of the Rulers, who are on the road [291^b] of
the Middle, is cruel, more than the fire of the punishment which is in
the great Chaos nine times: and the fire which is in the dragon of the
Darkness which is outer with all the judgments which (are) in it, are
cruel more than the fire which (is) in all the punishments which (are)
in the judgments of the Rulers, these who (are) on the road of the
Middle, is cruel more than them seventy times. But these having said
them the Saviour unto Maria she smote on her breast, she cried out, she
wept, she with all the disciples at once, said she, Woe to the sinners
because many are their judgments greatly. Came in front Mariham, she
prostrated upon the feet of Jesus, she worshipped them, said she, My
Lord, bear with me, seeking from thee, and be not angry with me because
I molest thee many [292^a] times, for from now I am about to begin to
seek from thee concerning every thing in an exactness.

Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Seek after every thing which
thou wishest to seek after, and I shall reveal them to thee in boldness,
without parable. Answered Maria said she, My Lord, then a man, good,
having completed all the mysteries, having a kinsman, in one word,
having a man, and that man being impious, having done every sin which
are worthy of the Darkness which is outer, and he did not repent, or
otherwise, having completed his number of cycle in the changes of the
body, and being not profitable at all, that man, having come out of the
body, and we knew securely that he sinned, worthy of the Darkness which
is outer, then what is that which we shall do, until we deliver [292^b]
him from the punishments of the dragon of the Darkness which is outer,
and remove him unto a righteous body, being about to find the mysteries
of the kingdom of the Light, and that he may become good and go unto the
Height and inherit the kingdom of the Light.

Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, If a sinner, he is being worthy
of the Darkness which is outer, or otherwise indeed he did sin according
to the punishment, the rest also of the punishments; and this (one) did
not repent, or otherwise indeed (he is) a man sinner who completed his
number of cycle in the changes of the body and this (one) did not
repent, whenever those men therefore, these whom I said, whenever they
should come out of the body, and they should take them unto the Darkness
which is outer. Now therefore if ye wish to remove them out of the
punishments of the Darkness which is outer with all the judgments, and
they remove [293^a] them unto a righteous body, this (one) being about
to find the mysteries of the Light, that he may go unto the Height and
inherit the kingdom of the Light, do the same mystery of the Ineffable,
this which is wont to forgive sin at every time: and whenever ye should
finish doing the mystery, say, The soul of such or such a man of whom I
thought in my heart, if she is in the Place of the punishments of the
chambers of the Darkness which is outer, even if it is in the rest also
of the punishments of the chambers of the Darkness which is outer, with
the rest also of the punishments of the dragon, they shall remove her
out of the all: and if she should not complete the number of the cycles
in the changes (of the body) they shall take her (close) to the Virgin
of the Light, and the Virgin of the Light (will) seal her (him, MS) with
the seal of the Ineffable [293^b] and cast it in the same month unto a
righteous body, this in whom she will find the mysteries of the Light,
and that she may become good and go unto the Height and inherit the
kingdom of the Light. And also if she completed the cycles of the
changes, they shall take that soul up to the seven Virgins of the Light,
these who are over the baptism, and they (will) put it upon that soul,
and seal her with the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable and take her
(him, MS) among the arrays of the Light, these I will say whenever ye
should complete the mysteries. Amen I say to you, The soul (for) which
ye will pray, if indeed she is in the dragon of the Darkness which is
outer, he will liberate his tail out of his mouth and vomit out that
soul. And also if she is in [294^a] any (every, MS) Place of the
judgments of the Rulers, Amen I say unto you, Will carry her off in a
haste the Receiver of Melkhisedek, if should have vomited her the
dragon, or otherwise indeed she is in the judgments of the Rulers, in
one word, will carry her off the Receivers of Melkhisedek from any
(every, MS) Place in which she is in. And they will take her unto the
Place of the Middle (close) to the Virgin of the Light. And is wont the
Virgin of the Light, she is wont to prove her, and see the sign of the
kingdom of the Ineffable being in that soul, and if she hath not yet
completed the number of cycles in the changing of the soul, or in (the
changing) of the body, is wont the Virgin of the Light, she is wont to
seal her with a seal more excellent, and [294^b] hasten to make them
cast her in the same month unto a righteous body, this which is about to
find the mysteries of the Light, and about to be good, that he may go
unto the Height unto the kingdom of the Light. And if that soul received
her number of cycles, is wont the Virgin of the Light, she is wont to
prove her, she is not wont to let them punish her, because that she
received the number of cycle: but she is wont to deliver her unto the
seven Virgins of the Light. And are wont the seven Virgins of the Light,
they are wont to prove that soul, and they are wont to baptise her with
their baptisms, and give to her the spiritual chrism, and take her unto
the Treasury of the Light, and put her in the last array of the Light,
until the catching up of all the perfect souls. And whenever they should
prepare for drawing away the veils [295^a] of the Place of those on the
Right (hand), they are wont to purify that soul again and cleanse her
and put her in the arrays of the first Saviour, he who (is) in the
Treasury of the Light.

It happened therefore, the Saviour having finished saying these words
unto his disciples, answered Mariham, said she to Jesus, My Lord, I
heard thee saying, He who will receive the mysteries of the Ineffable,
or he who will receive the mysteries of the First Mystery, they are wont
to make beams of light with effluence of light, and pass through every
Place, even until they go unto the Place of their inheritance. Answered
the Saviour, said he to Maria, Whenever they should receive the mystery
yet being alive, and whenever they should come out of body, they are
wont to make beams of light with effluence of light and pass [295^b]
through every Place, even until they go unto the Place of their
inheritance. But if being sinners indeed, having come out of the body,
having not repented, and ye make for them the mystery of the Ineffable,
that they should remove them out of all the punishments, and cast them
unto a righteous body, that he may inherit the kingdom of the Light, or
otherwise indeed they should take him unto the last array of the Light,
they are not wont to be able to prevail to pass through the Places,
because they are not those who make the mystery: but are wont the
Receivers of Melkhisedek, they are wont to come after them and take them
(close) to the Virgin of the Light, and a multitude of times are wont
the Ministers of the Judges of the Rulers, they are wont to hasten and
take those souls, and deliver them unto one (to) another, even until
[296^a] they take her (close) to the Virgin of the Light. Added also
Maria, said she to the Saviour, My Lord, then a man who received the
mysteries of the Light, those which (are) in the first Space reckoning
from without, and having been completed the time of the mysteries up to
which they extend, and that man added not again to receive mystery in
the mysteries which are toward the interior of the mysteries which he
finished receiving, and also was negligent that man, having not prayed
the prayer which is wont to take away the wickedness of the meats which
he eateth with those which he drinketh, and through the wickedness of
the meats they bound him in unto the Pole of the Destiny of the Rulers,
and by the compulsion of the elements he did sin again after the
completion [296^b] of the time up to which the mystery extendeth,
because he was negligent, having not prayed in the prayer, this which is
wont to take away the wickedness of the souls, and to cleanse them. And
that man came out of the body before that he repented again and received
mystery again in the mysteries, those which (are) within the mysteries
which he finished receiving, these which they are wont to receive again
for the repentance, and they forgive the sins; and he having come out of
the body we knew in an exactness that they took him away in unto the
midst of the dragon of the Darkness which is outer on account of the
sins which he did. And that man hath not helper upon the World nor
compassionate (one) for him to make the mystery of the Ineffable, even
until they should remove him out of the midst of the dragon of the
Darkness which is outer, and take him in unto the kingdom of the Light.
Now therefore, my Lord, [297^a] then what is that which he will do until
he is delivered from the punishments of the dragon of the Darkness which
is outer? Nay, O Lord, forsake him not because he suffered in the
persecutions and in the whole Godhead in which he becometh. Now
therefore O Saviour, have mercy on me, lest at any time any one of our
kindred should become in this type of this kind. And have mercy on all
the souls who will become in this type, because thou art our key which
openeth (the) door of the Universe and which shutteth (the) door of the
Universe, and thy mystery is that which extendeth to them all. Aio, O
Lord, have mercy on the souls of this kind, because they named indeed
thy mysteries on one day, and they believed them truly, and because they
were not becoming in hypocrisy. Aio, O Lord, give to them a free-gift in
thy goodness, and give to them a rest which is in [297^b] thy
mercifulness. These therefore having said them Maria, called her happy
the Saviour greatly greatly on account of the words which she saith. And
became in great mercy the Saviour, said he to Maria, Every man who will
become in this type which thou sayest, yet being alive, give to them the
mystery of one of the twelve names of the chambers of the dragon of the
Darkness which is outer, these which I shall give to you whenever I
should finish distributing to you the Universe from within out and from
without in. And every man who will find the mystery of one of the twelve
names of that dragon of the Darkness which is outer, and every man even
though they are sinners greatly, and having received the mysteries of
the Light at first (but) afterwards they transgressed, or otherwise
indeed they did not do any mystery at all. These whenever they should
complete [298^a] their cycle in the changes (of body). And these of this
kind, when they should come out of body having not repented again, and
they take them unto the punishments which are in the midst of the dragon
of the Darkness which is outer, and are left in the cycles, and are left
in the punishments which (are) in the midst of the dragon, and these
knowing the mystery of one of the twelve names of the Angels, being
alive, being become in the World, and they say one of their names, being
within in the midst of the punishments of the dragon, (and the hour (in)
which they will say it, is wont to shake the whole dragon, M), and he is
wont to be disturbed greatly greatly. And the chambers in which are in
the souls of those men is wont to open its doors toward the heaven, and
is wont the Ruler of the chamber in which become those men, and he is
wont to cast the souls of those men [298^b] out of the midst of the
dragon of the Darkness which is outer, because they found the mystery of
the name of the dragon. And whenever the Ruler should cast out the
souls, are wont the Angels of Ieou, the first man, these who are
vigilant unto the chambers of that Place, he is wont to hasten
immediately and to carry off that soul until he bringeth her (close) to
Ieou, the first man, the Legate of the First precept. And is wont Ieou,
the first man, he is wont to see the souls and to prove them, he is wont
to find them, having completed their cycles. And it is not lawful for
them to bring them unto the World again, because every soul which they
will cast unto the dragon of the Darkness which is outer, it is not
lawful to bring them unto the World again: are wont to retain them the
Receivers of Ieou, if they did not [299^a] complete their number of
cycles in the changes of the body, and until they do the mystery of the
Ineffable for them, until they turn them unto a good body, this which is
wont to find the mysteries of the Light and inherit the kingdom of the
Light. But if should prove them Ieou, and find them having completed
their cycle, and it is not lawful for them to turn them unto the World
again, and the sign also of the Ineffable is not becoming with them, and
is wont to have mercy on them Ieou, he is wont to bring them (close) to
the seven Virgins of the Light: they are wont to baptise them (him, MS)
in their baptisms, but they are not wont to give to them the spiritual
chrism, and they are wont to take them unto the Treasury of the Light,
but they are not wont to put them in the array of the inheritance,
because that there is not sign nor is there seal [299^b] of the
Ineffable with them. But they are wont to be delivered from every
punishment, but they are wont to put them in the Light of the Treasury
apart by themselves, even until the catching up of the Universe: and in
the time (in) which they will draw (back) the veils of the Treasury of
the Light, they are wont to purify those souls again and cleanse them
greatly greatly, and give (the) mystery to them again, and put them in
the last array which is in the Treasury. And are delivered those souls
from all punishments of the judgments.

But these having said them the Saviour, said he to his disciples: Did ye
understand in what manner I am speaking with you? Answered also Maria,
said she, My Lord, this is the word which thou saidst once in a parable
[300^a] saying, Put to you a friend out of the mamonas of the
unrighteousness, that whenever ye should be left, he should receive you
in unto the tabernacle unto age. What therefore is the mamonas of the
unrighteousness except the dragon of the Darkness which is outer, which
is this, the word, He who will understand the mystery of one of the
names of the dragon of the Darkness which is outer, whenever he should
be left in the Darkness which is outer, or he should complete in the
cycle of the change (of the body), and (should) say the name of the
dragon, he will be delivered and come up from the Darkness, and they
(will) take him unto the Light of the Treasury. This is the word, my
Lord. Answered also the Saviour, said he to Maria, Well (done) pure
spiritual one, this is the explanation of the word. Added also Maria,
said she, My Lord, is wont the dragon [300^b] of the Darkness which is
outer, he is wont to come in unto this World, or is he not wont to come?
Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, Whenever the light of the sun is
out, it is wont to cover with darkness the dragon: but if the sun should
be down from the World, is wont the darkness to remain as curtain for
the sun; and is wont the cloud (breath, MS) of the darkness to come in
unto the World in the form of a (pillar of) smoke in the night, namely,
whenever the sun should draw unto him(self) his rays: for it is
impossible for the World to endure the darkness of the dragon in its
truth of shape, otherwise it is wont to be dissolved and perish at once.
These when had said them the Saviour, added also Maria, said she to the
Saviour, My Lord, yet I seek from thee, and hide not from me. Now
therefore, my Lord, Who is he who will compel the man, even until he
doth sin? Answered [301^a] the Saviour said he to Maria, The Rulers of
the Destiny they are those who compel the man, even until he should do
sin. Answered Maria, said she to the Saviour, My Lord, Are not indeed
wont the Rulers, they are wont to come down unto the World and compel
the man, even until he should do sin? Answered the Saviour, said he (to)
Maria, They are not wont thus to come down unto the World, but are wont
the Rulers of the Destiny whenever an ancient soul should come, coming
down from them, are wont the Rulers of that great Destiny, this which
(is) in the Place of the head of the Aeons, which Place is that which
they are wont to call, The Place of the kingdom of the Adamas, and that
Place indeed is that which is in presence of the Virgin of the Light,
are wont the Rulers of the Place [301^b] of that head they (he, MS) are
wont to give to the ancient soul a cup of forgetfulness out of the seed
of the wickedness filled with all lusts which are various, and with
every forgetfulness: and as soon as that soul will drink from the cup,
she is wont to forget every Place unto which she went, with all the
punishments in which she went (through); and is wont that cup of water
of forgetfulness, it is wont to become body outside of the soul, and it
is wont to become being like to the soul in every form, and being like
unto her namely it is this which they are wont to call, The counterfeit
spirit. If however it is a new soul they are wont to take out of the
sweat of the Rulers, and out of the tears of their eyes, or otherwise
indeed out of the breath of their mouth, in one word, if one out of the
[302^a] new souls or one of the souls of this kind, if one out of the
sweat it is, are wont the great Rulers of the great Destiny, they are
wont to take away of the sweat of all the Rulers of their Aeons, and
knead them with one another at once, and divide it and make it into
soul, or otherwise indeed if it is dregs of the purifying of the Light,
is wont Melkhisedek to take it away from the Rulers; are wont the five
great Rulers of the great Destiny, they are wont to knead the dregs upon
one another, and divide it and make it into soul after soul, that each
of the Rulers of the Aeons, each of them should put his portion in the
soul. Because of this therefore they are kneading them up one on
another, that they all should belong to the soul. And [302^b] are wont
the five great Rulers, whenever they should divide them and make them
into souls, they are taking them out the sweat of the Rulers. But if it
is one out of the dregs of the purifying of the Light, is wont
Melkhisedek the great Receiver of the Light to take her from the Rulers,
or otherwise indeed if they are some out of the tears of their eyes, or
out of the breath of their mouth, in one word, out of the souls of this
kind; whenever the five Rulers, whenever they divide them, and make them
into souls; or otherwise indeed an ancient soul it is, is wont the Ruler
also, this who becometh among the heads of the Aeons, he is wont to
mingle (knead, MS) the cup of the forgetfulness of the seed of the
wickedness, he is wont to knead it with each of the new souls in the
[303^a] time (at) which he becometh in the Place of the head. And is
wont that cup of forgetfulness, it is wont to become counterfeit spirit
to that soul. And it is wont to remain outside of the soul being for
vesture unto her, being like to her in every kind, being for vesture
sheath outside her. And are wont the five great Rulers of (the) Destiny
of the Aeons, and with the Ruler of the disk of the sun with the Ruler
of the disk of the moon, they are wont to breathe in unto the midst of
that soul, and cometh out of them (her, MS) a portion out of my power,
this which the last Helper cast in unto the Confusion. And is wont the
portion of that power, it is wont to remain within the soul, being
dissolved, becoming upon its own authority in regard to the arrangement,
in which they put it for to give sense [303^b] to the soul, that she
should seek after the works of the Light of the Height at every time.
And is wont that power, it is wont to be like unto the kind of the soul
in every feature, and being similar to her: she is not wont to be able
to be outside of the soul, but she is wont to remain within her
according as I ordered to her from at first, being about to cast her in
unto the First precept, which I ordered to her for her to remain outside
of the souls in regard to the arrangement of the First Mystery:
wherefore all these words I shall say them unto you in the Distribution
(of the Universe) concerning the power and also concerning the soul, in
what types they are working them, or which Ruler indeed it is who
worketh her, or what is each kind of the souls, so that I shall say them
unto you in the Distribution of the Universe, how many there are working
the soul. And I shall say unto you the name of all those who work
[304^a] the soul, and I shall say unto you the type (in) which they
fashion the counterfeit spirit with the Fate, and I shall say unto you
the name of the soul, which is not yet purified, and her name also
whenever they should purify her, and she (should) become pure. And I
shall say unto you the name of the counterfeit spirit, and I shall say
unto you the name of the Fate, and I shall say unto you the name of all
the bonds, these in which are wont the Rulers to bind the counterfeit
spirit in unto the soul, and I shall say unto you the name of all the
Dekans, these which worked the soul in the bodies of the soul which (is)
in the World: and I shall say unto you in what manner they are working
the souls: and I shall say unto you the type of each of the souls, and I
shall say unto you the type [304^b] of the souls of the men, with those
of the birds, with those of the wild beasts, with the creeping things:
and I shall say unto you the type of all the souls, with those of all
the Rulers who sent them unto the World, that ye may become being
complete in all knowledge, that they should call you, Those who are
complete in all knowledge, with every pleroma. These all I shall say
them unto you in the Distribution of the Universe, and after these all I
shall say unto you, because of what also these all became. Hear
therefore that I may speak with you concerning the soul, according as I
said that are wont the five great Rulers of the great Destiny of the
Aeons; and with the Rulers of the disk of the sun, with the Rulers of
the disk of the moon, they are wont to breathe in unto that soul, and
cometh out [305^a] of them a portion out of my power, according as I
finished saying unto you. And is wont the portion of that power, it is
wont to remain within the soul, that should be able to stand (upright)
the soul, and they are wont to put the counterfeit spirit outside of the
soul, being vigilant unto her and imparted unto her. And are wont the
Rulers to bind it in unto the soul with their seals with their bonds,
and they are wont to seal it in unto her, that it should compel her at
every time, that it should make their passions with their unlawfulnesses
with all their sins which are continued, that she should be slave to
them at every time, and remain under their subjection at every time in
the changes of the body: and they are wont to seal it in unto her, for
her to become in every sin with every lust of the World. Because of this
therefore of this [305^b] kind I brought the mysteries unto the World,
these which are wont to loosen all the bonds of the counterfeit spirit
and with all the seals, these which bind in unto the soul, these
(mysteries) which are wont to make the soul free, and they are wont to
redeem her from her Ruler parents, and they are wont to make her pure
Light, and take her up unto the kingdom of her Father the First of
coming, the First Mystery unto age. Because of this therefore I said
unto you once, He who will not forsake father and mother and come and
follow me, this (one) is not worthy of me. I said therefore once, Ye
shall forsake your Ruler parents, that I may make you for son of the
First Mystery for unto age.

But these having said them the Saviour, sprang up forward Salome, said
she, My Lord, if our parents are the Rulers, then how (is it) written in
the Law of [306^a] Moyses, He who will forsake his father with his
mother, in a death let him die? Then did not the law speak of it? But
these having said them Salome, the power of light which (is) in Maria
the Magdalene boiled up within her, said she to the Saviour, My Lord,
command to me that I may speak with my sister Salome, that I may say
unto her the explanation of the word which she said. It happened
therefore, the Saviour having heard these words, saying them Maria, he
called her happy greatly greatly. Answered the Saviour, said he to
Maria: I command to thee Maria for to say the explanation of the word
which said Salome. But these having said them the Saviour, Maria sprang
up toward Salome she saluted her, said she, My sister Salome because of
the word [306^b] which thou saidst, It is written in the Law of Moyses,
He who will forsake his father with his mother in a death let him die.
Now therefore my sister Salome, the Law did not say this concerning the
soul, nor concerning the body, nor concerning the counterfeit spirit,
for these all the sons are of the Rulers, and ones out of them are, but
the Law did say this concerning the power which came out of the Saviour,
this which is Light-dweller within us to-day. The Law also said, Every
one who will remain outside of the Saviour with his mysteries, his
parents, not only that in a death he will die, but in a perishing he
will perish. These therefore having said them Maria, Salome sprang up
toward Maria, she saluted her again, said she, Salome, There is a power
[307^a] of the Saviour making me understanding as thee also. It happened
the Saviour having heard the words of Maria he called her happy greatly
greatly. Answered also the Saviour, said he to Maria in the midst of the
disciples. Hear therefore Maria, Who it is who compelleth the man, even
until he should do sin. Now therefore are wont the Rulers, they are wont
to seal the counterfeit spirit in unto the soul, that it should not
shake her at every hour, for her to do every sin with every
unlawfulness: and also they are wont to order unto the counterfeit
spirit, saying to it, Whenever the soul (psykikon, MS) should come out
of the body, shake her not, being imparted unto her, convicting her in
all the Places of the judgments, according to Places, because of all the
sins which thou causedst her to do, that they should punish her in all
the Places [307^b] of the judgments, that she should not be able to go
unto the Light, that she should cause them to turn her in unto the
change of the body, in one word, they are wont to order the counterfeit
spirit, Do not shake her at all in any hour except she should say
mystery and loosen all the seals with all the bonds, in which we bound
thee in unto her. And whenever she should say the mysteries and loosen
all her seals with all the bonds with the defence of the Place, and
whenever she should go, allow her to come, she having been reckoned unto
those of the Light of the Height, and she was alien unto us and unto
thee, and thou wilt be able to lay hold on her from that hour. If indeed
she should not say the mysteries of the loosening of thy bonds with thy
seals with the defence of the Place, lay hold on her, dismiss her not,
thou shalt convict [308^a] her in the punishments with all the Places of
the judgments concerning every sin which thou caused her to do: and
after these take them (close) to the Virgins of the Light, this who is
wont to dispatch them unto the cycle another time. These (commands) are
those which are wont the Rulers of the great Destiny of the Aeons they
are wont to deliver them (him, MS) to the counterfeit spirit: and are
wont the Rulers, they are wont to call the Ministers of the Aeons
amounting to (filling, MS) 365, who are wont to give to them the soul
and (of, or to, MS) the counterfeit spirit, being bound in unto one
another, the counterfeit spirit being outside of the soul, the mixture
of the power being the inward of the soul, being within them both, that
they should be able to stand up both: and are wont the Rulers, they are
wont to order unto the Ministers, saying to them, This is the type
[308^b] which ye will put in the body of the matter of the World. They
are wont to say indeed to them: Put the mixture of the power the
innermost of them all, that they should be able to stand up, because it
is their setting up; and after the soul place the counterfeit spirit:
this is the manner which they are wont to order unto their Ministers,
that they should put them down in the bodies of the anti-type: and after
this form are wont the Ministers of the Rulers, they are wont to bring
the power with the soul with the counterfeit spirit, they are wont to
bring them (all) three down unto the World, and they are wont to pour
(them) out unto the World of the Rulers of the Middle. Are wont also the
Rulers of the Middle, they are wont to consider the counterfeit spirit
with the Fate also, whose name is “the Moira” he is wont to conduct the
man, until he cause them to kill him in the death which is reckoned unto
him: [309^a] this (fate) which bound in unto the soul the Rulers of the
great Destiny; and are wont the Ministers of the Sphere, they are wont
to bind (together) the soul with the power with the counterfeit spirit
and with the Fate, they are wont to divide them all, and put them in two
parts, and go round after the man with the woman in the World, these to
whom they gave sign that they (we, MS) will send them in unto them. And
they are wont to give (one) part to the male and (one) part to the woman
in meat of the World or in a breath of the air, or in water or in some
thing (form, MS) which they are wont to drink. All these I shall say
unto you the kind of each soul with the types which are wont to go in
unto the bodies, either man or bird or beast, or wild-beast or creeping
thing or every form which is on the World, I shall say unto you [309^b]
their types in what type they are wont to go in unto the men, I shall
say them unto you in the Distribution of the Universe. Now therefore
whenever the Ministers of the Rulers, whenever they should cast the part
in unto the woman and the part also in unto the male, in the way which I
said unto you, even if they are at (a) distance from one another, in a
distance which is much, are wont the Ministers to compel them in
concealment that they should harmonise with one another in the harmony
of the World: and is wont the counterfeit spirit which is in the male,
it is wont to come unto the part which is deposited unto the World in
the matter of his body, he is wont to take it away and cast it unto the
womb of the woman being deposited unto the seed of the wickedness: and
immediately are wont the three hundred (and) sixty five Ministers of the
Rulers, they are wont to go into her belly and [310^a] lodge in it. Are
wont the Ministers to bring the two parts to one another, and also are
wont the Ministers to hold back the blood of every meat of the woman
which she will eat, with the (things) which she drinketh, they are wont
to hold them back in the belly of the woman, even until forty days: they
are wont to knead the blood of the power of the meats, they are wont to
knead it well in the womb of the woman: after the forty days they are
wont to spend thirty other days building (up) his members in the image
of the body of the man, is wont each to build (up) a member, these (of)
which I shall say unto you which Dekans will build it, I shall say them
unto you in the Distribution of the Universe. If therefore it should
happen after these, the Ministers should complete all the body with all
its members in [310^b] seventy days. And after these, are wont the
Ministers they are wont to call in unto the body which they built (up):
first indeed they are wont to call the counterfeit spirit, afterwards
they are wont to call the soul within them, and afterwards they are wont
to call the mixture of the power in unto the soul: and the Fate they are
wont to put it outside of all (but) not mixing in with them, following
them at a distance after them: and after these are wont the Ministers,
they are wont to seal them in unto one another with all the seals which
gave to them the Rulers, and they are wont to seal (added in lower
margin) on the day (in) which they settled in the belly of the woman,
they are wont to seal him in unto the left hand of the (human) form; and
they are wont to seal on the day in which they completed the body on the
right hand: and they are wont to seal on the day in which the Rulers
delivered them unto them in the middle of the skull of the body of the
(human) form: and they are wont to seal on the [311^a] day (in) which
the soul cometh out of the Rulers, they are wont to seal him on the
skull of the (human) form. And they are wont to seal on the day (in)
which they kneaded the members, and separated unto (one) soul, they are
wont to seal him in the skull on right (hand) of the form. And the day
(in) which they bound the counterfeit spirit unto her (the soul) they
are wont to seal him behind the head of the form: and the day in which
breathed the power in unto the body the Rulers, they sealed him on the
cerebellum which is in the middle of the head of the form, and also on
the heart of the form: and also the number of years which will spend the
soul in the body, they are wont to seal him on the forehead, this which
is in the form: so that all these seals they are wont to seal on [311^b]
the form: all these seals I shall say their name unto you at the
Distribution of the Universe. And after the Distribution of the Universe
I shall say unto you because of what thing all these became. And if ye
wish to understand, I am that Mystery. Now therefore are wont the
Ministers, they are wont to complete the whole man, and all these seals
in which they sealed the body; are wont the Ministers, they are wont to
bring the whole speciality, and take them to all the Contentious Rulers,
these which are over all the punishments of the judgments, and they are
wont to give them to their Receivers who (and, MS) being their souls out
of the body: these are wont to give to them the speciality of the seals,
that they should know the time (in) which they will bring the souls out
of (the) bodies; [312^a] And that they should know the time in which
they will bring forth the body, that they should dispatch them to their
Ministers and stand (up) and follow after the soul and become witness of
every sin which she will do, they with the counterfeit spirit concerning
the manner (in) which they will punish her in the judgments. And
whenever the Ministers, whenever they should give the speciality of the
seals to the Contentious Rulers, they are wont to withdraw unto the
arrangement of their works which are prescribed for them by the Rulers
of the great Destiny. And whenever should be completed the number of
month of begetting children, they are wont to bring forth the child,
being small in him the mixture of the power, and being small in him the
soul, and being made small in him the counterfeit spirit. (But) the Fate
indeed [312^b] being great, being not mixed in unto the body of the
arrangement, but following after the soul with the body with the
counterfeit spirit, even until the time in which the soul is coming out
of the body, because of the type of the death by which she will kill
him, according to that which is reckoned unto him by the Rulers of the
great Destiny: or being about to die by a wild-beast, is wont the Fate
to bring the wild-beast toward him until he killeth him: or being about
to die by a creeping thing: or being about to fall unto a pit by a
chance: or being about to strangle himself: or indeed being about to die
by water, or by these of this kind, or indeed by other death worse than
these or better, (good, MS) in one word the Fate is (that) which
compelleth his death toward him. This is the work of the Fate, and she
hath not other work except this, and is wont the Fate to follow after
that man [313^a] until the day of his death.

Answered Maria, said she, Then every man who (is) on the World, then
every work which is reckoned unto them by the Destiny either good or
evil, or sin or death or life, in one word, every thing which is
reckoned unto them by the Ruler of the Destiny will happen to them.
Answered the Saviour, said he to Marihamme, Amen, I say unto you, Every
thing which is reckoned to each by the Destiny, either every good (deed)
or every sin, in one word every thing which is reckoned unto them, they
are wont to go on them. Because of this therefore I brought the key of
the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens; or otherwise there was no
flesh (which) will be saved upon the World, for without mysteries there
is not any (who) will go unto the kingdom of the Light either righteous
(or) when he had done sin. Because of this therefore of this kind, I
brought the keys of the mysteries [313^b] unto the World, that I should
unloose the sinners, these who will believe me, and who will hearken to
me, that I should unloose them from the bonds with the seals of the
Aeons of the Rulers and bind them in unto the seals (added in upper
margin) with the vestures with the arrays of the Light, that he whom I
shall loosen upon the World from the bonds with the seals of the Aeons
of the Rulers, they shall loosen him in the Height from the bonds with
the seals of the Aeons of the Rulers, and he whom I shall bind upon the
World in unto the seals with the vestures with the arrays of the Light,
they (will) bind him in the land of the Light in unto the arrays of the
inheritances of the Light. Because of the sinners I despoiled myself at
this time, I brought the mysteries to them, that I should unloose them
from the Aeons of the Rulers, and bind them in unto the inheritances of
the Light: not only (for) the sinners but also the righteous, that I
should give to them the mysteries, [314^a] and they (will) take them
unto the Light: for without mystery it is not possible to take them unto
the Light: Because of this therefore I hid not it, but I cried out
plainly, and I separated not the sinners: but I cried out, and I said
unto all men the sinners with the righteous (ones), saying, Seek that ye
may find, knock that they may open to you: for every one who seeketh in
truth will find, and he who knocketh they will open to him. For I said
unto every man that they should seek after the mysteries of the kingdom
of the Light, these which will purify them and make them pure (Light),
and they (will) take them unto the Light. Because of this therefore
Iohannes the baptist prophesied about me, saying, I indeed baptised you
in water unto repentance unto the forgiveness of your sins: he who is
coming after me [314^b] is more excellent than I, this whose fan (is) in
his hand, he is about to purify his threshing-floor, the chaff indeed he
is burning it in a fire which is not wont to be quenched, but the wheat
he is gathering it in unto his barn. My power which (is) in Iohannes
prophesied about me, knowing that I shall bring the mysteries unto the
World, and I (shall) purify the sins of the sinners, these who will
believe me, and hearken unto me, and I (shall) make them pure light, and
take them unto the Light. These therefore having said them Jesus,
answered Maria, said she, My Lord, then whenever the men go that they
should seek, and come upon teachings of error, by what are they about to
know that they are reckoned unto thee or otherwise? Answered the
Saviour, said he to Maria, I said unto you once, Be as the wise
money-changers, because that which is [315^a] good he taketh it, that
which is bad he casteth it out. Now therefore, say to every man who will
seek the Godhead, Whenever a wind of north, ye are wont to know that a
coolness is that will happen, whenever a south wind cometh out, ye are
wont to know that (added in upper margin) burning-heat with a warmth is
that which will happen. Now therefore say unto them, If ye knew the face
of the heaven with the earth out of the winds, Whenever some therefore
now should come up (close) to you and preach to you a Godhead, and ye
know in an exactness that their words agreed and suited (to) all your
words, these which I said unto you by witnessings two up to three, and
they have agreed in the constitution of the air with the heavens with
the cycles with the stars (aster) with the planet (phoster) with all the
earth with all which are in it with all the waters also with all which
are in them, say unto them, Those who come [315^b] unto you and their
words suit and agree in all the knowledge which I said unto you, then
receive them (as) belonging unto us. These are the (things) which ye
will say unto the men to whom ye preach, that they should keep
them(selves) from the teachings of error. Now therefore because of the
sinners I despoiled my(self) I came unto the World, that I should
deliver them, because that the righteous (ones) indeed, these who did
not do any of evil ever, and these who did not do sin at all, it is
necessary for them to find the mysteries, these which (are) in the Book
of Ieou, these which I caused Enokh to write in the paradisos, while
speaking with him out of the Tree of the Knowledge and out of the Tree
of the life. And I caused him to put them in the rock of Ararad. And I
put Kalapatauroth, the Ruler who (is) over Ghemmout, this (one) upon
whom are the feet [316^a] of Ieou, and he it is who goeth round all the
Aeons with the Destinies. That Ruler I put him being vigilant unto the
Books of Ieou because of the Flood, and that no Ruler should envy them
and should destroy them. These which I shall give to you whenever I
finish saying unto you the Distribution of the Universe. These therefore
having said them the Saviour, answered Maria, said she, My Lord, then
who therefore also is the man who is upon the World, who sinned not at
all, this (one) being sound from unlawfulness? For whenever he should be
sound from one he will not be able to be sound from another, that he
should find the mysteries which are in the Books of Ieou. For I say that
there is not man upon the World who will be able to be sound from sin.
For whenever he should be able to be sound from one he would not be able
to be sound from another. Answered the Saviour, said he to Maria, I
[316^b] say to you that they will find one in thousand, two in ten
thousand because of the completion of the mystery of the First Mystery,
these which I shall say whenever I should finish Distributing to you the
Universe. Because of this therefore I despoiled my(self) I brought the
mysteries unto the World, because they become all under the sin, and
they all come short of the free-gift of the mysteries. Answered Maria,
said she to the Saviour, My Lord, before that thou camest unto the Place
of the Rulers, and before that thou camest into the World did no soul go
unto the Light? Answered the Saviour said he to Maria, Amen amen I say
unto you, Before that I came unto the world not any soul went in unto
the Light. And now therefore I having come, I opened the gates of the
Light, and I opened the roads which take in unto the Light. And now
therefore [317^a] he who will do that which is worthy of the mysteries,
let him receive the mysteries and go unto the Light. Added also Maria,
said she, My Lord, but I heard that the prophets went unto the Light.
Added also the Saviour said he to Maria, Amen amen I say to thee, Not
any prophet went unto the Light. But the Rulers of the Aeons who spake
with them out of the Aeons, they gave to them the mystery of the Aeons;
and I having come unto the Place of the Aeons, Helias—I turned him, I
dispatched him unto the body of Iohannes the baptist. But the rest also
I turned them unto righteous bodies, these who will find the mysteries
of the Light, and go unto the Height and inherit the kingdom of the
Light, Abraham indeed with Isaak with Iakob, I forgave to them all their
sins with all their unlawfulnesses, and I gave to them the mysteries of
the Light in the Aeons, and I put [317^b] them in the Place of Iabraoth
with all the Rulers who repented: and while I go unto the Height, and
come, being about to go unto the Light, I shall take away their souls
with me unto the Light. But Amen I say to thee Maria: He (they, MS) will
not go unto the Light, I not having taken away thy soul, thine with that
of all thy brothers unto the Light. But the rest also of the patriarchs
with the righteous since the time of Adam even until now, those who are
in the Aeons with all the arrays of the Rulers: I having come unto the
Place of Aeons, I caused these, the Virgin of the Light to turn them
unto all bodies being about to become righteous (ones), these (are
those) who will find all the mysteries of the Light and go in and
inherit the kingdom of the Light. Answered Maria, said she, We are happy
beyond every man for these greatnesses which thou revealedst to us.
Answered the Saviour, said he to [318^a] Maria with all the disciples.
Yet I shall reveal to you all the greatnesses of the Height from inward
part of the inward parts even until the outward part of the outward
parts, that ye may become being complete in every knowledge and with
every pleroma with the height of the heights with the depth of the
depths. Continued also Maria, said she to the Saviour, My Lord, behold,
we knew in boldness in an exactness plainly that thou broughtest the
keys of the Mysteries of the kingdom of the Light, these which are wont
to forgive the sins of the souls and purify them, and make them pure
light and take them unto the Light.

                  *       *       *       *       *

[Half this line is ornament, two lines of ornament follow, and the title
of the Fourth Document follows with ornament below.]




                          THE FOURTH DOCUMENT
                   A PART OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR


[318^b] It happened therefore, they having crucified our Lord Jesus, He
rose out of those who are dead on his third day, gathered unto him his
disciples, they prayed him, saying, Our Lord be compassionate to us,
because we forsook father and mother with all the World, we followed
thee.

Then Jesus stood (up) with his disciples at the water of the Ocean and
he invoked with this prayer saying, Hear me, my Father, the Father of
every fatherhood, the boundless Light: a e ē i o u ō i a o a o i ō i a
psinother— ther(i)nops—nōpsither—zagourē—pagouri—nethmomaoth—
nepsiomaoth—marakhakhtha—thobarraban—tharnakhakhan—
zorokothora—Ieou—sabaoth: But these saying them Jesus, Thomas with
Andreas with Iakobos with Simon the Kananites they were being on the
west, their faces being turned unto the east. [319^a] But Philippos with
Bartholomaios, they were being on the south, being turned unto north.
But the remainder of disciples with the women disciples, they were
standing behind Jesus. But Jesus was standing at the altar, and cried
out Jesus, turned him(self) about it unto the four corners of the World
with his disciples, all being wrapped in linen garments, saying, i a o i
a o (written above) i a o. This is its (his, MS) interpretation i ō t a,
The Universe came out alpha, They will turn them. ō, Will become the
completion of all the completions. But these he having said them Jesus,
said he, Iaphtha iaphtha mounaēr, mounaēr, ermanouēr, ermanouēr, which
is this, O Father of every fatherhood of the Boundless Ones, thou shalt
hear me concerning my disciples whom I brought into thy presence,
because that they shall believe every word of thy truths: [319^b] and do
thou everything which I shall cry up unto thee concerning them: because
I know the name of the Father of the Treasury of the Light. Again also
cried out Jesus, who Aberamenthō is, saying the name of the Father of
the Treasury of the Light, and said he, Let all the mysteries of the
Rulers with the authorities, with the Angels with the Archangels, with
every power, with every work of the invisible God ag(x
corrected)rammakhamar(inserted)ei with the Barbēlo the bdella, let them
draw near apart and separate them(selves) on (the) right (hand). But at
that hour all the heavens came unto the west with all the Aeons with the
Sphere with their Rulers with all their powers, they ran all unto the
west on (the) left (hand) of the disk of the sun with the disk of the
moon. But the disk of the sun was being a great dragon with his tail
within his mouth, being mounted on [320^a] seven powers of the Left, and
drawing under him viz.: four powers being in the likeness of white
horses: but the going (basis, MS) of the moon was being of the type of a
ship, with a dragon male with a dragon female being for rudder unto it,
with two calves of white drawing under it, with the likeness of a child
behind the moon steering the dragons who rob the light of the Rulers
from them: with a face of cat in front of him. And all the World with
the mountains with the seas ran all of them unto the west unto the left.
And Jesus with his disciples remained in the midst of the aëry Place in
the roads of the road of the Middle, this which is below the Sphere. And
they came unto the first array of the road (added in margin, MS) which
is in the Middle. But Jesus stood (up) in the air of her (of the road)
Place with his disciples. Said the disciples of Jesus to him, What is
this Place in which we are? [320^b] Said Jesus, These are the Places of
the road of the Middle: for it happened, having been disorderly the
Rulers of the Adamas, they continued working intercourse, begetting
Rulers and Archangels and Angels and Ministers and Dekans. Came out on
(the) Right Ieou the Father of my Father, he bound them in a Destiny of
the Sphere: for there are twelve Aeons becoming, Sabaoth the Adamas
ruling over six, and Iabraoth his brother ruling over other six. Then
therefore Iabraoth believed the mysteries of the Light with his Rulers,
and he worked in the mysteries of the Light, he forsook the mysteries of
the intercourse. But Sabaoth indeed the Adamas remained working in the
intercourse with his Rulers. And Ieou the Father of my father, having
seen, that believed Iabraoth, he took him away with all the Rulers who
believed [321^a] with him: he received (him) unto him(self) from the
Sphere, he took him unto a (Place of) air, which was purified in the
presence of the light of the sun, between the Places of those of the
Middle, and between the Places of the invisible God. He put him there
with the Rulers who believed him. And he took away Sabaoth the Adamas
with his Rulers, these who worked not in the mysteries of the Light, but
who continued working in the mysteries of the intercourse. He bound them
in unto the Sphere. He bound eighteen hundred Rulers in every Aeon: he
put three hundred and sixty over them. He put another five great Rulers
ruling over the three hundred sixty and over all the Rulers who are
bound, these whom they are wont to call in all the World of the mankind
by these names: the first they are wont to call him, Kronos; the second,
Ares; the third, The hermes; the fourth, The aphrodite; the fifth,
[321^b] The zeus. Continued further Jesus, said he, Hear also that I may
say unto you their mystery. It happened therefore, Ieou, having bound
them thus, he drew a power out of the great Invisible, he bound it in
this which they are wont to call it, Kronos. And also he drew another
power out of Ipsantakhounkhainkhoukheokh, who is one among the three
triple-powered gods, he bound it in Ares: and he drew a power out of
Khainkhōōōkh, being one also among the three triple-powered gods. He
bound it in the hermes. Again also he drew a power out of the Pistis the
Sophia, the daughter of the Barbēlōs, he bound it in Aphrodite. And also
he noticed that they needed a rudder for him to steer the World and
(with, MS) the Aeons of the Sphere, that they should not destroy it in
their evil doing, he went up unto the Middle, he drew a power out of
[322^a] the Little Sabaoth the good, he of the Middle, he bound it in
Zeus, because that good is (he), for him to steer them in his goodness.
And he arranged the turning about of his array thus, for him to spend
thirteen months in Aeon (after) Aeon standing still, that every Ruler
upon whom he cometh should liberate (from) the wickedness of their evil
doing. And he gave to him the two Aeons for dwellingplace in the
presence of those of the hermes. I said unto you at the first time the
names of these five great Rulers, these in which are wont the men of the
World to call them: hear also now that I may say unto you also their
incorruptible names, which are these, Orimuth for Kronos, Munikhunaphōr
for Ares, Tarpetanuph for Hermes, Khōsi for the aphrodite, Khōnbal for
Zeus, namely their incorruptible names. But having heard [322^b] these
(words) the disciples, they prostrated, they worshipped Jesus, said
they, Happy are we, we, beyond every man, because thou revealedst to us
these great wonders. They added also, they prayed him, saying, We pray
thee, reveal to us, About (in, MS) what also are these roads. Drew near
in unto him Mariham, she prostrated, she worshipped unto his feet, and
she kissed his hands, said she, Yea, my Lord, reveal to us, What is the
need of the roads of the Middle: for we heard thee that they are put
over great punishments: what therefore is the manner, our Lord, (in)
which we shall escape? or (in) which we shall be quit of them? or are
they wont to lay hold on the souls in what manner? or are they (the
souls) wont to spend how much time in their punishments. Have compassion
upon us, our Lord, our Saviour, that should not take away our souls the
Receivers of the judgments of the roads of the Middle. And that they
should not judge [323^a] us, in their punishments which are evil, that
we may inherit also the Light of thy Father, that we should not become
being poor and cut away from thee. These therefore saying them Mariham
weeping, answered Jesus in great compassion, said he to them, Truly, my
brothers and my beloved, these who have forsaken father and mother
because of my name, that I should give to you every mystery with every
knowledge, I shall give to you the mystery of the twelve Aeons of the
Rulers with their seals with their tickets with the manner of invoking
them to go unto their Places. And I shall give to you the mystery of the
thirteenth (thirteen, MS) Aeon with the manner of invoking to go unto
its Place (their Places, MS). And I shall give to you their tickets with
their seals. And I shall give to you the mystery of the baptism of those
of the Middle with the manner of invoking to go unto their Place and
their [323^b] tickets with their seals, I shall show to you them. And I
shall give to you the baptism of those of the Right, our Place, with his
tickets with his seals, and with the manner of invoking to go thither.
And I shall give to you the great mystery of the Treasury of the Light
and with the manner of invoking to go thither. I shall give to you every
mystery with every knowledge, that they should call you, The sons of the
Pleroma which is complete in every knowledge and every mystery. Ye are
happy indeed beyond every man who (is) upon the earth, because the sons
of the Light came in your time.

Added also in the word Jesus, said he, It happened therefore after these
(things), came the Father of my Father, namely, Ieou, he took away other
three hundred with sixty Rulers among the Rulers also of the Adamas,
these who did not believe the mysteries of the Light: he bound them in
these [324^a] aery Places in which we are now below the Sphere, he
placed five other great Rulers over them, namely, those who become upon
the road of the Middle. The first Ruler of the road of the Middle (added
in upper margin) they are wont to call him The (feminine) Paraplex a
Ruler being of shape of woman, with her (his, MS) hair reaching down
upon her (his, MS) feet: with fifteen arch-demons under her (his, MS)
authority ruling over many other demons: and those demons they are those
which are wont to go in unto the men, and cause them to be angry and
curse and slander. And they are those which are wont to take away the
souls by robbery, and send them through their smoke of darkness with
their evil punishments. Said she, Mariham, I shall not fail in seeking
from thee, Be not angry with me, while I am seeking after every thing.
Said Jesus, Seek [324^b] after that which thou wilt. Said she, Mariham,
My Lord, reveal to us in what manner are they wont to take away the
souls by robbery, that my brothers also should understand it (them, MS).
Said Jesus, namely, Aberamentho, Since the Father of my Father, namely,
Ieou, he is the Provider of all the Rulers with the Gods with the
powers, these which became in the matter of the Light of the Treasury.
And Zorokothora Melkhisedek he also is the Legate of all the Lights
which are purified among the Rulers, taking them in unto the Treasury of
the Light. These two only are the great Lights, their business being
this, for them to come down unto the Rulers and purify them. And
Zorokothora Melkhisedek took away the purification of the Lights which
they purified among the Rulers, and took it unto the Treasury [325^a] of
the Light, whenever should become the ticket, and with the time of their
array, for them to come down unto the Rulers and oppress them and
afflict them, taking away the purification from the Rulers. But in the
hour in which they release them from the oppression of the afflicting,
and withdraw unto the Places of the Treasury of the Light, when they
should reach unto the Places of the Middle, is wont Zorokothora
Melkhisedek, he is wont to take away the lights, and take them into the
gate of those of the Middle, and take them unto the Treasury of the
Light. And is wont Ieou also to withdraw him(self) unto the Places of
those on the Right until the time also of the ticket for them to come
out. Are wont the Rulers therefore to be disorderly through the anger of
their evil doing. Immediately they are walking up with the Lights,
because that they (Ieou and M.) are not with them at that hour. And they
are wont to take away the souls which they will be able to carry off by
robbery [325^b] and waste them away by their smoke of darkness and their
evil fire. Then therefore the souls the quick-tempered (ones) with the
cursers with the slanderers, is wont to take them away the authority
called the Paraplex with the demons which are under her and send them
through the smoke of darkness and destroy them by her evil fire, and
they begin to be consumed and to be dissolved. They (the souls) are wont
to spend hundred thirty three years with nine months in the punishment
of her Places, while she tormenteth them in the fire of her evil doing.
It is wont to happen therefore after all these times, whenever the
Sphere should turn round and the little Sabaoth the Zeus cometh unto the
first of the Aeons of the Sphere, this (one) whom they are wont to call
in the World the Ram of the Bubasti, namely the Aphrodite. [326^a]
Whenever (Aphrodite) should come unto the seventh House of the Sphere,
namely, the Balance, they are wont to draw (away) the veils which are
between those on the Left with those on the Right, and is wont to look
out of the Height among those on the Right the great Sabaoth the good,
and all the World with all the Sphere (are troubled) before that he
looked: and he looked down upon the Places of the Paraplex, and her
Places dissolved and perished. And all the souls which (are) in her
punishments, they are wont to take them away and throw them back unto
the Sphere another time, because that they were (being) destroyed in the
punishments of the Paraplex.

He added also in the word, said he, (The Ruler of) the second array they
are wont to call him Ariuth the Ethiopian-woman, being a woman Ruler
being quite black, with fourteen other demons under her, they ruling
over many other demons. [326^b] And these demons which are there, who
are under Ariuth the Ethiopian-woman, they are those which are wont to
go in unto the men quarrelsome, until they excite the wars and killings
which happen; and give hardness to their heart and anger, for killings
to happen. And the souls, which this authority will take away by robbery
are wont to spend hundred with thirteen years in her Places, she is
tormenting them by her smoke of darkness with her evil fire, and they
draw near unto destruction. And after these (things) whenever the Sphere
should turn round, and (should) come the little Sabaoth the good, this
whom they are wont to call in the World Zeus; whenever he should come
unto the fourth Aeon of the Sphere which the Crab is, and (should) come
the Bubasti, this whom they are wont to call in the World, The
aphrodite, and she (should) come unto the [327^a] tenth House (Aeon, MS)
of the Sphere, this which they are wont to call, The He-goat, then they
are wont to draw (back) the veils which are between those of the Left
with those of the Right, and Ieou (should) look out on the Right and all
the World should be disturbed, and (should) be moved with all the Aeons
of the Sphere and (should) look upon the dwelling places of Ariuth the
Ethiopian-woman and her Places (should) be dissolved and be destroyed,
and they should take away all the souls which are in her punishments,
and (they) should throw them (back) unto the Sphere another time,
because that they perished by her smoke of darkness with her evil fire.
Added also said he, The (Ruler of the) third array they are wont to
call, The hecate the three of face, but there are twenty seven other
demons under her authority: they are those which are wont to go in unto
the men and they cause them to swear false(ly) and [327^b] they lie, and
love that which is not their own. The souls therefore which will take
away by robbery the hekate, she is wont to deliver them unto her demons
which are under her to torment them by her smoke of darkness with her
evil fire: they are afflicting them greatly by the demons, and they are
wont to spend hundred with five years with six months punishing them in
her punishments evil. But they are wont to begin to be destroyed and to
perish. And after these (things) whenever the Sphere should turn round
and (should) come the little Sabaoth the good, he of the Middle, this
(one) whom they are wont in the World to call, Zeus, and he (should)
come unto the eighth House (Aeon, MS) of the Sphere, this which they are
wont to call, The scorpion, and (should) come the Bubasti, this whom
they are wont to call, The aphrodite, and she (should) come unto the
second House (Aeon, MS) of the Sphere, this which they are wont to call,
[328^a] The bull, they are wont to draw (back) the veils between those
of the Left with those of the Right, and (to) look out of the Height the
Zorokothora Melkhisedek, and the World is (wont to) be moved with the
mountains, and the Rulers are (wont to) be disturbed: and he is (wont
to) look out upon all the Places of the hecate, and her Places are (wont
to) be dissolved and perish; and they take away all the souls which
(are) in her punishments, and throw them (back) unto the Sphere another
time, because that they were destroyed in the fire of her punishments.

He added also, said he, The (Ruler of the) fourth array which they are
wont to call, The Assessor of the Typhon, being a strong Ruler, becoming
under his authority thirty two demons: they are those who are wont to go
into the men and cause them to lust and fornicate and commit adultery
and to become doing [328^b] the intercourse continually. The souls
therefore which will take away by robbery this Ruler, they are wont to
spend hundred thirty eight years in his Places, are tormenting them his
demons by his smoke of darkness with his evil fire, and they begin to be
wasted away and to perish. It is wont to happen therefore whenever the
Sphere should turn (round), and (should) come the little Sabaoth, the
good, he of the Middle, this whom they are wont to call, Zeus, whenever
he should come unto the ninth Aeon of the Sphere, this which they are
wont to call, The archer, and the Bubasti, this whom they are wont to
call in the World, The aphrodite and she (should) come unto the third
Aeon of the Sphere, this which they are wont to call, The twin, they are
wont to draw (back) the veils which are between those of the Left with
those of the Right, and is (wont to) look out [329^a] Zarazaz, this whom
the Rulers are wont to call in the name of a strong Ruler of their
Places, Maskelli. And he is (wont to) look upon the dwelling places of
the Assessor the Typhon, and his Places are (wont to) be dissolved and
perish: and they take away all the souls which (are) in his punishments
and throw them (back) unto the Sphere another time, because that they
were diminished by his (her, MS) smoke of darkness and by his evil fire.
Again also he added in the word, said he to his disciples, The fifth
array, of which they are wont to call its Ruler, Iakhthanabas, being a
strong Ruler, being under him many other demons: they are those who are
wont to go in unto the men, and cause them to become acceptors of
person, wronging the righteous, and they are accepting person of the
sinners, receiving gifts against [329^b] the true judgment, they are
destroying it (judgment), they are forgetting the poor with those who
are in want, they are increasing the forgetfulness in their soul with
the care in which there is not profit, that they should not remember
their life, that whenever they should come out of the body they should
take away by robbery the souls: (and those) which will take away by
robbery this Ruler, they are wont to become in his punishments for
hundred fifty years with eight months; and they are wasted away by his
smoke of darkness with his evil fire, afflicting them greatly by the
flame of his fire. And whenever the Sphere should turn round, and
(should) come the little Sabaoth, the good, this whom they are wont to
call in the World, Zeus, unto the eleventh Aeon of the Sphere, this
which they are wont to call, The water-bearer, and (should) come the
Bubasti unto the fifth Aeon [330^a] of the Sphere, this which they are
wont to call, The lion, they are wont to draw (back) the veils, which
are between those of the Left with those of the Right, and (is wont) to
look out of the height the great Iao, the good, he of the Middle, down
upon the Places of Iakhthanabas whose Places dissolve and perish, and
they take away all the souls which are in his punishments, and they
throw them back unto the Sphere again, because that they were destroyed
by his punishments. These therefore are the actions of the roads of the
Middle of which ye sought (from) me.

But having heard these (things) the disciples, they prostrated, they
worshipped to him, saying, Help us, our Lord, and have compassion upon
us, that we should be saved from these punishments which are evil, which
are prepared for the sinners! Woe to them, Woe to them, the sons of men,
because they are being [330^b] like to blind (men) groping in the
darkness and seeing not! Have compassion on us, O Lord, in this great
blindness in which we are in, and have mercy on all the race of the
mankind, because they laid snares for the souls as the lions for a prey,
which they prepare for food for their punishments by the forgetfulness
and the ignorance which is in them. Have compassion therefore upon us,
our Lord, our Saviour, and have mercy on us and deliver us in this great
bewilderment.

Said Jesus to his disciples, Be of good cheer, fear not because ye are
happy: because I shall make you for lord over all these, and I shall
make them all subject to you. Remember that I finished saying to you
before that they crucified me, that I shall give to you the keys of the
kingdom of the heavens. Now also I say to you [331^a] that I shall give
them to you.

These therefore having said them Jesus, he hymned in the great name.
Were hidden the Places of the road of the Middle and Jesus with his
disciples remained upon air of light which is much greatly. Said Jesus
to his disciples, Draw near unto me. And they drew near unto him: he
turned unto the four corners of the World, he said the great name over
their head: he blessed them, he breathed in unto their eyes. Said Jesus
to them, Look up, see what ye see. And they took away their eyes up,
they saw a great light which is much greatly, native of earth shall not
be able to speak of it. Said he also to them again, Look out on the
Light, see what ye see. Said they, We are seeing a fire with water with
wine with blood. Said [331^b] Jesus, who Aberamentho is, toward his
disciples, Amen I say to you, I brought not anything unto the World,
while coming, except this fire with this water with this wine with this
blood. I brought the water with the fire from the Place of the Light of
the Lights from the Treasury of the Light. I brought the wine with the
blood from the Place of the Barbelos, and after a little time my Father
dispatched to me the spirit which is holy in the type of a dove: but the
fire with the water with the wine they became unto a purifying of the
world. The blood also became to me for sign, because of the body of the
mankind, this which I took from the Place of the Barbelos, the great
power of the Invisible God. The spirit also is drawing in front of every
soul, taking them [332^a] unto the Place of the Light. Because of this I
said to you, I came to cast a fire upon the earth, which is this, that I
came to purify the sins of all the World in fire. And because of this I
said to the Samaritan woman, Thou wast not knowing the free-gift of God,
and who it is who saith to thee, Give me that I may drink: Thou wast
asking him and he (would) give to thee water living, and it (would)
become to thee for a fountain in thee, springing up unto a life of unto
age. And also because of this I took a cup of wine, I blessed it I gave
it to you, because this is the blood, the Covenant which they will shed
for you unto the forgiving of your sins. And also because of this they
thrust the spear in unto my side, came out water with blood. But these
are the mysteries of the Light which are wont to forgive sins, which are
those, the appellations and (with, MS) [332^b] the names of the Light.

It happened therefore after these (things), commanded Jesus, Let all the
powers of the Left (hand) come unto their Places. And Jesus with his
disciples remained upon the mountain of the Galilaia. Added also the
disciples, they prayed him, How long therefore dost not thou cause them
to forgive our sins which we did with our unlawfulness, and make us
worthy of the kingdom of thy Father. But Jesus, said he to them, Amen I
say to you, Not only shall I purify your sins, but I shall make you
worthy of the kingdom of my Father. And I shall give to you the mystery
of the forgiving of sin upon the earth, that that which ye will forgive
upon the earth, they shall forgive to him in the heavens, and that which
ye will bind upon the earth it will become being bound in the heavens. I
shall give to you the mystery of the kingdom of the heavens that ye also
[333^a] shall do them to the men. But Jesus, said he to them, Bring to
me fire with some wood of vine. They brought them to him, he offered up
the Oblation: he put the two jars of wine one on the right hand and the
other on the left of the Oblation. He put the Oblation in front of them.
He put a cup of water by the vessel of wine which (is) on the right, and
he put a cup of wine by the vessel of wine which (is) on the left, and
he put some cakes according to the number of the disciples in the midst
of the cups. He put a cup of water behind the cakes. Stood (up) Jesus in
front of the Oblation: he put the disciples behind him, all being
wrapped in garment of linen, with the ticket of the name of the Father
of the Treasury of the Light in their hands. He cried out thus, saying,
Hear me, my [333^b] Father, the Father of every fatherhood, the
boundless Light Iao iuo iaō aoi uia psinother theropsin (n)opsither
nephthomaoth nephiomaōth marakhakhtha marmarakhtha ieanamenaman
amaneitououranou israi amen amen soubaibai appaap amen amen
deraaraiapaou amen amen sarsasartou amen amen koukiaminmiai amen amen
iai iai touap amen amen amen main mari marie marei amen amen amen. Hear
me, my Father, the Father of every kingdom, I invoke you also the
forgivers, the purifiers of the unlawfulness, forgive the sins of the
souls of these disciples who followed me, and purify their unlawfulness,
and cause them to be worthy of being numbered in unto the kingdom of my
[334^a] Father, the Father of the Treasury of the Light, because they
followed me and kept my commandments. Now therefore my Father, Father of
every fatherhood, let come the forgivers, whose names are these
ghiphirepsnijiet—zenei berimou—sokhabrikher euthari nanei dieis
balmerikh Meuni poskhirie entair mouthiour cmour peukher oouskhous
minionor isokhobor tha. Hear me invoking you, forgive the sins of these
souls and blot out their unlawfulness: let them be worthy of being
numbered in unto the kingdom of my Father the Father of the Treasury of
the Light: because I know thy great powers and I invoke them Ayer bebrō
athroni eoureph eone souphen knitou sokhreoph mayoubi mneyor sououi
khokheteoph khōkhe [334^b] eteoph memōkh aneuph. Forgive the sins of
these souls, blot out their unlawfulness, those which they did knowing,
and those which they did not knowing, those which they did in
fornication with adultery even until to-day: forgive them to them, and
cause them to be worthy of being numbered in unto the kingdom of my
Father, and be worthy of receiving out of this Oblation, my Father who
(art) holy. If therefore my Father thou heardest me and forgavest the
sins to these souls and blottedst out their unlawfulness, and thou
causedst them to be worthy of being numbered in unto thy kingdom, thou
shalt give to me a sign in this Oblation. And happened the sign which
Jesus said. Said Jesus toward his disciples, Rejoice and be glad;
because they forgave your sins, they blotted out your unlawfulness
[335^a] and ye were numbered in unto the kingdom of my Father.

But these having said them, the disciples rejoiced in great joy, said
Jesus to them, This is the manner and this is the mystery which ye will
do for the men who will believe you, having not guile in them, and
hearkening to you in every word which is good. And their sins with their
unlawfulness they will blot them out unto the day (in) which ye did this
mystery. But hide this mystery, give it not to every man except him who
will do every thing which I said to you in my commandments. This
therefore is the mystery of the truth of the baptism of those who will
forgive their sins, and those who will cover over their unlawfulnesses.
This is the baptism of the First Oblation which guideth in unto the
Place of the truth, and in [335^b] unto the Place of the Light. After
these (things) also said they his disciples, Rabbei reveal to us the
mystery of the Light of thy Father, since we knew thee while thou
sayest, that there is also baptism of Fire, and there is also baptism of
Spirit, being holy, of the Light, and there is a spiritual anointing,
these which are wont to take the souls unto the Treasury of the Light.
Say therefore unto us their mystery, that we may inherit also the
kingdom of thy Father. Said Jesus to them, These mysteries after which
ye seek? There is not mystery more excellent than they, which is about
to take your souls unto the Light of the Lights, unto the Places of the
truth with the goodness, of the Place of him who is holy of all those
who are holy, unto the Place in which there is not woman, nor is there
male, nor is there shape in that Place, but [336^a] a light is being
steadfast ineffable: there is not that which is more excellent therefore
than those mysteries after which ye seek, except the mystery of the
Seven Voices with their forty nine powers, and their tickets, and with
the Name which is more excellent than all of them, the Name in which is
becoming every name, and every light and every power. He who knoweth
that Name, whenever he should come out of the body of the matter, shall
not any smoke nor any darkness nor authority nor Ruler of the Sphere of
the Destiny, nor Angel nor Archangel nor power, they shall not be able
to hold back the soul which knoweth that Name. But whenever he should
come out of the World and (should) say that Name unto the fire, it is
wont to be quenched, and is wont the darkness to withdraw. And whenever
he should say unto the demons with the Receivers [336^b] of the Darkness
which is outer, with their Rulers with their authorities with their
powers, they will all perish and their flame burn and they (will) cry
out, Thou art holy, thou art holy, he who is holy of all those who are
holy. And whenever they should say that Name unto the Receivers of the
judgments which are evil, with their authorities with all their powers,
and the Barbelo also with the Invisible God with the three
Triple-powered Gods, at the hour in which they will say this Name in
those Places, they will fall all of them one upon another and be
dissolved and perish, and they (will) cry out, O Light of every Light
which becometh in the Boundless Light, remember us also and purify us.

But having finished saying these words Jesus, cried out all his
disciples, they wept in a great cry, saying,

(_Four leaves wanting._)




                           THE FIFTH DOCUMENT


(_Title and eight pages wanting_)

[345^a] fire and punish her in them for six other months with eight
days. After these (things) they (will) take her upon the road of the
Middle, and each of the Rulers of the road of the Middle (will) punish
her in his punishments for six other months with eight days. After these
things they (will) take her to the Virgin of the Light, this who is wont
to judge the good and (with, MS) the evil, that she may judge her. And
whenever the Sphere should turn round she is wont to deliver them up to
her Receivers, that they may cast her unto the Aeons of the Sphere. And
are wont the Ministers of the Sphere to take her out unto water which is
below the Sphere; and it is (wont) to become a fire boiling and eating
into her, until it purifieth her entirely. And is wont to come Ialouham

(_Eight lines wanting_)

the Receiver of Sabaoth, the Adamas, this who is wont to give the cup of
forgetfulness to the souls, and to bring a [345^b] cup being full of the
water of the forgetfulness and give it to the soul: and she (is wont to)
drink it and forget every place (coptic word) with every Place unto
which she went: and cast her into a body, which is about to spend its
time (in which) he is wont to pain his heart continually. This is the
punishment of the man who curseth. Added further Mariham, said she, My
Lord Jesus, then the man (a) slanderer continually, whenever he should
come out of body whither is he about to go, or what is his punishment?
Said Jesus, A man (a) slanderer continually, whenever should be
completed his time by the Sphere for him to come out of body, are wont
to come after him Abiout with Kharmon the Receivers of Ariel, and they
bring his soul out of body, and spend three days going with her teaching
her the creatures of the World. And after these (things) [346^a] they
take her down unto Amente (close) to Ariel, and he (is wont) to punish
her in his punishments eleven months with twenty one days. And
afterwards they take her unto the Chaos (close) to Ialdabaoth with his
forty nine demons, and each one of his demons goeth out upon her for
another eleven months with other twenty one days, scourging her with
whips of smoke. And after these they take her into the rivers of smoke
with seas of fire boiling, and they punish her in them other eleven
months with twenty one days. And after these they are wont to take her
away upon the road of the Middle, and each of the Rulers in the road of
the Middle punisheth her in his punishments other eleven months with
twenty one days. After [346^b] these they are wont to take her away to
the Virgin of the Light, this who is wont to judge the righteous with
the sinners, that she may judge her. And whenever the Sphere should turn
round, she is wont to deliver her up to her Receivers, that they may
cast her out unto the Aeons of the Sphere. And the Ministers of the
Sphere take her out unto water below the Sphere, and it becometh a smoke
boiling and it eateth in at her, until it purifieth her entirely. And
bringeth the cup of forgetfulness Ialouham, the Receiver of Sabaoth, the
Adamas, and he giveth it to the soul: and she drinketh it and forgetteth
every place (coptic word) with every thing with every Place unto which
she went: and they give her into a body being about to spend his time
being oppressed. This is the judgment of the man, (the) slanderer. Said
she, Mariham, Woe woe to the sinners. Answered [347^a] also Salome, said
she, My Lord, Jesus, a man, murderer having not done sin ever except
killing, whenever he should come out of body, what is his punishment?
Answered Jesus, said he, A man killer, having not done sin ever except
killing, whenever his time should be completed by the Sphere for him to
come out of body, are wont to come the Receivers of Ialdabaoth, and
bring his soul out of body, and bind her by her feet behind a great
demon of face of horse, and he spendeth three days going round with her
in the World. After these (things) they are wont to take her out unto
the Place of the cold with the snow and punish her there for three years
with six months. After these they (are wont to) take her down unto the
Chaos (close) to Ialdabaoth with his forty nine demons, and scourge
[347^b] her his demons other three years for each (demon) with six
months. After these (things) they are wont to take her unto the Chaos
(close) to the Persephone, and punish her in her punishments other three
years with six months. After these (things) they are wont to take her
away upon the road of the Middle, and each of the Rulers of the road of
the Middle punisheth her in the punishments of his Places for other
three years with six months. And after these they take her to the Virgin
of the Light, this who is wont to judge the righteous with the sinners
that she may judge her, and whenever the Sphere should turn round she is
wont to command, that they cast her unto the Darkness which is outer,
until the time (in) which they will take away the Darkness of the Middle
she is wont to be destroyed and dissolved. This is the punishment of the
man, (a) killer. Said he, Petros, My Lord, [348^a] Let the women be
content unto seeking, that we also may seek. Said Jesus to Mariham with
the women, Leave the place for your brothers, (the) male that they also
may seek. Answered Petros said he, My Lord, then a man, (a) thief, (a)
robber, his sin being this continually, whenever he should come out of
body, what is his punishment? Said Jesus, This of this kind whenever his
time should be completed by the Sphere, are wont to come after him the
Receivers of Adonis, and bring his soul out of body and spend three days
going round with her teaching her the creatures of the World. After
these (things) they are wont to take her down unto Amente (close) to
Ariel that he may punish her in his punishments for three months with
eight days with hours two. [348^b] And after these (things) they take
(her) unto the Chaos (close) to Ialdabaoth, with his forty nine demons,
that each of his demons should punish her other three months with eight
days with hours two. After these (things) they are wont to take her down
upon the road of the Middle, that each of the Rulers of the road of the
Middle should punish her by his smoke of darkness with his evil fire for
other three months with eight days with hours two. After these (things)
they are wont to take her up to the Virgin of the Light, this who is
wont to judge the righteous and the sinners, that she may judge her. And
whenever should the Sphere turn round, she is wont to give her to her
Receivers, that they may cast her unto the Aeons of the Sphere, that the
Ministers of the Sphere may take her unto water being below the Sphere,
that it may become [349^a] smoke boiling, that it may eat in at her,
until it purify her entirely. After these (things) is wont to come
Ialouham the Receiver of Sabaoth, the Adamas, and he bringeth the cup of
the forgetfulness, and he giveth it to the soul that she may drink it,
and she forgetteth every thing with every Place unto which she went: and
they cast her unto a body lame and maimed and blind. This is the
punishment of the man, (a) robber.

Answered Andreas, said he, A man proud, (a) despiser whenever he should
come out of body, what will they do to him? Said Jesus, This of this
kind whenever his time should be completed by the Sphere, are wont to
come after him the Receivers of Ariel and take his soul, and they spend
three days going about in the World teaching her the creatures of
[349^b] the World. After these (things) they are wont to take her down
unto Amente, up to Ariel that he may punish her in his punishments for
twenty months. After these (things) they are wont to take her unto the
Chaos up to Ialdabaoth with his forty nine demons, and that he may
punish her with his demons one by one for other twenty months. After
these (things) they are wont to take her up on the road of the Middle,
that each of the Rulers of the road of the Middle may punish her for
other twenty months. And after these (things), they are wont to take her
to the Virgin of the Light that she may judge her. And whenever should
the Sphere turn round, she is wont to give her to her Receivers, that
they may cast her unto Aeons of the Sphere. And are wont the Ministers
of the Sphere to take her out unto water being underneath the Sphere,
that it may become a smoke boiling that it may eat in [350^a] at her
until it purifieth her. And is wont to come Ialouham the Receiver of
Sabaoth, the Adamas, and bringeth the cup of forgetfulness, and he
giveth it to the soul that she may drink it, and she forgetteth every
thing with every Place unto which she went: and they cast her down unto
a body dumb, deformed, that every one may remain despising him. This is
the punishment of the man proud (a) despiser.

Said he, Thomas, A man blasphemer continually, what is his punishment?
Said Jesus, This of this kind whenever should his time be completed by
the Sphere, are wont to come after him the Receivers of Ialdabaoth and
bind him with his tongue to a great demon with face of horse, and they
spend three days going about with him in the World and punish him. After
these (things) they are wont to take him [350^b] out unto the place of
the cold with the snow to punish him for eleven years. After these
(things) they are wont to take him down unto the Chaos (close) to
Ialdabaoth with his forty nine demons, that each of the demons may
punish him other eleven years. After these (things) they are wont to
take him out unto the Darkness which is outer, until the day (in) which
they will judge the great Ruler of face of dragon which goeth round the
Darkness, and is wont that soul, she is wont to be numbed and to waste
away and to be dissolved. This is the judgment of the man blasphemer.

Said Bartholomaios, A man who sleeper with male, What is his punishment?
Said he, Jesus: The man sleeping with male with the man who will sleep
with him (there shall be the same measure) [351^a] as the man
blasphemer: whenever the time therefore should be completed by the
Sphere, are wont to come after their souls the Receivers of Ialdabaoth
that he may punish them with his forty nine demons for eleven (added in
margin) years. After these (things) they are wont to take them out unto
rivers of smoke with seas of pitch boiling, full of demons of face of
swine, they are wont to eat in at them and punish them in the rivers of
smoke for other eleven years. After these (things) they are wont to take
them out in the Darkness which is outer, until the day of the judgment
(in) which they will Judge the great Darkness, they are wont to be
dissolved and perish.

Said Thomas, We heard that there are some upon the earth who are wont to
take away the sperma of the males with the menstruum [351^b] of the
woman and give them unto a (mess of) lentil and eat it, while they say,
We are believing Esau with Iakob. Is it a thing which is right or
otherwise? But Jesus was angry with the World at that hour, and said he
to Thomas, Amen I say that every sin and every unlawfulness—this sin
surpasseth them—these of this kind. They are about to take them
immediately unto the Darkness which is outer, nor shall they throw them
back unto the Sphere again. But they are not about to be wasted away and
destroy them in the Darkness which is outer, the place in which there is
not mercy nor is there light, but the weeping is, and the gnashing of
the teeth is (there). And every soul which they will take unto the
Darkness which is outer, they are not wont to throw them back again, but
they are wont to perish and be dissolved.

Answered Iohannes, Then a man [352^a] having not done sin but being
become good continually, but having not found thy mysteries for him to
pass through the Rulers, whenever he should come out of body, what will
they do to him? Said Jesus, The man of this kind whenever should his
time be completed by the Sphere, are wont to come after his soul the
Receivers of Bainkhoookh, being one among the Triple-powered Gods, that
they may take his soul in a joy with a gladness, and spend three days
going round with her teaching her the creatures of the World in joy with
gladness. After these (things) they are wont to take her down unto
Amente and teach her the punishment-places, those which (are) in Amente,
but they would not be about to punish her in them, but they are about to
teach her only of them. And the steam of the flame of the punishments
[352^b] is wont to become touching her only a little. After these
(things) they take her away up on the road of the Middle, and teach her
the punishments of the roads of the Middle, while the steam of the flame
toucheth her a little. And after these (things) they take her to the
Virgin of the Light, that she may judge her before the little Sabaoth
the good, he of the Middle, until the Sphere should turn round, that
Zeus with Aphrodite may come in the presence of the Virgin of the Light,
that the Kronos with Ares may come behind her. Then she is wont to take
away that righteous soul and deliver her up to her Receivers and cast
her unto the Aeons of the Sphere, that the Ministers of the Sphere may
take her out unto water being underneath the Sphere, that it may become
a smoke [353^a] boiling, that it may eat in at her until it should
purify her entirely. And is wont to come Ialouham the Receiver of
Sabaoth, the Adamas, this who is wont to give the cup of forgetfulness
to the souls. And he is wont to bring the water of forgetfulness, and
give it to the soul and she forgetteth every thing with every Place unto
which she went. Afterwards is wont to come a Receiver of the little
Sabaoth, the good, he of the Middle, he is wont to bring also a cup,
full of the understanding and wiseness and with watchfulness in it, and
giveth it to the soul, and they cast her unto a body, that she will not
be able to sleep nor will she be able to forget, because of the cup of
the watchfulness which they gave to her, but it will become beating her
heart continually, seeking after the mysteries of the Light, [353^b]
until she find them by the precept of the Virgin of the Light, and
inherit the Light eternal (of-unto-age, MS).

Said Mariham, Then a man having done every sin and every unlawfulness,
having not found the mysteries of the Light is he about to receive all
his punishments at one time? Said Jesus, Yea, he is about to receive
them. If also those which he did (were) three he is about to receive
three punishments.

Said Iohannes, Then a man having done every sin and every unlawfulness,
but at the last he found the mysteries of the Light is it possible for
him to be saved? Said Jesus, This of this kind who did every sin and
every unlawfulness, and found the mysteries of the Light, and did them
and completed them, and did not cease, nor did sin, he is about to
inherit the Treasury of the Light.

Said Jesus to his disciples, If should [354^a] the Sphere turn round and
(if) Kronos with Ares should come behind the Virgin of the Light; and
Zeus with the Aphrodite should come in the presence of the Virgin, being
in their own Aeons, they are wont to draw (away) the veils of the
Virgin; she is wont to become cheerful in that hour, seeing these two
stars of light in her presence. And every soul which she will cast unto
the cycle of the Aeons of the Sphere at that hour, for them to come out
unto the world, they are wont to become righteous and good, and they are
wont to find the mysteries of the Light at this time. (Or if not) she is
wont to dispatch them another time, that they may find the mysteries of
the Light. If Ares also with Kronos should come to the presence of the
Virgin, Zeus with the Aphrodite beg behind her, not seeing them, every
soul which she will cast [354^b] unto the creatures of the Sphere at
that hour, they are wont to become evil and wrathful, and they are not
wont to find the mysteries of the Light.

These therefore while Jesus is saying them to his disciples in the
Middle of Amente, cried out, wept the disciples, Woe woe to the men the
sinners, these upon whom the neglect lieth and the forgetfulness of the
Rulers, until they come out of body and they take them unto these
punishments. Have mercy on us, have mercy on us, the Son of him who is
holy, and have compassion on us, that we should be saved from these
punishments and these judgments, which are prepared for the sinners.
Otherwise we did sin, we also, our Lord and our Light....

(_Seven lines vacant_)

[355^a] the righteous (one). They came out (by) three (and) three unto
the four regions of the heaven, they preached the evangel of the Kingdom
in all the world, the Christ working with them in the word of the
strengthening and the signs which follow them and the wonders. And thus
they knew the kingdom of the God in all the earth and in all the world
of the Israel, unto witness to all the nations, these who become from
the places of rising to place of setting: (two lines of ornament, two
lines erasure, and two more lines of ornament.)




                        INDEX OF PSALMS AND ODES


 50^a, Psalm 68 (69), 1-37, Maria, 27

 55^a, Psalm 70 (71), 1-13 (11), Petros, 30

 58^a, Psalm 69 (70), 1-6, Martha, 31

 61^b, Psalm 101 (102), 1-22, Iohannes, 33

 67^b, Psalm 87 (88), 1-19, Philippos, 36

 69^b, Psalm 129 (130), 1-8, Andreas, 38

 71^b, Psalm 81 (82), 1, Maria, 39

 74^b, Psalm 24 (25), 1-22 (21), Thomas, 40

 80^a, Psalm 30 (31), 1-19, Maththaios, 44

 85^b, Psalm 34 (35), 1-28, Iakobos, 47

 90^b, Psalm 119 (120), 1-7 (6), Petros, 50

 92^b, Psalm 51 (52), 1-9 (10), Salome, 51

 97^a, Psalm 108 (109), 1-31 (30), Andreas, 53

 100^b, Psalm 50 (51), 1-4, Martha, 55

 103^a, Solomon 1-9, Salome, 56

 106^a, Solomon 19 (Ode), 1-4, Maria the Mother of Jesus, 57

 107^b, Psalm 84 (85), 11, 12 (10, 11), Maria, Mariham, Iohannes, 58,
    &c.

 120^a, Solomon (Odes), 1-9, Petros, 65

 130^a, Psalm 90 (91), 1-16, Iakkobos, 70

 138^b, Solomon, the son of David, in his Odes, 1-9;
   Thomas, 75

 145^a, Ode of Solomon, 1-11, Matthias, 78

 150^a, Psalm 29 (30), 1-3, Maria, 81

 151^a, Psalm 29 (30), 11, 12 (10, 11), Martha, 81

 152^a, Psalm 102 (103), 1-5, Maria, 82

 153^b, Psalm 39 (40), 1-4, Andreas, 83

 161^a, Psalm 7 (7), 1-6, Iakkobos, 86

 163^b, Psalm 7 (7), 12-17, Martha, 88

 167^b, Psalm 106 (107), 1-21, Philippos, 90




                                 INDEX


 Aberamentho = Jesus, 180, 184, 188

 Abiout, 193

 Abraham, Isaak, Iakob, sins of, 179

 Adam, 123, 179

 Adamas, the, 12, 19, 68, 69, 71, 77, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 146, 169, 181;
   Sabaoth the Adamas, 181

 Adonis, 195

 Aeon: cares of this, 109;
   courses of the, 18, 19;
   Mystery of the, 22, 178, 183;
   the 12, 11, 24, 48, 54, 72, 84, 93, 181, 183;
   the 13th (the place of righteousness, 26, 46, 50), 9, 22, 24, 32, 51,
      54, 68, 72, 82, 84, 88, 93, 107;
   Rulers of the 13th, 48;
   Veils of the, 21;
   Magic of those of the, 15;
   consummation of the, 97

 Agrammakhamarei, 180

 Alms, 130

 Alpha, 180

 Amen: the three, 2, 9, 96, 97, 108, 115;
   the seven, 2, 9, 96, 108, 115

 Amente, 36, 128, 162, 193, 195, 196, 197, 199;
   Amente of the Chaos, 142

 Andreas, 38, 53, 82, 124, 126, 180, 195

 Answer, 114, 117, 118, 121, 122, 124, 139

 Anti-type, 173

 Ararad, 178

 Aphrodite, the, χωσι, 182;
   βυβαστι, 186; 198, 199

 Archangel and angel, 1;
   hymning, 3;
   belong to Æon, 9;
   excelled by man, 115;
   form part of Kerasmos, 124;
   set on the right hand, 180;
   produced by Rulers, 181;
   transgressed and taught mysteries, 13;
   one watches at gate of punishment, 161

 Ares, 182, 198, 199

 Ariel, 128, 193, 195, 196

 Ariuth, 185

 Authority, 1, 10, 12, 21, 38, 180, 191


 Barbelo(s), 7, 25, 57, 60, 63, 64, 180, 182, 188, 191

 Bartholomaios, 180, 196

 Basilisk, 68, 161

 Bonds, 10, 40, 74, 79, 142, 144

 Book, 35, 123, 127, 178, 180

 Boundary, 8

 Bubasti, 185, 186, 187


 Chambers of punishment, 160

 Change of body, 126, 143, 148, 159, 172

 Chaos, 23 etc.;
   Ruler of, 34, 88;
   bonds of, 89;
   fires of, 131;
   darkness of, 24;
   power of, 32;
   punishment of, 143;
   gates of, 89

 Chief Captain, 96, 108

 Child of the child (Twin Saviour), 2, 9, 96, 115

 Chosen, 20

 Christ, 6, 7, 199

 Confusion, 7, 38, 108, 115, 124, 142, 170

 Consummation, 94, 97

 Contentious Receivers, 114, 117, 131, 142, etc.;
   Rulers, 175;
   Ministers, 142, 149, etc.

 Counterfeit spirit, 32, 141-148, 150, 151, 169-175

 Course: of the sun, 2;
   of the Æons, 18, 19;
   of the Rulers, 16;
   (path) of the Destiny and Sphere, 19

 Crown of Light, 57, 69


 Darkness: Outer, 154, etc.;
   Ruler of, 52;
   Demons and Receivers of, 191;
   Punishments of, 163

 David, 27, etc.

 Deacons of the Middle, 7, 97, 108

 Defence, 114, 117, 118, 121, 122, 124, 139, 146, 147, 148, 172

 Dekans, 1, 15, 170, 181;
   of the Rulers, 7 A.D., 32;
   origin of, 107

 Demon: in matter, 32;
   plural, 38;
   in air, 53;
   emanation, 68;
   reason of their origin, 106;
   can be cured, 140;
   under arch-demon, 183;
   under Ariuth, 185;
   with face of horse, 194;
   of Ialtabaoth, 129;
   of outer Darkness, 191

 Demonic, 69, 72, 85

 Despoiling, 110-113

 Destiny, 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 21, 93, 134, 142, 176;
   house of arrays of, gates of, 11;
   pole of, 165;
   plural, 178;
   of sphere, 181

 Disciples (women), 180;
   men, 1, etc.

 Dove, 1, 64, 188

 Dragon, 68, 130, 136, 153, 160-4, 166-8;
   of sun and moon, 181;
   face of, 196


 Effluence of Light, 58, 64, etc., 74, 86, 118, 119, 165

 Eight-form (figure), 15, 16, 19

 Elisabet, 6, 61

 Emanations of Self-willed Triple power, 23, etc.;
   of the Invisible, 1, 22, etc.;
   of the Treasury, 1, 9;
   of the Light, 60, 114

 Enokh, 123, 178

 Esaias the prophet, 14

 Ethiopian, 185


 Fate (Moira), 141, 142, 144, 147, 170, 176

 Father, 83, 180, 188, 189;
   all places of my, 30;
   kingdom of my, 30, 190;
   of every kingdom, 190;
   of every fatherhood, 180;
   of the Treasury of the Light, 180

 Firmament, 9, 10, 106, 124, 159

 Forefather, 9, 12, 92, 107, 115

 Forgetfulness, Cup of, 169, 193, 196

 Free-gift, 120, 131, 152, 153, 156, 166, 178


 Gabriel, 6;
   and Michael, 64, 70, 73

 Gnashing, of teeth, 130, 136, 159

 God: only of the truth inaccessible, 121;
   Gods of the Æons, 11, 48;
   the Gods, 38, 100, 115, 124, 184;
   the Self-willed, 49


 Heavens, the, 4, 92;
   all, 9, 181;
   Kingdom of, 13, 131;
   Mystery of kingdom of, 189;
   key, etc. of, 176

 Height, 5, 23;
   Rulers of, 6;
   Angel of, 161;
   Inheritance of, 17;
   Knowledge of, 91;
   Fire of (lightning), 106;
   Greatnesses of, 179;
   H. of the, 179;
   Light of, 22;
   Mysteries of, 61;
   Spaces of, 64;
   Gate of, 84

 Hekate, 186

 Helias, 6, 7, 179

 Helper, 7, 96, 99, 115, 122, 170;
   the lesser, 99;
   the fifteen, 97;
   the five, 1, 2, 100

 Hermes, the, 182;
   Tarpetanuph, 182

 Holy: of all who are holy, 191;
   son of the, 199


 Iabraoth, 179, 181

 Iak(k)obos, 47, 48, 70, 86, 180

 Iakhthanabas, 187;
   place of, 132

 Iald(t)abaoth, 24, 129, 194

 Ialouham, 194, 195, 196

 Iao, the great, 97, 187;
   the little, 6

 Ieou, 13, 17, 96, 141, 161, 167, 181, 183, 184

 Influences, 13, etc.

 Inheritance of Light, 98, etc.;
   of the Height, 17;
   places of, 40, 94, 99;
   to inherit, 59, etc.

 Invoke, 12

 Iohannes, disciple, 33, 63, 101, 132, 198;
   virgin, 34, 116;
   baptist, 6, 61, 177, 179

 Ioseph, 59, 60


 Jesus: the merciful, etc., 4, 13;
   commandments of, 191;
   vesture of, 5;
   material body of, 7, etc., 188;
   mysteries of, 48;
   kingdom of, 94;
   eleven years of, 1


 Kalapatauroth, 178

 Kharmon, 193

 Kh(B)ainkhoookh, 182

 King, 147, 156

 Knowledge, 38, 94, 128, 170, 177, 179, 183;
   Tree of the, 178;
   of all knowledges, 8;
   of the Height, 91;
   of the Ineffable, 109, etc.

 Kronos, 182, 198, 199;
   Orimuth, 182


 Land of the Light, 93, 94, 103, 176

 Law of Moyses, 171, 172;
   prophecy of Moyses, 36

 Leader, 9

 Legate, πρεσβυτής, 9, 161, 167, 184

 Lion face, 23, 42, 50, 54, 68, 83

 Lords of the Æons, 1, 11, 21, 38, 107, 115


 Magic, 13, 15

 Magdalene, 91, 94, 99, 101, 108, 116, 118, 122, 161, 171

 Marks, 1, 2, 9;
   of light, 110

 Martha, 31, 55, 81, 87

 Maskelli (Zarazaz), 187

 Math(th)aios, 35, 43, 44, 78, 80

 Matter: singular and plural, 26;
   origin of all, 124;
   purified by Mysteries, 125;
   material æons, 32;
   haab, coptic word for, 38;
   material darkness, 77;
   material soul, 20

 Melkhisedek, 17-19, 96, 146, 164, 169;
   Zorokothora M., 184

 Members, 8, 77, 79, 112, 114, 121, 127

 Middle, the, 115;
   Iao of the, 6;
   Deacons in the, 7;
   place of, 93;
   Captain of, 97;
   Angels of, 97;
   near the Virgin, 164;
   Road, of the, 131, 181, 183, 193-5

 Minister, 38, 107, 142, 149

 Moon, 2, 3, 18;
   disk of, 170, 171, 181

 Mother of Jesus, 7, 57, 59, 62

 Most profound (ones) (hyperbathroi), 111

 Mystery: the first which looketh inward, 63, etc.;
   the first which looketh outward, 63, etc., 88;
   the 24 of second space of the first, 1, 3, 102;
   the Ineffable, 103;
   the knowledge of, 108;
   the types and figures of, 113, 119;
   higher and lower, 101;
   twin Mysteries of the only one, 111


 Name of Rulers of Chambers of punishment, 160;
   glory of, 9;
   mystery of, 22, 35, 53;
   in the great, 188


 Oblation, 189

 Outward and Inward, 5, 8, 38, 49, 94, 179

 Overseer, 13, 17, 96, 161


 Parable, 5, etc.

 Paraplex, 183, 184, 185

 Paradise, 123, 178

 Partner, 22, 24, 25, 32, 35, 43, 46, 107

 Paulos, 147

 Peresphone, 194

 Petros, 29, 30, 49, 65, 67, 80, 156, 195

 Philippos, 16, 35, 36, 37, 89, 91, 180

 Pistis Sophia, the: first mention of, 22;
   fall of, 23;
   soul of, 32;
   mind of, 43;
   Second attack upon, 85;
   Hymn 1, 86;
   Hymn 2, 87;
   Hymn 3, 88;
   two powers of Light sent to, 58, 82;
   daughter of Barbelos, 182;
   Repentances, 1, 24; 2, 28; 3, 30; 4, 31; 5, 34; 6, 37; 7, 39; 8, 42;
      9, 45; 10, 49; 11, 50; 12, 51; 13, 54

 Places mentioned: Galilaia, 189;
   Egypt, 14;
   Mountain of the Olives, 2, 5, 7, 85;
   Ocean, 180;
   Kedar, 50

 Pleroma, 2, 38, 94, 183

 Precept, First, 1, 2, 7, 10, 13, 23, 98, 101, 110, 170

 Punishments, 193, etc.

 Purgation (dregs), 19, 125, 169


 Renunciation, 128-130

 Righteousness, Æons of, 132;
   Height of, 99;
   Place of, 26, 46, etc.

 Right and Left, 13, 15, 16;
   places of the Left, 64, 146, 184;
   place of the Right, 14, 64, 93, 124, 146, 185;
   name of those, etc., 9

 Rose (Jesus), 1, 180

 Rulers, 1;
   of the world, 6;
   of the Height, 6;
   of the Æons, 6, 11, 13, 17, 24, 43, 82;
   of the Sphere, 6, 18, 89, 106;
   of the Destiny, 15, 17, 18, 93, 139, 142, 144, 165, 168, 173, 175,
      191;
   binding of the, 16, 142, 181;
   the Tyrants of the R. of the twelve Æons, 19;
   of the Middle, 143, 145, 173, 193;
   a R. of face of Lion, 24;
   of the twelve Æons, 23, 39;
   of the outer Darkness, 52, 129, 160, 167, 196;
   of the six Æons, 63;
   of the Chaoses, 88;
   R. who will repent, 98;
   Material body of the R., 101, 139;
   Places of, 114, 152;
   Matter of, 117;
   judgments of the, 150;
   sweat, tears of the, 169;
   five great R., 171;
   Ministers of the, 174;
   the R. who is over Ghemmont, 178;
   over the twelve chambers, 160, 161


 Sabaoth, the great, 7, 14, 63, 96, 108, 146, 185;
   the little, 63, 182, 185, 186, 187, 198

 Salome, 51, 56, 171, 194

 Samaritan Woman, 189;
   Spear thrust, 189

 Saviour (Jesus), 2, 4, 13, etc.;
   the twelve, 2, 6, 95, 115;
   the places of, 118;
   the arrays of, 44, 118;
   saying of, 177

 Self-willed, the, 22, 23, 26, 51, 64, 66, 68, 83, 107

 Service, 4, 5, 10, 16, 19

 Sign, 190

 Simon, 180

 Spaces: Three, 127, 152;
   Three of First M., 92, 102, 103;
   1st Sp. of the Ineffable, 9, 92, 102, 123;
   2nd Sp. of the Ineffable, 110, 123, 134

 Sphere: Æons of, 6, 198;
   the first, 10;
   houses of, 10;
   Ministers of, 18;
   the second, 11

 Spirit, 30, 41, 188, 189, 191;
   of perception, 31;
   of Jesus, 27;
   of disciples, 29, 105

 Star: Luminaries (phoster), planets, 1, 12, 21, 106, 107, 115, 177;
   Sparks (spinther), fixed stars, 21, 107;
   stars (aster), 177

 Sun, 2, 5, 8, 18, 94, 132, 143, 168, 171, 181


 Thomas, 35, 40, 74, 77, 180, 196

 Three-corners, etc., 15, 16

 Three Times, 83, 84

 Ticket, 123, 183, 189

 Tobe (month), 2, 3

 Tree: the five, 2, 9, 95, 108, 115;
   the first, the second, the third, 95;
   the fourth, the fifth, 96

 Triple-powered, 1, 9, 12, 52, 107, 115;
   (Gods), 191;
   (the two), 22

 Triple spirit, 111, 112;
   pre-triple Spirit, 113;
   hyper-triple spirit, 113

 Truth, 76;
   beginning of, 5, 8;
   way of, 61;
   word of, 119

 Typhon (assessor), 186, 187

 Tyrant, 12;
   Gods, 38, 115, 146;
   see under Adamas


 Universe, the (the all), 2, 5, 18, 44, 91, 97, 109, 115, 117, 123, 127,
    128, 131, 132, 140, 141, 159, 166, 170, 178, 180;
   Head of the, 1, 2;
   Lord of the, 10, 11, 21;
   Door of the, 166;
   Distribution of, 97, etc.

 Unrevealed αμυνατοι, 110


 Veil, 1, etc.

 Virgin of the Light, 6, 57, 97, 120, 143, 164, 179, 194;
   Virgins of the Light, 108, 146, 164, 167


 West, 181


 Zeus, 182, 198, 199

 Zodiac: the signs of, 185-7

                      Printed in Great Britain
                      BY
                      WILLIAM CLOWES & SONS, LIMITED,
                      LONDON AND BECCLES.




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
    ○ Text in bold print is enclosed by equal signs (=bold=).
    ○ Footnotes have been moved to follow the sections in which they are
      referenced.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PISTIS SOPHIA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


